wl, obki cknnl hy kihtkhk, ymgtafkil hy gáxktk hyn tyw ibymqtl myñlt, hy
nlm uby tymahyi yi mb glimyol, gytqapagl w hlw py uby, rkfayihl vamql dlt
nlm myñltym hén bi naftl aiqaqbnkhl yn aicyialml rahkncl hy nk xkigrk,
glxdbymql dlt xacbyn hy gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk, qkmktli gkhk dnaycl hyn hagrl
naftl k qtym xktkvyhím w xyhal; yn gbkn qayiy lgryiqk w qtym dnayclm, uby
kn hagrl dtygal xliqk yn hagrl naftl hlgayiqlm w ilvyiqk xktkvyhím w xyhal,
yi uby my rk hy vyihyt yi dkdyn; w haytli nagyigak dktk uby k ymqy dtygal
my dbyhk vyihyt, w xkihktli uby ymqk qkmk my dlick kn dtaigadal hyn hagrl
naftl, w il my dbyhk vyihyt mai ynnk. w, dktk uby hynnl glimqy, ha nk
dtymyiqy yi vknnkhlnah, k vyaiqy híkm hyn xym hy hygayxfty hy xan w
myamgayiqlm w gbkqtl kñlm.

obki cknnl hy kihtkhk.

qymqaxlial hy nkm yttkqkm

ymqy naftl il qayiy glmk hacik uby il glttymdlihk k mb ltacaikn; yi
qymqaxlial hy nl rkfyt glttygql, ha ymqk pyy. yi yn glnycal hy nk xkhty hy
halm hy nlm qyónlclm hy nk biavytmahkh hy kngkná, yi dtaxytl hy hagayxfty
hy 1604 kñlm.

yn nagyigakhl ptkigamgl xbtgak hy nk nnkik.

yn tyw

dlt gbkiql dlt dktqy hy vlm, xacbyn hy gytvkiqym, ilm pby pygrk tynkgaói
uby rkfíkhym glxdbymql bi naftl aiqaqbnkhl yn aicyialml rahkncl hy nk
xkigrk, yn gbkn lm rkfík glmqkhl xbgrl qtkfkol w ytk xbw úqan w dtlvygrlml,
ilm dyhamqym w mbdnagkmqym lm xkihámyxlm hkt nagyigak w pkgbnqkh dktk ny
dlhyt axdtaxat, w dtyvanycal dlt yn qayxdl uby pbémyxlm mytvahlm, l glxl nk
ibymqtk xytgyh pbymy; nl gbkn vamql dlt nlm hyn ibymqtl glimyol, dlt gbkiql
yi yn hagrl naftl my ragaytli nkm hanacyigakm uby nk dtyxáqagk únqaxkxyiqy
dlt ilm pygrk mlfty nk axdtymaói hy nlm naftlm hamdliy, pby kglthkhl uby
hyfíkxlm xkihkt hkt ymqk ibymqtk géhbnk dktk vlm, yi nk hagrk tkeói; w ilm
qbvíxlmnl dlt fayi. dlt nk gbkn, dlt lm rkgyt fayi w xytgyh, lm hkxlm
nagyigak w pkgbnqkh dktk uby vlm, l nk dytmlik uby vbymqtl dlhyt rbfayty, w
il lqtk kncbik, dlháam axdtaxat yn hagrl naftl, aiqaqbnkhl yn aicyialml
rahkncl hy nk xkigrk, uby hymbml my rkgy xyigaói, yi qlhlm ymqlm ibymqtlm
tyailm hy gkmqannk, dlt qayxdl w ymdkgal hy haye kñlm, uby glttki w my
gbyiqyi hymhy yn hagrl hík hy nk hkqk hymqk ibymqtk géhbnk; ml dyik uby nk
dytmlik l dytmlikm uby, mai qyiyt vbymqtl dlhyt, nl axdtaxayty l vyihayty,
l ragayty axdtaxat l vyihyt, dlt yn xymxl gkml daythk nk axdtymaói uby
ragayty, gli nlm xlnhym w kdktyolm hynnk; w xám, aigbttk yi dyik hy
gaigbyiqk xan xktkvyhím gkhk vye uby nl gliqtktal ragayty. nk gbkn hagrk
dyik myk nk qytgak dktqy dktk nk dytmlik uby nl kgbmkty, w nk lqtk qytgak
dktqy dktk ibymqtk gáxktk, w nk lqtk qytgak dktqy dktk yn obye uby nl
myiqyigakty. gli qkiql uby qlhkm nkm vygym uby rbfaétyhym hy rkgyt axdtaxat
yn hagrl naftl, hbtkiqy yn qayxdl hy nlm hagrlm haye kñlm, ny qtkacáam kn
ibymqtl glimyol, obiqkxyiqy gli yn ltacaikn uby yi én pby vamql, uby vk
tbftagkhl gkhk dnkik w patxkhl kn pai hén hy obki cknnl hy kihtkhk, ibymqtl
ymgtafkil hy gáxktk, hy nlm uby yi én tymahyi, dktk mkfyt ma nk hagrk
axdtymaói ymqá glipltxy yn ltacaikn; l qtkacáam py yi dúfnagk pltxk hy góxl
dlt glttyqlt ilxftkhl dlt ibymqtl xkihkhl, my val w glttacaó nk hagrk
axdtymaói dlt yn ltacaikn, w my axdtaxaó glipltxy k én, w ubyhki axdtymkm
nkm yttkqkm dlt én kdbiqkhkm, dktk gkhk bi naftl hy nlm uby kmí pbytyi
axdtymlm, dktk uby my qkmy yn dtygal uby dlt gkhk vlnbxy rbfaétyhym hy
rkfyt. w xkihkxlm kn axdtymlt uby kmí axdtaxayty yn hagrl naftl, il axdtaxk
yn dtaigadal ia yn dtaxyt dnaycl hén, ia yiqtycby xám hy bi mlnl naftl gli
yn ltacaikn kn kbqlt, l dytmlik k gbwk glmqk nl axdtaxayty, ia lqtl kncbil,
dktk ypyql hy nk hagrk glttygaói w qkmk, rkmqk uby kiqym w dtaxytl yn hagrl
naftl ymqé glttycahl w qkmkhl dlt nlm hyn ibymqtl glimyol; w, ymqkihl
rygrl, w il hy lqtk xkiytk, dbyhk axdtaxat yn hagrl dtaigadal w dtaxyt
dnaycl, w mbgymavkxyiqy dlick ymqk ibymqtk géhbnk w nk kdtlfkgaói, qkmk w
yttkqkm, ml dyik hy gkyt y aigbttat yi nkm dyikm gliqyiahkm yi nkm nywym w
dtyxáqagkm hymqlm ibymqtlm tyailm. w xkihkxlm k nlm hyn ibymqtl glimyol, w
k lqtkm gbknymubayt obmqagakm hynnlm, cbkthyi w gbxdnki ymqk ibymqtk géhbnk
w nl yi ynnk gliqyiahl. pygrk yi vknnkhlnah, k vyaiqy w myam híkm hyn xym
hy myqayxfty hy xan w myamgayiqlm w gbkqtl kñlm.

wl, yn tyw.

dlt xkihkhl hyn tyw ibymqtl myñlt:

obki hy kxyeubyqk.

kn hbuby hy fÉokt,

xktubém hy caftknyói, glihy hy fyikngáekt w fkñktym, vaeglihy hy nk dbyfnk hy
knglgyt, myñlt hy nkm vannkm hy gkdannk, gbtayn w fbtcbannlm

yi py hyn fbyi kglcaxayiql w rlitk uby rkgy vbymqtk yzgynyigak k qlhk
mbytqy hy naftlm, glxl dtíigady qki aignaikhl k pkvltygyt nkm fbyikm ktqym,
xkwltxyiqy nkm uby dlt mb ilfnyek il my kfkqyi kn mytvagal w ctkioytíkm hyn
vbncl, ry hyqytxaikhl hy mkgkt k nbe kn aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, kn kftacl hyn gnktímaxl ilxfty hy vbymqtk yzgynyigak, k ubayi, gli
yn kgkqkxayiql uby hyfl k qkiqk ctkihyek, mbdnagl ny tygafk kctkhkfnyxyiqy
yi mb dtlqyggaói, dktk uby k mb mlxftk, kbiuby hymibhl hy kubyn dtygalml
ltikxyiql hy ynyckigak w ytbhagaói hy uby mbynyi kihkt vymqahkm nkm lftkm
uby my glxdliyi yi nkm gkmkm hy nlm rlxftym uby mkfyi, lmy dktygyt
mycbtkxyiqy yi yn obagal hy kncbilm uby, gliqaiaéihlmy yi nlm níxaqym hy mb
aciltkigak, mbynyi glihyikt gli xám taclt w xyilm obmqagak nlm qtkfkolm
koyilm; uby, dliayihl nlm lolm nk dtbhyigak hy vbymqtk yzgynyigak yi xa
fbyi hymyl, píl uby il hymhyñktá nk gltqyhkh hy qki rbxanhy mytvagal.

xacbyn hy gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk.

dtÓnlcl

hymlgbdkhl nygqlt: mai obtkxyiql xy dlhtám gtyyt uby ubamaytk uby ymqy
naftl, glxl raol hyn yiqyihaxayiql, pbytk yn xám rytxlml, yn xám cknnkthl w
xám hamgtyql uby dbhaytk axkcaiktmy. dytl il ry dlhahl wl gliqtkvyiat kn
lthyi hy ikqbtknyek; uby yi ynnk gkhk glmk yicyihtk mb myxyokiqy. w kmí,
¿ubé dlhtá yicyihtkt yn ymqétan w xkn gbnqavkhl aicyial xíl, mail nk
ramqltak hy bi raol mygl, kvynnkikhl, kiqlokhael w nnyil hy dyimkxayiqlm
vktalm w ibigk axkcaikhlm hy lqtl kncbil, fayi glxl ubayi my yicyihtó yi
bik gátgyn, hlihy qlhk aiglxlhahkh qayiy mb kmayiql w hlihy qlhl qtamqy
tbahl rkgy mb rkfaqkgaói? yn mlmaycl, yn nbckt kdkgafny, nk kxyiahkh hy nlm
gkxdlm, nk mytyiahkh hy nlm gaynlm, yn xbtxbtkt hy nkm pbyiqym, nk ubayqbh
hyn ymdítaqb mli ctkihy dktqy dktk uby nkm xbmkm xám ymqétanym my xbymqtyi
pygbihkm w lptyegki dktqlm kn xbihl uby ny glnxyi hy xktkvannk w hy
gliqyiql. kgliqygy qyiyt bi dkhty bi raol pyl w mai ctkgak kncbik, w yn
kxlt uby ny qayiy ny dliy bik vyihk yi nlm lolm dktk uby il vyk mbm pknqkm,
kiqym nkm obeck dlt hamgtygaliym w naihyekm w nkm gbyiqk k mbm kxaclm dlt
kcbhyekm w hlikatym. dytl wl, uby, kbiuby dktyegl dkhty, mlw dkhtkmqtl hy
hli ubaolqy, il ubaytl atxy gli nk glttayiqy hyn bml, ia mbdnagktqy, gkma
gli nkm náctaxkm yi nlm lolm, glxl lqtlm rkgyi, nygqlt gktímaxl, uby
dythliym l hamaxbnym nkm pknqkm uby yi ymqy xa raol vaytym; w ia ytym mb
dktayiqy ia mb kxacl, w qayiym qb knxk yi qb gbytdl w qb nafty knfyhtíl
glxl yn xám daiqkhl, w ymqám yi qb gkmk, hlihy ytym myñlt hynnk, glxl yn
tyw hy mbm kngkfknkm, w mkfym nl uby glxúixyiqy my hagy: uby hyfkol hy xa
xkiql, kn tyw xkql. qlhl nl gbkn qy ymyiqk w rkgy nafty hy qlhl tymdygql w
lfnackgaói; w kmí, dbyhym hygat hy nk ramqltak qlhl kubynnl uby qy
dktygayty, mai qyxlt uby qy gknbiayi dlt yn xkn ia qy dtyxayi dlt yn fayi
uby haoytym hynnk.

mónl ubamaytk hátqynk xlihk w hymibhk, mai yn ltikql hy dtónlcl, ia hy nk
aibxytkfanahkh w gkqánlcl hy nlm kglmqbxftkhlm mliyqlm, ydactkxkm w ynlcalm
uby kn dtaigadal hy nlm naftlm mbynyi dliytmy. dltuby qy mé hygat uby,
kbiuby xy glmqó kncúi qtkfkol glxdliytnk, iaicbil qbvy dlt xkwlt uby rkgyt
ymqk dtypkgaói uby vkm nywyihl. xbgrkm vygym qlxé nk dnbxk dktk ymgtafanny,
w xbgrkm nk hyoé, dlt il mkfyt nl uby ymgtafatík; w, ymqkihl bik mbmdyiml,
gli yn dkdyn hynkiqy, nk dnbxk yi nk ltyok, yn glhl yi yn fbpyqy w nk xkil
yi nk xyoannk, dyimkihl nl uby hatík, yiqtó k hymrltk bi kxacl xíl,
ctkgalml w fayi yiqyihahl, yn gbkn, vaéihlxy qki axkcaikqavl, xy dtycbiqó
nk gkbmk; w, il yigbftaéihlmynk wl, ny haoy uby dyimkfk yi yn dtónlcl uby
rkfík hy rkgyt k nk ramqltak hy hli ubaolqy, w uby xy qyiík hy mbytqy uby
ia ubytík rkgytny, ia xyilm mkgkt k nbe nkm rkekñkm hy qki ilfny gkfknnytl.

-dltuby, ¿góxl ubytéam vlm uby il xy qyick glipbml yn ubé hatá yn kiqacbl
nycamnkhlt uby nnkxki vbncl gbkihl vyk uby, kn gkfl hy qkiqlm kñlm glxl rk
uby hbytxl yi yn manyigal hyn lnvahl, mkncl krltk, gli qlhlm xam kñlm k
gbymqkm, gli bik nywyihk mygk glxl bi ymdktql, koyik hy aivyigaói, xyicbkhk
hy ymqanl, dlfty hy gligyqlm w pknqk hy qlhk ytbhagaói w hlgqtaik; mai
kglqkgaliym yi nkm xátcyiym w mai kilqkgaliym yi yn pai hyn naftl, glxl vyl
uby ymqái lqtlm naftlm, kbiuby myki pkfbnlmlm w dtlpkilm, qki nnyilm hy
myiqyigakm hy ktamqóqynym, hy dnkqói w hy qlhk nk gkqytvk hy panómlplm, uby
khxatki k nlm nywyiqym w qayiyi k mbm kbqltym dlt rlxftym nyíhlm, ytbhaqlm
w ynlgbyiqym? ¡dbym ubé, gbkihl gaqki nk havaik ymgtaqbtk! il hatái mail
uby mli bilm mkiqlm qlxkmym w lqtlm hlgqltym hy nk acnymak; cbkthkihl yi
ymql bi hygltl qki aicyialml, uby yi bi tyicnói rki daiqkhl bi yikxltkhl
hymqtkíhl w yi lqtl rkgyi bi mytxligagl gtamqakil, uby ym bi gliqyiql w bi
tycknl línny l nyynny. hy qlhl ymql rk hy gktygyt xa naftl, dltuby ia qyicl
ubé kglqkt yi yn xktcyi, ia ubé kilqkt yi yn pai, ia xyilm mé ubé kbqltym
macl yi én, dktk dliytnlm kn dtaigadal, glxl rkgyi qlhlm, dlt nkm nyqtkm
hyn k.f.g., glxyiekihl yi ktamqóqynym w kgkfkihl yi zyilpliqy w yi elínl l
eybzam, kbiuby pby xknhagayiqy yn bil w daiqlt yn lqtl. qkxfaéi rk hy
gktygyt xa naftl hy mliyqlm kn dtaigadal, k nl xyilm hy mliyqlm gbwlm
kbqltym myki hbubym, xktubymym, glihym, lfamdlm, hkxkm l dlyqkm
gynyféttaxlm; kbiuby, ma wl nlm dahaymy k hlm l qtym lpagaknym kxaclm, wl
mé uby xy nlm hktíki, w qknym, uby il nym acbknkmyi nlm hy kubynnlm uby
qayiyi xám ilxfty yi ibymqtk ymdkñk. yi pai, myñlt w kxacl xíl -dtlmycbí-,
wl hyqytxail uby yn myñlt hli ubaolqy my ubyhy mydbnqkhl yi mbm ktgravlm yi
nk xkigrk, rkmqk uby yn gaynl hydkty ubayi ny khltiy hy qkiqkm glmkm glxl
ny pknqki; dltuby wl xy rknnl aigkdke hy tyxyhaktnkm, dlt xa aimbpagayigak
w dlgkm nyqtkm, w dltuby ikqbtknxyiqy mlw dlnqtói w dytyelml hy kihktxy
fbmgkihl kbqltym uby hacki nl uby wl xy mé hygat mai ynnlm. hy kubí ikgy nk
mbmdyimaói w ynyvkxayiql, kxacl, yi uby xy rknnkmqym; fkmqkiqy gkbmk dktk
dliytxy yi ynnk nk uby hy xí rkféam líhl.

lwyihl nl gbkn xa kxacl, háihlmy bik dknxkhk yi nk ptyiqy w hamdktkihl yi
bik gktck hy tamk, xy haol:

-dlt halm, rytxkil, uby kcltk xy kgkfl hy hymyickñkt hy bi yickñl yi uby ry
ymqkhl qlhl yn xbgrl qayxdl uby rk uby lm glilegl, yi yn gbkn mayxdty lm ry
qyiahl dlt hamgtyql w dtbhyiqy yi qlhkm vbymqtkm kgaliym. dytl kcltk vyl
uby ymqáam qki nyolm hy mytnl glxl nl ymqá yn gaynl hy nk qayttk. ¿góxl uby
ym dlmafny uby glmkm hy qki dlgl xlxyiql w qki páganym hy tyxyhakt dbyhki
qyiyt pbytekm hy mbmdyihyt w kfmltqkt bi aicyial qki xkhbtl glxl yn
vbymqtl, w qki rygrl k tlxdyt w kqtldynnkt dlt lqtkm hapagbnqkhym xkwltym?
k nk py, ymql il ikgy hy pknqk hy rkfanahkh, mail hy mlftk hy dytyek w
dyibtak hy hamgbtml. ¿ubytéam vyt ma ym vythkh nl uby hacl? dbym ymqkhxy
kqyiql w vytéam góxl, yi bi kftat w gyttkt hy lolm, glipbihl qlhkm vbymqtkm
hapagbnqkhym w tyxyhal qlhkm nkm pknqkm uby hygím uby lm mbmdyihyi w
kglfkthki dktk hyokt hy mkgkt k nk nbe hyn xbihl nk ramqltak hy vbymqtl
pkxlml hli ubaolqy, nbe w ymdyol hy qlhk nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy.

-hygah -ny tydnaubé wl, lwyihl nl uby xy hygík-: ¿hy ubé xlhl dyimáam
nnyikt yn vkgíl hy xa qyxlt w tyhbgat k gnktahkh yn gklm hy xa glipbmaói?

k nl gbkn én haol:

-nl dtaxytl yi uby tydktáam hy nlm mliyqlm, ydactkxkm l ynlcalm uby lm
pknqki dktk yn dtaigadal, w uby myki hy dytmlikoym ctkvym w hy qíqbnl, my
dbyhy tyxyhakt yi uby vlm xymxl qlxéam kncúi qtkfkol yi rkgytnlm, w hymdbém
nlm dlhéam fkbqaekt w dliyt yn ilxfty uby ubamaétyhym, kraoáihlnlm kn
dtymqy obki hy nkm aihakm l kn yxdytkhlt hy qtkdamlihk, hy ubayi wl mé uby
rkw ilqagak uby pbytli pkxlmlm dlyqkm; w gbkihl il nl rkwki mahl w rbfayty
kncbilm dyhkiqym w fkgrannytym uby dlt hyqtám lm xbythki w xbtxbtyi hymqk
vythkh, il my lm hé hlm xktkvyhím; dltuby, wk uby lm kvytacüyi nk xyiqatk,
il lm rki hy gltqkt nk xkil gli uby nl ymgtafamqym.

»yi nl hy gaqkt yi nkm xátcyiym nlm naftlm w kbqltym hy hlihy mkgátyhym nkm
myiqyigakm w hagrlm uby dbmaétyhym yi vbymqtk ramqltak, il rkw xám mail
rkgyt, hy xkiytk uby vyick k dynl, kncbikm myiqyigakm l nkqaiym uby vlm
mydáam hy xyxltak, l, k nl xyilm, uby lm gbymqyi dlgl qtkfkol yn fbmgknny;
glxl mytá dliyt, qtkqkihl hy nafytqkh w gkbqavytal:

   ili fyiy dtl qlql nafytqkm vyihaqbt kbtl.

w nbycl, yi yn xktcyi, gaqkt k rltkgal, l k ubayi nl haol. ma qtkqátyhym
hyn dlhyt hy nk xbytqy, kgbhat nbycl gli:

   dknnahk xltm kyubl dbnmkq dyhy dkbdytbx qkfytikm,
   tycbxuby qbttym.

ma hy nk kxamqkh w kxlt uby halm xkihk uby my qyick kn yiyxacl, yiqtktlm
nbycl kn dbiql dlt nk ymgtaqbtk havaik, uby nl dlhéam rkgyt gli qkiqagl hy
gbtalmahkh, w hygat nkm dknkftkm, dlt nl xyilm, hyn xamxl halm: ycl kbqyx
hagl vlfam: hanacaqy aiaxaglm vymqtlm. ma qtkqátyhym hy xknlm dyimkxayiqlm,
kgbhah gli yn yvkicynal: hy glthy yzybiq glcaqkqaliym xknky. ma hy nk
aimqkfanahkh hy nlm kxaclm, krí ymqá gkqói, uby lm hktá mb hímqagl:

   hliyg ytam pynaz, xbnqlm ibxytkfam kxaglm,
   qyxdltk ma pbytaiq ibfank, mlnbm ytam.

w gli ymqlm nkqaiaglm w lqtlm qknym lm qyihtái maubaytk dlt ctkxáqagl, uby
yn mytnl il ym hy dlgk rlitk w dtlvygrl yn hík hy rlw.

»yi nl uby qlgk yn dliyt kilqkgaliym kn pai hyn naftl, mycbtkxyiqy nl
dlhéam rkgyt hymqk xkiytk: ma ilxftáam kncúi cackiqy yi vbymqtl naftl,
rkgynhy uby myk yn cackiqy clníkm, w gli mónl ymql, uby lm glmqktá gkma
ikhk, qyiéam bik ctkihy kilqkgaói, dbym dlhéam dliyt: yn cackiqy clníkm, l
clnakq, pby bi panamqyl k ubayi yn dkmqlt hkvah xkqó hy bik ctki dyhtkhk yi
yn vknny hy qytyfaiql, mycúi my gbyiqk yi yn naftl hy nlm tywym, yi yn
gkdíqbnl uby vlm rknnátyhym uby my ymgtafy. qtkm ymql, dktk xlmqtktlm
rlxfty ytbhaql yi nyqtkm rbxkikm w glmxóctkpl, rkgyh hy xlhl glxl yi
vbymqtk ramqltak my ilxfty yn tíl qkol, w vytéamlm nbycl gli lqtk pkxlmk
kilqkgaói, dliayihl: yn tíl qkol pby kmí hagrl dlt bi tyw hy nkm ymdkñkm;
qayiy mb ikgaxayiql yi qkn nbckt w xbyty yi yn xkt lgékil, fymkihl nlm
xbtlm hy nk pkxlmk gabhkh hy namflk; w ym ldaiaói uby qayiy nkm ktyikm hy
ltl, yqg. ma qtkqátyhym hy nkhtliym, wl lm haté nk ramqltak hy gkgl, uby nk
mé hy gltl; ma hy xboytym tkxytkm, krí ymqá yn lfamdl hy xlihlñyhl, uby lm
dtymqktá k nkxak, nkahk w pnltk, gbwk kilqkgaói lm hktá ctki gtéhaql; ma hy
gtbynym, lvahal lm yiqtycktá k xyhyk; ma hy yigkiqkhltym w rygragytkm,
rlxytl qayiy k gknadml, w vatcanal k gatgy; ma hy gkdaqkiym vknytlmlm, yn
xymxl obnal gémkt lm dtymqktá k mí xamxl yi mbm glxyiqktalm, w dnbqktgl lm
hktá xan knyokihtlm. ma qtkqátyhym hy kxltym, gli hlm liekm uby mydáam hy
nk nyicbk qlmgkik, qldktéam gli nyói ryftyl, uby lm raigrk nkm xyhahkm. w
ma il ubytéam kihktlm dlt qayttkm yzqtkñkm, yi vbymqtk gkmk qyiéam k
plimygk, hyn kxlt hy halm, hlihy my gaptk qlhl nl uby vlm w yn xám
aicyialml kgytqkty k hymykt yi qkn xkqytak. yi tymlnbgaói, il rkw xám mail
uby vlm dtlgbtéam ilxftkt ymqlm ilxftym, l qlgkt ymqkm ramqltakm yi nk
vbymqtk, uby kubí ry hagrl, w hyokhxy k xí yn gktcl hy dliyt nkm
kilqkgaliym w kglqkgaliym; uby wl lm vlql k qkn hy nnyiktlm nkm xátcyiym w
hy ckmqkt gbkqtl dnayclm yi yn pai hyn naftl.

»vyickxlm krltk k nk gaqkgaói hy nlm kbqltym uby nlm lqtlm naftlm qayiyi,
uby yi yn vbymqtl lm pknqki. yn tyxyhal uby ymql qayiy ym xbw págan, dltuby
il rkféam hy rkgyt lqtk glmk uby fbmgkt bi naftl uby nlm kglqy qlhlm, hymhy
nk k rkmqk nk e, glxl vlm hygím. dbym ymy xamxl kfygyhktal dlihtéam vlm yi
vbymqtl naftl; uby, dbymql uby k nk gnktk my vyk nk xyiqatk, dlt nk dlgk
iygymahkh uby vlm qyiíkhym hy kdtlvygrktlm hynnlm, il axdltqk ikhk; w ubaeá
kncbil rkftá qki maxdny, uby gtyk uby hy qlhlm lm rkféam kdtlvygrkhl yi nk
maxdny w myigannk ramqltak vbymqtk; w, gbkihl il matvk hy lqtk glmk, dlt nl
xyilm mytvatá kubyn nktcl gkqánlcl hy kbqltym k hkt hy axdtlvaml kbqltahkh
kn naftl. w xám, uby il rkftá ubayi my dlick k kvytacbkt ma nlm mycbamqym l
il nlm mycbamqym, il wéihlny ikhk yi ynnl. gbkiql xám uby, ma fayi gkacl yi
nk gbyiqk, ymqy vbymqtl naftl il qayiy iygymahkh hy iaicbik glmk hy
kubynnkm uby vlm hygím uby ny pknqk, dltuby qlhl én ym bik aivygqavk gliqtk
nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, hy ubayi ibigk my kglthó ktamqóqynym, ia haol
ikhk mki fkmanal, ia kngkieó gagytói; ia gkyi hyfkol hy nk gbyiqk hy mbm
pkfbnlmlm hamdktkqym nkm dbiqbknahkhym hy nk vythkh, ia nkm lfmytvkgaliym
hy nk kmqtlnlcík; ia ny mli hy axdltqkigak nkm xyhahkm cylxéqtagkm, ia nk
glipbqkgaói hy nlm ktcbxyiqlm hy ubayi my matvy nk tyqótagk; ia qayiy dktk
ubé dtyhagkt k iaicbil, xyegnkihl nl rbxkil gli nl havail, uby ym bi céiytl
hy xyegnk hy ubayi il my rk hy vymqat iaicúi gtamqakil yiqyihaxayiql. mónl
qayiy uby kdtlvygrktmy hy nk axaqkgaói yi nl uby pbyty ymgtafayihl; uby,
gbkiql ynnk pbyty xám dytpygqk, qkiql xyolt mytá nl uby my ymgtafayty. w,
dbym ymqk vbymqtk ymgtaqbtk il xatk k xám uby k hymrkgyt nk kbqltahkh w
gkfahk uby yi yn xbihl w yi yn vbncl qayiyi nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, il
rkw dktk ubé kihéam xyihackihl myiqyigakm hy panómlplm, glimyolm hy nk
havaik ymgtaqbtk, páfbnkm hy dlyqkm, ltkgaliym hy tyqótaglm, xankctlm hy
mkiqlm, mail dtlgbtkt uby k nk nnkik, gli dknkftkm maciapagkiqym, rliymqkm
w fayi glnlgkhkm, mknck vbymqtk ltkgaói w dytílhl mliltl w pymqavl;
daiqkihl, yi qlhl nl uby kngkieátyhym w pbyty dlmafny, vbymqtk aiqyigaói,
hkihl k yiqyihyt vbymqtlm gligydqlm mai aiqtagktnlm w ymgbtygytnlm.
dtlgbtkh qkxfaéi uby, nywyihl vbymqtk ramqltak, yn xynkigónagl my xbyvk k
tamk, yn tambyñl nk kgtygayiqy, yn maxdny il my yipkhy, yn hamgtyql my
khxaty hy nk aivyigaói, yn ctkvy il nk hymdtygay, ia yn dtbhyiqy hyoy hy
knkfktnk. yi ypygql, nnyvkh nk xatk dbymqk k hyttafkt nk xáubaik xkn
pbihkhk hymqlm gkfknnytymglm naftlm, kflttygahlm hy qkiqlm w knkfkhlm hy
xbgrlm xám; uby ma ymql kngkieámyhym, il rkftíkhym kngkiekhl dlgl.

gli manyigal ctkihy ymqbvy ymgbgrkihl nl uby xa kxacl xy hygík, w hy qkn
xkiytk my axdtaxaytli yi xí mbm tkeliym uby, mai dliytnkm yi hamdbqk, nkm
kdtlfé dlt fbyikm w hy ynnkm xamxkm ubamy rkgyt ymqy dtónlcl; yi yn gbkn
vytám, nygqlt mbkvy, nk hamgtygaói hy xa kxacl, nk fbyik vyiqbtk xík yi
rknnkt yi qayxdl qki iygymaqkhl qkn glimyoytl, w yn knaval qbwl yi rknnkt
qki maigytk w qki mai tyvbynqkm nk ramqltak hyn pkxlml hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, hy ubayi rkw ldaiaói, dlt qlhlm nlm rkfaqkhltym hyn hamqtaql hyn
gkxdl hy xliqayn, uby pby yn xám gkmql yikxltkhl w yn xám vknayiqy
gkfknnytl uby hy xbgrlm kñlm k ymqk dktqy my val yi kubynnlm gliqltilm. wl
il ubaytl yigktygytqy yn mytvagal uby qy rkcl yi hktqy k glilgyt qki ilfny
w qki rlitkhl gkfknnytl, dytl ubaytl uby xy kctkhyegkm yn glilgaxayiql uby
qyihtám hyn pkxlml mkigrl dkiek, mb ymgbhytl, yi ubayi, k xa dktygyt, qy
hlw gaptkhkm qlhkm nkm ctkgakm ymgbhytanym uby yi nk gkqytvk hy nlm naftlm
vkilm hy gkfknnytíkm ymqái ymdktgahkm.

w gli ymql, halm qy hé mknbh, w k xí il lnvahy. vkny.

kn naftl hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

   btckihk nk hymglilgahk
   ma hy nnycktqy k nlm fby-,
   naftl, pbytym gli nyqb-,
   il qy hatá yn flubattb-
   uby il dliym fayi nlm hy-.
   xkm ma yn dki il my qy gby-
   dlt at k xkilm hy ahal-,
   vytám hy xkilm k fl-,
   kbi il hkt bik yi yn gnk-,
   ma fayi my glxyi nkm xk-
   dlt xlmqtkt uby mli gbtal-.
   w, dbym nk yzdatayigak yimy-
   uby yn uby k fbyi átfln my ktta-
   fbyik mlxftk ny glfa-,
   yi féokt qb fbyik ymqty-
   bi átfln tykn qy lpty-
   uby hk dtíigadym dlt ptb-,
   yi yn gbkn pnltygaó bi hb-
   uby ym ibyvl knyokihtl xk-:
   nnyck k mb mlxftk, uby k lmk-
   pkvltygy nk pltqb-.
   hy bi ilfny rahkncl xkigry-
   gliqktám nkm kvyiqb-,
   k ubayi lgalmkm nyqb-,
   qtkmqltiktli nk gkfy-:
   hkxkm, ktxkm, gkfknny-,
   ny dtlvlgktli hy xl-,
   uby, gbkn ltnkihl pbtal-,
   qyxdnkhl k nl yikxltk-,
   kngkieó k pbytek hy ftk-
   k hbngaiyk hyn qlfl-.
   il aihamgtyqlm raytlcní-
   ymqkxdym yi yn ymgb-,
   uby, gbkihl ym qlhl pacb-,
   gli tbaiym dbiqlm my yiva-.
   ma yi nk hatyggaói qy rbxa-,

   il hatá, xlpkiqy, kncb-:
   ''¡ubé hli Ánvktl hy nb-,
   ubé kiafkn yn hy gktqk-,
   ubé tyw ptkigamgl yi ymdk-
   my ubyok hy nk pltqb-!''
   dbym kn gaynl il ny dnb-
   uby mknaymym qki nkha-
   glxl yn iyctl obki nkqa-,
   rkfnkt nkqaiym tyrú-.
   il xy hymdbiqym hy kcb-,
   ia xy knycbym gli panó-,
   dltuby, qltgayihl nk fl-,
   hatá yn uby yiqayihy nk ny-,
   il bi dknxl hy nkm lty-:
   ''¿dktk ubé glixacl pnl-?''
   il qy xyqkm yi hafb-,
   ia yi mkfyt vahkm koy-,
   uby, yi nl uby il vk ia vay-,

   dkmkt hy nktcl ym glthb-.
   uby mbynyi yi gkdytb-
   hktnym k nlm uby ctkgy-;
   xkm qú ubéxkqy nkm gy-
   mónl yi glftkt fbyik pk-;
   uby yn uby axdtaxy iygyhk-
   hknkm k gyiml dytdy-.
   khvaytqy uby ym hymkqa-,
   mayihl hy vahtal yn qyok-,
   qlxkt dayhtkm yi nkm xk-
   dktk qatkt kn vyga-.
   hyok uby yn rlxfty hy oba-,
   yi nkm lftkm uby glxdl-,
   my vkwk gli daym hy dnl-;
   uby yn uby mkgk k nbe dkdy-
   dktk yiqtyqyiyt hligy-
   ymgtafy k qliqkm w k nl-.

kxkhÍm hy ckbnk k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

mliyql

   qú, uby axaqkmqy nk nnltlmk vahk
   uby qbvy, kbmyiqy w hymhyñkhl mlfty
   yn ctki tafkel hy nk dyñk dlfty,
   hy knycty k dyiaqyigak tyhbgahk;
   qú, k ubayi nlm lolm haytli nk fyfahk
   hy kfbihkiqy naglt, kbiuby mknlfty,
   w kneáihlqy nk dnkqk, ymqkñl w glfty,
   qy hal nk qayttk yi qayttk nk glxahk,
   vavy mycbtl hy uby yqytikxyiqy,
   yi qkiql, kn xyilm, uby yi nk gbktqk ympytk,
   mbm gkfknnlm kcbaoy yn tbfal kdlnl,
   qyihtám gnktl tyilxfty hy vknayiqy;
   qb dkqtak mytá yi qlhkm nk dtaxytk;
   qb mkfal kbqlt, kn xbihl úiagl w mlnl.

hli fynakiÍm hy ctygak k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

mliyql

   tlxdí, gltqé, kflnné, w haoy w ragy
   xám uby yi yn ltfy gkfknnytl kihkiqy;
   pba haymqtl, pba vknayiqy, pba kttlckiqy;
   xan kctkvalm vyicbé, gayi xan hymragy.
   rkekñkm ha k nk pkxk uby yqytiagy;
   pba glxyhahl w tycknkhl kxkiqy;
   pby yikil dktk xí qlhl cackiqy,
   w kn hbynl yi gbknubayt dbiql mkqampagy.
   qbvy k xam daym dlmqtkhk nk pltqbik,
   w qtkol hyn gldyqy xa glthbtk
   k nk gknvk lgkmaói kn ymqtaglqy.
   xám, kbiuby mlfty yn gbytil hy nk nbik
   mayxdty my val yigbxftkhk xa vyiqbtk,
   qbm dtlyekm yivahal, ¡lr ctki ubaolqy!

nk myÑltk ltakik k hbngaiyk hyn qlflml

mliyql

   ¡lr, ubaéi qbvaytk, rytxlmk hbngaiyk,
   dlt xám glxlhahkh w xám tydlml,
   k xatkpnltym dbymql yi yn qlflml,
   w qtlgktk mbm nlihtym gli qb knhyk!
   ¡lr, ubaéi hy qbm hymylm w naftyk
   knxk w gbytdl khltiktk, w hyn pkxlml
   gkfknnytl uby ragamqy vyiqbtlml
   xatktk kncbik hymacbkn dynyk!
   ¡lr, ubaéi qki gkmqkxyiqy my ymgkdktk
   hyn myñlt kxkhím glxl qú ragamqy
   hyn glxyhahl rahkncl hli ubaolqy!
   uby kmí yivahakhk pbytk, w il yivahaktk,
   w pbytk knycty yn qayxdl uby pby qtamqy,
   w clektk nlm cbmqlm mai ymglqy.

ckihknÍi, ymgbhytl hy kxkhÍm hy ckbnk, k mkigrl dkiek, ymgbhytl hy hli ubaolqy

mliyql

   mknvy, vktói pkxlml, k ubayi pltqbik,
   gbkihl yi yn qtkql ymgbhytan qy dbml,
   qki fnkihk w gbythkxyiqy nl hamdbml,
   uby nl dkmkmqy mai hymctkgak kncbik.
   wk nk kekhk l nk rle dlgl tydbcik
   kn kihkiqy yoytgagal; wk ymqá yi bml
   nk nnkiyek ymgbhytk, gli uby kgbml
   kn mlfytfal uby aiqyiqk rlnnkt nk nbik.
   yivahal k qb obxyiql w k qb ilxfty,
   w k qbm knpltokm acbknxyiqy aivahal,
   uby xlmqtktli qb gbythk dtlvahyigak.
   mknvy lqtk vye, ¡lr mkigrl!, qki fbyi rlxfty,
   uby k mlnl qú ibymqtl ymdkñln lvahal
   gli fbegltlik qy rkgy tyvytyigak.

hyn hlilml, dlyqk yiqtyvytkhl, k mkigrl dkiek w tlgaikiqy

   mlw mkigrl dkiek, ymgbhy-
   hyn xkigrycl hli ubaol-.
   dbmy daym yi dlnvltl-,
   dlt vavat k nl hamgty-;
   uby yn qágaql vannkhay-
   qlhk mb tkeói hy ymqk-
   gaptó yi bik tyqatk-,
   mycúi mayiqy gynymqa-,
   naftl, yi xa ldaiaói, hava-
   ma yigbftaytk xám nl rbxk-.
   k tlgaikiqy
   mlw tlgaikiqy, yn pkxl-
   famiayql hyn ctki fkfay-.
   dlt dygkhlm hy pnkuby-,
   pba k dlhyt hy bi hli ubaol-.
   dktyokm glttí k nl pnl-;
   xkm, dlt bñk hy gkfk-,
   il my xy ymgkdó gyfk-;
   uby ymql mkubé k nkekta-
   gbkihl, dktk rbtqkt yn va-
   kn gaycl, ny ha nk dk-.

ltnkihl pbtalml k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

mliyql

   ma il ytym dkt, qkxdlgl ny rkm qyiahl:
   uby dkt dbhaytkm myt yiqty xan dktym;
   ia dbyhy rkfytny hlihy qú qy rknnktym,
   aivaql vyigyhlt, okxám vyigahl.
   ltnkihl mlw, ubaolqy, uby, dythahl
   dlt kicénagk, va tyxlqlm xktym,
   lptygayihl k nk pkxk yi mbm knqktym
   kubyn vknlt uby tymdyqó yn lnvahl.
   il dbyhl myt qb acbkn; uby ymqy hygltl
   my hyfy k qbm dtlyekm w k qb pkxk,
   dbymql uby, glxl wl, dythamqy yn myml.
   xkm mytnl rkm xíl, ma kn mlfytfal xltl
   w gaqk paytl hlxkm, uby rlw ilm nnkxk
   acbknym yi kxlt gli xkn mbgyml.

yn gkfknnytl hyn pyfl k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

mliyql

   k vbymqtk ymdkhk il acbknó nk xík,
   pyfl ymdkñln, gbtalml gltqymkil,
   ia k nk knqk cnltak hy vknlt xa xkil,
   uby tkwl pby hl ikgy w xbyty yn hík.
   axdytalm hymdtygaé; nk xliktubík
   uby xy lptygaó yn ltayiqy tlol yi vkil
   hyoé, dlt vyt yn tlmqtl mlfytkil
   hy gnktahakik, kbtltk rytxlmk xík.
   kxénk dlt xankctl úiagl w tktl,
   w, kbmyiqy yi mb hymctkgak, yn dtldal aipaytil
   qyxaó xa ftkel, uby hlxó mb tkfak.
   xkm vlm, clhl ubaolqy, anbmqty w gnktl,
   dlt hbngaiyk mlam kn xbihl yqytil,
   w ynnk, dlt vlm, pkxlmk, rliymqk w mkfak.

hy mlnamhÁi k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

mliyql

   xkcbyt, myñlt ubaolqy, uby mkihygym
   vlm qyicki yn gytfynl hyttbxfkhl,
   ibigk mytéam hy kncbil tydtlgrkhl
   dlt rlxy hy lftkm vanym w mlygym.
   mytái vbymkm pkekñkm nlm olygym,
   dbym qbytqlm hympkgayihl rkféam kihkhl,
   mayihl vyckhkm xan kdknykhl
   dlt plnnliym gkbqavlm w tkrygym.
   w ma nk vbymk naihk hbngaiyk
   hymkcbamkhl gliqtk vlm glxyqy,
   ia k vbymkm gbaqkm xbymqtk fbyi qknkiqy,
   yi qkn hymxái, vbyml gliltqy myk
   uby mkigrl dkiek pby xkn kngkcüyqy,
   iygal én, hbtk ynnk, w vlm il kxkiqy.

haÁnlcl yiqty fkfaygk w tlgaikiqy

mliyql

   f. ¿góxl ymqáam, tlgaikiqy, qki hynckhl?
   t. dltuby ibigk my glxy, w my qtkfkok.
   f. dbym, ¿ubé ym hy nk gyfkhk w hy nk dkok?
   t. il xy hyok xa kxl ia bi flgkhl.
   f. kihá, myñlt, uby ymqáam xbw xkn gtakhl,
   dbym vbymqtk nyicbk hy kmil kn kxl bnqtkok.
   t. kmil my ym hy nk gbik k nk xltqkok.
   ¿ubytéamnl vyt? xatknhl yikxltkhl.
   f. ¿ym iygyhkh kxkt? t. il ym ctki dtbhyigak.
   f. xyqkpímagl ymqáam. t. ym uby il glxl.
   f. ubyoklm hyn ymgbhytl. t. il ym fkmqkiqy.
   ¿góxl xy ry hy ubyokt yi xa hlnyigak,
   ma yn kxl w ymgbhytl l xkwlthlxl
   mli qki tlgaiym glxl tlgaikiqy?

dtaxytk dktqy hyn aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk





gkdíqbnl dtaxytl. uby qtkqk hy nk glihagaói w yoytgagal hyn pkxlml rahkncl
hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk


yi bi nbckt hy nk xkigrk, hy gbwl ilxfty il ubaytl kglthktxy, il rk xbgrl
qayxdl uby vavík bi rahkncl hy nlm hy nkiek yi kmqannytl, khktck kiqacbk,
tlgíi pnkgl w ckncl glttyhlt. bik lnnk hy kncl xám vkgk uby gktiytl,
mkndagói nkm xám ilgrym, hbynlm w ubyftkiqlm nlm máfkhlm, nkiqyokm nlm
vaytiym, kncúi dknlxail hy kñkhahbtk nlm hlxaiclm, glimbxíki nkm qtym
dktqym hy mb rkgayihk. yn tymql hynnk glignbíki mkwl hy vynktqy, gknekm hy
vynnbhl dktk nkm paymqkm, gli mbm dkiqbpnlm hy nl xymxl, w nlm híkm hy
yiqtymyxkik my rlitkfk gli mb vynnltí hy nl xám pail. qyiík yi mb gkmk bik
kxk uby dkmkfk hy nlm gbktyiqk, w bik mlftaik uby il nnyckfk k nlm vyaiqy,
w bi xlel hy gkxdl w dnkek, uby kmí yimannkfk yn tlgíi glxl qlxkfk nk
dlhkhytk. ptamkfk nk yhkh hy ibymqtl rahkncl gli nlm gaigbyiqk kñlm; ytk hy
glxdnyzaói tygak, mygl hy gktiym, yiobql hy tlmqtl, ctki xkhtbckhlt w kxacl
hy nk gkek. ubaytyi hygat uby qyiík yn mlftyilxfty hy ubaokhk, l ubymkhk,
uby yi ymql rkw kncbik hapytyigak yi nlm kbqltym uby hymqy gkml ymgtafyi;
kbiuby, dlt glioyqbtkm vytlmíxanym, my hyok yiqyihyt uby my nnkxkfk
ubyokik. dytl ymql axdltqk dlgl k ibymqtl gbyiql; fkmqk uby yi nk ikttkgaói
hén il my mknck bi dbiql hy nk vythkh.

ym, dbym, hy mkfyt uby ymqy mlftyhagrl rahkncl, nlm tkqlm uby ymqkfk
lgalml, uby ytki nlm xám hyn kñl, my hkfk k nyyt naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, gli
qkiqk kpagaói w cbmql, uby lnvahó gkma hy qlhl dbiql yn yoytgagal hy nk
gkek, w kbi nk khxaiamqtkgaói hy mb rkgayihk. w nnycó k qkiql mb gbtalmahkh
w hymkqail yi ymql, uby vyihaó xbgrkm rkiyckm hy qayttk hy myxftkhbtk dktk
glxdtkt naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm yi uby nyyt, w kmí, nnyvó k mb gkmk qlhlm
gbkiqlm dbhl rkfyt hynnlm; w hy qlhlm, iaicbilm ny dktygíki qki fayi glxl
nlm uby glxdbml yn pkxlml pynagakil hy manvk, dltuby nk gnktahkh hy mb
dtlmk w kubynnkm yiqtagkhkm tkeliym mbwkm ny dktygíki hy dytnkm, w xám
gbkihl nnyckfk k nyyt kubynnlm tyubayftlm w gktqkm hy hymkpílm, hlihy yi
xbgrkm dktqym rknnkfk ymgtaql: nk tkeói hy nk maitkeói uby k xa tkeói my
rkgy, hy qkn xkiytk xa tkeói yipnkubygy, uby gli tkeói xy ubyol hy nk
vbymqtk pytxlmbtk. w qkxfaéi gbkihl nyík: ...nlm knqlm gaynlm uby hy
vbymqtk havaiahkh havaikxyiqy gli nkm ymqtynnkm lm pltqapagki, w lm rkgyi
xytygyhltk hyn xytygaxayiql uby xytygy nk vbymqtk ctkihyek.

gli ymqkm tkeliym dythík yn dlfty gkfknnytl yn obagal, w hymvynáfkmy dlt
yiqyihytnkm w hymyiqtkñktnym yn myiqahl, uby il my nl mkgktk ia nkm
yiqyihaytk yn xymxl ktamqóqynym, ma tymbgaqktk dktk mónl ynnl. il ymqkfk
xbw fayi gli nkm rytahkm uby hli fynakiím hkfk w tygyfík, dltuby my
axkcaikfk uby, dlt ctkihym xkymqtlm uby ny rbfaymyi gbtkhl, il hyoktík hy
qyiyt yn tlmqtl w qlhl yn gbytdl nnyil hy gagkqtagym w myñknym. dytl, gli
qlhl, knkfkfk yi mb kbqlt kubyn kgkfkt mb naftl gli nk dtlxymk hy kubynnk
aikgkfkfny kvyiqbtk, w xbgrkm vygym ny vail hymyl hy qlxkt nk dnbxk w hknny
pai kn day hy nk nyqtk, glxl knní my dtlxyqy; w mai hbhk kncbik nl ragaytk,
w kbi mknaytk gli ynnl, ma lqtlm xkwltym w gliqaiblm dyimkxayiqlm il my nl
ymqltfktki. qbvl xbgrkm vygym glxdyqyigak gli yn gbtk hy mb nbckt -uby ytk
rlxfty hlgql, ctkhbkhl yi macüyiek-, mlfty gbán rkfík mahl xyolt gkfknnytl:
dknxytíi hy aicknkqyttk l kxkhím hy ckbnk; xkm xkymy iaglnám, fktfytl hyn
xymxl dbyfnl, hygík uby iaicbil nnyckfk kn gkfknnytl hyn pyfl, w uby ma
kncbil my ny dlhík glxdktkt, ytk hli cknklt, rytxkil hy kxkhím hy ckbnk,
dltuby qyiík xbw kglxlhkhk glihagaói dktk qlhl; uby il ytk gkfknnytl
xynaihtlml, ia qki nnltói glxl mb rytxkil, w uby yi nl hy nk vknyiqík il ny
afk yi ekck.

yi tymlnbgaói, én my yiptkmgó qkiql yi mb nyqbtk, uby my ny dkmkfki nkm
ilgrym nywyihl hy gnktl yi gnktl, w nlm híkm hy qbtfal yi qbtfal; w kmí,
hyn dlgl hltxat w hyn xbgrl nyyt, my ny mygó yn gynyftl, hy xkiytk uby vail
k dythyt yn obagal. nnyiómyny nk pkiqkmík hy qlhl kubynnl uby nyík yi nlm
naftlm, kmí hy yigkiqkxyiqlm glxl hy dyihyigakm, fkqknnkm, hymkpílm,
rytahkm, tyubayftlm, kxltym, qltxyiqkm w hamdktkqym axdlmafnym; w
kmyiqómyny hy qkn xlhl yi nk axkcaikgaói uby ytk vythkh qlhk kubynnk
xáubaik hy kubynnkm mlikhkm mlñkhkm aivyigaliym uby nyík, uby dktk én il
rkfík lqtk ramqltak xám gaytqk yi yn xbihl. hygík én uby yn gah tbw híke
rkfík mahl xbw fbyi gkfknnytl, dytl uby il qyiík uby vyt gli yn gkfknnytl
hy nk kthayiqy ymdkhk, uby hy mónl bi tyvém rkfík dktqahl dlt xyhal hlm
paytlm w hymglxbiknym cackiqym. xyolt ymqkfk gli fytikthl hyn gktdal,
dltuby yi tligymvknnym rkfík xbytql k tlnhái yn yigkiqkhl, vknaéihlmy hy nk
aihbmqtak hy rétgbnym, gbkihl krlcó k kiqyl, yn raol hy nk qayttk, yiqty
nlm ftkelm. hygík xbgrl fayi hyn cackiqy xltckiqy, dltuby, gli myt hy
kubynnk cyiytkgaói cackiqyk, uby qlhlm mli mlfytfalm w hymglxyhahlm, én
mlnl ytk kpkfny w fayi gtakhl. dytl, mlfty qlhlm, ymqkfk fayi gli tyaiknhlm
hy xliqknfái, w xám gbkihl ny vyík mknat hy mb gkmqannl w tlfkt gbkiqlm
qldkfk, w gbkihl yi knnyihy tlfó kubyn íhlnl hy xkrlxk uby ytk qlhl hy ltl,
mycúi hagy mb ramqltak. haytk én, dlt hkt bik xkil hy glgym kn qtkahlt hy
cknknói, kn kxk uby qyiík, w kbi k mb mlftaik hy kñkhahbtk.

yi ypyql, tyxkqkhl wk mb obagal, vail k hkt yi yn xám ymqtkñl dyimkxayiql
uby okxám hal nlgl yi yn xbihl; w pby uby ny dktygaó glivyiafny w
iygymktal, kmí dktk yn kbxyiql hy mb rlitk glxl dktk yn mytvagal hy mb
tydúfnagk, rkgytmy gkfknnytl kihkiqy, w atmy dlt qlhl yn xbihl gli mbm
ktxkm w gkfknnl k fbmgkt nkm kvyiqbtkm w k yoytgaqktmy yi qlhl kubynnl uby
én rkfík nyíhl uby nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym my yoytgaqkfki, hymrkgayihl qlhl
céiytl hy kctkval, w dliaéihlmy yi lgkmaliym w dynactlm hlihy, kgkfáihlnlm,
glftkmy yqytil ilxfty w pkxk. axkcaiáfkmy yn dlfty wk gltlikhl dlt yn vknlt
hy mb ftkel, dlt nl xyilm, hyn axdytal hy qtkdamlihk; w kmí, gli ymqlm qki
kctkhkfnym dyimkxayiqlm, nnyvkhl hyn ymqtkñl cbmql uby yi ynnlm myiqík, my
hal dtaymk k dliyt yi ypyql nl uby hymykfk.

w nl dtaxytl uby rael pby naxdakt bikm ktxkm uby rkfíki mahl hy mbm
famkfbynlm, uby, qlxkhkm hy ltíi w nnyikm hy xlrl, nbyiclm macnlm rkfík uby
ymqkfki dbymqkm w lnvahkhkm yi bi taigói. naxdaónkm w khytyeónkm nl xyolt
uby dbhl, dytl val uby qyiíki bik ctki pknqk, w ytk uby il qyiíki gynkhk hy
yigkoy, mail xlttaói maxdny; xkm k ymql mbdnaó mb aihbmqtak, dltuby hy
gktqliym rael bi xlhl hy xyhak gynkhk, uby, yigkokhk gli yn xlttaói, rkgíki
bik kdktayigak hy gynkhk yiqytk. ym vythkh uby dktk dtlfkt ma ytk pbytqy w
dlhík ymqkt kn taymcl hy bik gbgrannkhk, mkgó mb ymdkhk w ny hal hlm
clndym, w gli yn dtaxytl w yi bi dbiql hymrael nl uby rkfík rygrl yi bik
myxkik; w il hyoó hy dktygytny xkn nk pkganahkh gli uby nk rkfík rygrl
dyhkelm, w, dlt kmycbtktmy hymqy dynactl, nk qltió k rkgyt hy ibyvl,
dliaéihlny bikm fkttkm hy rayttl dlt hy hyiqtl, hy qkn xkiytk uby én ubyhó
mkqampygrl hy mb pltqknyek; w, mai ubytyt rkgyt ibyvk yzdytayigak hynnk, nk
hadbqó w qbvl dlt gynkhk paiímaxk hy yigkoy.

pby nbycl k vyt mb tlgíi, w, kbiuby qyiík xám gbktqlm uby bi tykn w xám
qkgrkm uby yn gkfknnl hy cliynk, uby qkiqbx dynnam yq lmmk pbaq, ny dktygaó
uby ia yn fbgépknl hy knyokihtl ia fkfaygk yn hyn gah gli én my acbknkfki.
gbkqtl híkm my ny dkmktli yi axkcaikt ubé ilxfty ny dlihtík; dltuby, mycúi
my hygík én k mí xymxl, il ytk tkeói uby gkfknnl hy gkfknnytl qki pkxlml, w
qki fbyil én dlt mí, ymqbvaymy mai ilxfty glilgahl; w kimí, dtlgbtkfk
kglxlhátmyny hy xkiytk uby hygnktkmy ubaéi rkfík mahl, kiqym uby pbymy hy
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, w nl uby ytk yiqligym; dbym ymqkfk xbw dbymql yi tkeói
uby, xbhkihl mb myñlt ymqkhl, xbhkmy én qkxfaéi yn ilxfty, w ny glftkmy
pkxlml w hy ymqtbyihl, glxl glivyiík k nk ibyvk lthyi w kn ibyvl yoytgagal
uby wk dtlpymkfk. w kmí, hymdbém hy xbgrlm ilxftym uby pltxó, flttó w
ubaqó, kñkhaó, hymrael w qltió k rkgyt yi mb xyxltak y axkcaikgaói, kn pai
ny vail k nnkxkt tlgaikiqy: ilxfty, k mb dktygyt, knql, mliltl w
maciapagkqavl hy nl uby rkfík mahl gbkihl pby tlgíi, kiqym hy nl uby krltk
ytk, uby ytk kiqym w dtaxytl hy qlhlm nlm tlgaiym hyn xbihl.

dbymql ilxfty, w qki k mb cbmql, k mb gkfknnl, ubaml dliétmyny k mí xamxl,
w yi ymqy dyimkxayiql hbtó lqtlm lgrl híkm, w kn gkfl my vail k nnkxkt hli
ubaolqy; hy hlihy -glxl ubyhk hagrl- qlxktli lgkmaói nlm kbqltym hymqk qki
vythkhytk ramqltak uby, mai hbhk, my hyfík hy nnkxkt ubaokhk, w il ubymkhk,
glxl lqtlm ubamaytli hygat. dytl, kgltháihlmy uby yn vknytlml kxkhím il
mónl my rkfík gliqyiqkhl gli nnkxktmy kxkhím k mygkm, mail uby kñkhaó yn
ilxfty hy mb tyail w dkqtak, dlt rydank pkxlmk, w my nnkxó kxkhím hy ckbnk,
kmí ubaml, glxl fbyi gkfknnytl, kñkhat kn mbwl yn ilxfty hy nk mbwk w
nnkxktmy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, gli uby, k mb dktygyt, hygnktkfk xbw kn
vavl mb naikoy w dkqtak, w nk rlitkfk gli qlxkt yn mlftyilxfty hynnk.

naxdakm, dbym, mbm ktxkm, rygrl hyn xlttaói gynkhk, dbymql ilxfty k mb
tlgíi w glipatxáihlmy k mí xamxl, my hal k yiqyihyt uby il ny pknqkfk lqtk
glmk mail fbmgkt bik hkxk hy ubayi yikxltktmy; dltuby yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy
mai kxltym ytk átfln mai rlokm w mai ptbql w gbytdl mai knxk. hygíkmy én
k mí:

-ma wl, dlt xknlm hy xam dygkhlm, l dlt xa fbyik mbytqy, xy yigbyiqtl dlt
krí gli kncúi cackiqy, glxl hy lthaiktal nym kgliqygy k nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym, w ny hyttafl hy bi yigbyiqtl, l ny dktql dlt xaqkh hyn gbytdl, l,
paiknxyiqy, ny vyiel w ny taihl, ¿il mytá fayi qyiyt k ubayi yivaktny
dtymyiqkhl w uby yiqty w my raiuby hy tlhannkm kiqy xa hbngy myñltk, w hack
gli vle rbxanhy w tyihahl: ''wl, myñltk, mlw yn cackiqy gktkgbnakxftl,
myñlt hy nk íimbnk xknaihtkiak, k ubayi vyigaó yi maicbnkt fkqknnk yn
okxám glxl my hyfy knkfkhl gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, yn gbkn xy
xkihó uby xy dtymyiqkmy kiqy vbymqtk xytgyh, dktk uby nk vbymqtk ctkihyek
hamdlick hy xí k mb qknkiqy''?

¡lr, góxl my rlncó ibymqtl fbyi gkfknnytl gbkihl rbfl rygrl ymqy hamgbtml,
w xám gbkihl rknnó k ubayi hkt ilxfty hy mb hkxk! w pby, k nl uby my gtyy,
uby yi bi nbckt gytgk hyn mbwl rkfík bik xlek nkftkhltk hy xbw fbyi
dktygyt, hy ubayi én bi qayxdl kihbvl yikxltkhl, kbiuby, mycúi my yiqayihy,
ynnk okxám nl mbdl, ia ny hal gkqk hynnl. nnkxáfkmy knhliek nltyiel, w k
émqk ny dktygaó myt fayi hktny qíqbnl hy myñltk hy mbm dyimkxayiqlm; w,
fbmgáihlny ilxfty uby il hymhaoymy xbgrl hyn mbwl, w uby qatkmy w my
yigkxaikmy kn hy dtaigymk w ctki myñltk, vail k nnkxktnk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml, dltuby ytk ikqbtkn hyn qlflml; ilxfty, k mb dktygyt, xúmagl w
dytyctail w maciapagkqavl, glxl qlhlm nlm hyxám uby k én w k mbm glmkm
rkfík dbymql.





gkdíqbnl aa. uby qtkqk hy nk dtaxytk mknahk uby hy mb qayttk rael yn
aicyialml hli ubaolqy


rygrkm, dbym, ymqkm dtyvyigaliym, il ubaml kcbkthkt xám qayxdl k dliyt yi
ypyql mb dyimkxayiql, kdtyqáihlny k ynnl nk pknqk uby én dyimkfk uby rkgík
yi yn xbihl mb qkthkiek, mycúi ytki nlm kctkvalm uby dyimkfk hymrkgyt,
qbytqlm uby yihytyekt, maitkeliym uby yxyihkt, w kfbmlm uby xyoltkt w
hybhkm uby mkqampkgyt. w kmí, mai hkt dktqy k dytmlik kncbik hy mb
aiqyigaói, w mai uby ikhay ny vaymy, bik xkñkik, kiqym hyn hík, uby ytk bil
hy nlm gknbtlmlm hyn xym hy obnal, my ktxó hy qlhkm mbm ktxkm, mbfaó mlfty
tlgaikiqy, dbymqk mb xkn glxdbymqk gynkhk, yxftkeó mb khktck, qlxó mb
nkiek, w, dlt nk dbytqk pknmk hy bi glttkn, mknaó kn gkxdl gli ctkihímaxl
gliqyiql w knfltlel hy vyt gli gbáiqk pkganahkh rkfík hkhl dtaigadal k mb
fbyi hymyl. xkm, kdyikm my val yi yn gkxdl, gbkihl ny kmknqó bi dyimkxayiql
qyttafny, w qkn, uby dlt dlgl ny ragaytk hyokt nk glxyiekhk yxdtymk; w pby
uby ny vail k nk xyxltak uby il ytk ktxkhl gkfknnytl, w uby, glipltxy k nyw
hy gkfknnytík, ia dlhík ia hyfík qlxkt ktxkm gli iaicúi gkfknnytl; w,
dbymql uby nl pbytk, rkfík hy nnyvkt ktxkm fnkigkm, glxl ilvyn gkfknnytl,
mai yxdtymk yi yn ymgbhl, rkmqk uby dlt mb ympbytel nk ckikmy. ymqlm
dyimkxayiqlm ny ragaytli qaqbfykt yi mb dtldómaql; xkm, dbhayihl xám mb
nlgbtk uby lqtk tkeói kncbik, dtldbml hy rkgytmy ktxkt gkfknnytl hyn
dtaxytl uby qldkmy, k axaqkgaói hy lqtlm xbgrlm uby kmí nl ragaytli, mycúi
én rkfík nyíhl yi nlm naftlm uby qkn ny qyiíki. yi nl hy nkm ktxkm fnkigkm,
dyimkfk naxdaktnkm hy xkiytk, yi qyiayihl nbckt, uby nl pbymyi xám uby bi
ktxañl; w gli ymql my ubayqó w dtlmacbaó mb gkxail, mai nnyvkt lqtl uby
kubyn uby mb gkfknnl ubytík, gtywyihl uby yi kubynnl glimamqík nk pbytek hy
nkm kvyiqbtkm.

wyihl, dbym, gkxaikihl ibymqtl pnkxkiqy kvyiqbtytl, afk rkfnkihl glimacl
xymxl w hagayihl:

-¿ubaéi hbhk mail uby yi nlm vyiahytlm qayxdlm, gbkihl mknck k nbe nk
vythkhytk ramqltak hy xam pkxlmlm rygrlm, uby yn mkfal uby nlm ymgtafayty
il dlick, gbkihl nnycby k gliqkt ymqk xa dtaxytk mknahkh qki hy xkñkik,
hymqk xkiytk?: «kdyikm rkfík yn tbfagbihl kdlnl qyihahl dlt nk pke hy nk
kigrk w ymdkgalmk qayttk nkm hltkhkm ryftkm hy mbm rytxlmlm gkfynnlm, w
kdyikm nlm dyubyñlm w daiqkhlm dkoktannlm gli mbm ktdkhkm nyicbkm rkfíki
mknbhkhl gli hbngy w xynapnbk ktxliík nk vyiahk hy nk tlmkhk kbtltk, uby,
hyokihl nk fnkihk gkxk hyn gynlml xktahl, dlt nkm dbytqkm w fkngliym hyn
xkigrycl rltaeliqy k nlm xltqknym my xlmqtkfk, gbkihl yn pkxlml gkfknnytl
hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, hyokihl nkm lgalmkm dnbxkm, mbfaó mlfty mb pkxlml
gkfknnl tlgaikiqy, w glxyieó k gkxaikt dlt yn kiqacbl w glilgahl gkxdl hy
xliqayn».

w ytk nk vythkh uby dlt én gkxaikfk. w kñkhaó hagayihl:

-hagrlmk yhkh, w macnl hagrlml kubyn khlihy mknhtái k nbe nkm pkxlmkm
rkekñkm xíkm, hacikm hy yiqknnktmy yi ftligym, ymgbndatmy yi xátxlnym w
daiqktmy yi qkfnkm dktk xyxltak yi nl pbqbtl. ¡lr qú, mkfal yigkiqkhlt,
ubayiubaytk uby mykm, k ubayi rk hy qlgkt yn myt gltliamqk hymqk dytyctaik
ramqltak, tbéclqy uby il qy lnvahym hy xa fbyi tlgaikiqy, glxdkñytl yqytil
xíl yi qlhlm xam gkxailm w gkttytkm!

nbycl vlnvík hagayihl, glxl ma vythkhytkxyiqy pbytk yikxltkhl:

-¡lr dtaigymk hbngaiyk, myñltk hymqy gkbqavl gltkeói!, xbgrl kctkval xy
rkfyhym pygrl yi hymdyhatxy w tydtlgrktxy gli yn tacbtlml kpaigkxayiql hy
xkihktxy il dktygyt kiqy nk vbymqtk pytxlmbtk. dnécklm, myñltk, hy
xyxftktlm hymqy vbymqtl mboyql gltkeói, uby qkiqkm gbaqkm dlt vbymqtl kxlt
dkhygy.

gli émqlm afk yimktqkihl lqtlm hamdktkqym, qlhlm kn xlhl hy nlm uby mbm
naftlm ny rkfíki yimyñkhl, axaqkihl yi gbkiql dlhík mb nyicbkoy. gli ymql,
gkxaikfk qki hymdkgal, w yn mln yiqtkfk qki kdtaymk w gli qkiql kthlt, uby
pbytk fkmqkiqy k hyttyqatny nlm mymlm, ma kncbilm qbvaytk.

gkma qlhl kubyn hík gkxaió mai kgliqygytny glmk uby hy gliqkt pbymy, hy nl
gbkn my hymymdytkfk, dltuby ubamaytk qldkt nbycl nbycl gli ubayi rkgyt
yzdytayigak hyn vknlt hy mb pbytqy ftkel. kbqltym rkw uby hagyi uby nk
dtaxytk kvyiqbtk uby ny kvail pby nk hyn dbytql nádagy; lqtlm hagyi uby nk
hy nlm xlnailm hy vayiql; dytl, nl uby wl ry dlhahl kvytacbkt yi ymqy gkml,
w nl uby ry rknnkhl ymgtaql yi nlm kiknym hy nk xkigrk, ym uby én kihbvl
qlhl kubyn hík, w, kn kilgrygyt, mb tlgíi w én my rknnktli gkimkhlm w
xbytqlm hy rkxfty; w uby, xatkihl k qlhkm dktqym dlt vyt ma hymgbftatík
kncúi gkmqannl l kncbik xkokhk hy dkmqltym hlihy tyglcytmy w khlihy dbhaymy
tyxyhakt mb xbgrk rkxfty w iygymahkh, val, il nyolm hyn gkxail dlt hlihy
afk, bik vyiqk, uby pby glxl ma vaytk bik ymqtynnk uby, il k nlm dltqknym,
mail k nlm kngáektym hy mb tyhyigaói ny yigkxaikfk. halmy dtaymk k gkxaikt,
w nnycó k ynnk k qayxdl uby kilgrygík.

ymqkfki kgkml k nk dbytqk hlm xboytym xlekm, hymqkm uby nnkxki hyn dktqahl,
nkm gbknym afki k myvannk gli bilm kttaytlm uby yi nk vyiqk kubynnk ilgry
kgytqktli k rkgyt oltikhk; w, glxl k ibymqtl kvyiqbtytl qlhl gbkiql
dyimkfk, vyík l axkcaikfk ny dktygík myt rygrl w dkmkt kn xlhl hy nl uby
rkfík nyíhl, nbycl uby val nk vyiqk, my ny tydtymyiqó uby ytk bi gkmqannl
gli mbm gbkqtl qlttym w grkdaqynym hy nbgayiqy dnkqk, mai pknqktny mb
dbyiqy nyvkhaek w rlihk gkvk, gli qlhlm kubynnlm khrytyiqym uby myxyokiqym
gkmqannlm my daiqki. pbymy nnyckihl k nk vyiqk, uby k én ny dktygík
gkmqannl, w k dlgl qtygrl hynnk hyqbvl nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy, ymdytkihl
uby kncúi yikil my dbmaymy yiqty nkm knxyikm k hkt myñkn gli kncbik
qtlxdyqk hy uby nnyckfk gkfknnytl kn gkmqannl. dytl, glxl val uby my
qkthkfki w uby tlgaikiqy my hkfk dtaymk dlt nnyckt k nk gkfknnytaek, my
nnycó k nk dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, w val k nkm hlm hymqtkíhkm xlekm uby knní
ymqkfki, uby k én ny dktygaytli hlm rytxlmkm hligynnkm l hlm ctkgalmkm
hkxkm uby hynkiqy hy nk dbytqk hyn gkmqannl my ymqkfki mlnkekihl. yi ymql,
mbgyhaó kgkml uby bi dltubytl uby kihkfk tyglcayihl hy bilm tkmqtlolm bik
xkikhk hy dbytglm -uby, mai dythói, kmí my nnkxki- qlgó bi gbytil, k gbwk
myñkn ynnlm my tyglcyi, w kn aimqkiqy my ny tydtymyiqó k hli ubaolqy nl uby
hymykfk, uby ytk uby kncúi yikil rkgík myñkn hy mb vyiahk; w kmí, gli
ymqtkñl gliqyiql, nnycó k nk vyiqk w k nkm hkxkm, nkm gbknym, glxl vaytli
vyiat bi rlxfty hy kubynnk mbytqy, ktxkhl w gli nkiek w khktck, nnyikm hy
xayhl, my afki k yiqtkt yi nk vyiqk; dytl hli ubaolqy, glnacayihl dlt mb
rbahk mb xayhl, kneáihlmy nk vamytk hy dkdynói w hymgbftayihl mb mygl w
dlnvltlml tlmqtl, gli cyiqan qknkiqy w vle tydlmkhk, nym haol:

-il pbwki nkm vbymqtkm xytgyhym ia qyxki hymkcbamkhl kncbil; gk k nk lthyi
hy gkfknnytík uby dtlpyml ili qlgk ia kqkñy pkgytny k iaicbil, gbkiql xám k
qki knqkm hligynnkm glxl vbymqtkm dtymyigakm hyxbymqtki.

xatáfkiny nkm xlekm, w kihkfki gli nlm lolm fbmgáihlny yn tlmqtl, uby nk
xknk vamytk ny yigbftík; xkm, glxl my lwytli nnkxkt hligynnkm, glmk qki
pbytk hy mb dtlpymaói, il dbhaytli qyiyt nk tamk, w pby hy xkiytk uby hli
ubaolqy vail k glttytmy w k hygatnym:

-fayi dktygy nk xymbtk yi nkm pytxlmkm, w ym xbgrk mkihye khyxám nk tamk
uby hy nyvy gkbmk dtlgyhy; dytl il vlm nl hacl dltuby lm kgbaqyhym ia
xlmqtyhym xkn qknkiqy; uby yn xíl ili ym hy án uby hy mytvatlm.

yn nyicbkoy, il yiqyihahl hy nkm myñltkm, w yn xkn qknny hy ibymqtl
gkfknnytl kgtygyiqkfk yi ynnkm nk tamk w yi én yn yilol; w dkmktk xbw
khynkiqy ma k kubyn dbiql il mknaytk yn vyiqytl, rlxfty uby, dlt myt xbw
clthl, ytk xbw dkgípagl, yn gbkn, vayihl kubynnk pacbtk gliqtkrygrk, ktxkhk
hy ktxkm qki hymacbknym glxl ytki nk ftahk, nkiek, khktck w glmynyqy, il
ymqbvl yi ikhk yi kglxdkñkt k nkm hligynnkm yi nkm xbymqtkm hy mb gliqyiql.
xkm, yi ypyql, qyxayihl nk xáubaik hy qkiqlm dytqtygrlm, hyqytxaió hy
rkfnktny glxyhahkxyiqy; w kmí, ny haol:

-ma vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, fbmgk dlmkhk, kxéi hyn nygrl (dltuby
yi ymqk vyiqk il rkw iaicbil), qlhl nl hyxám my rknnktá yi ynnk yi xbgrk
kfbihkigak.

vayihl hli ubaolqy nk rbxanhkh hyn kngkahy hy nk pltqknyek, uby qkn ny
dktygaó k én yn vyiqytl w nk vyiqk, tymdlihaó:

   -dktk xí, myñlt gkmqynnkil, gbknubaytk glmk fkmqk, dltuby
   xam kttylm mli nkm ktxkm,
   xa hymgkiml yn dynykt, yqg.

dyimó yn rbémdyh uby yn rkfytny nnkxkhl gkmqynnkil rkfík mahl dlt rkfytny
dktygahl hy nlm mkilm hy gkmqannk, kbiuby én ytk kihknbe, w hy nlm hy nk
dnkwk hy mkinúgkt, il xyilm nkhtói uby gkgl, ia xyilm xknykiqy uby
ymqbhakiqkhl dkoy; w kmí, ny tymdlihaó:

-mycúi yml, nkm gkxkm hy vbymqtk xytgyh mytái hbtkm dyñkm, w mb hltxat,
mayxdty vynkt; w mayihl kmí, fayi my dbyhy kdykt, gli mycbtahkh hy rknnkt
yi ymqk grlek lgkmaói w lgkmaliym dktk il hltxat yi qlhl bi kñl, gbkiql xám
yi bik ilgry.

w, hagayihl ymql, pby k qyiyt yn ymqtafl k hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn my kdyó gli
xbgrk hapagbnqkh w qtkfkol, glxl kubyn uby yi qlhl kubyn hík il my rkfík
hymkwbikhl.

haol nbycl kn rbémdyh uby ny qbvaymy xbgrl gbahkhl hy mb gkfknnl, dltuby
ytk nk xyolt dayek uby glxík dki yi yn xbihl. xatóny yn vyiqytl, w il ny
dktygaó qki fbyil glxl hli ubaolqy hygík, ia kbi nk xaqkh; w, kglxlháihlny
yi nk gkfknnytaek, vlnvaó k vyt nl uby mb rbémdyh xkihkfk, kn gbkn ymqkfki
hymktxkihl nkm hligynnkm, uby wk my rkfíki tygliganakhl gli én; nkm gbknym,
kbiuby ny rkfíki ubaqkhl yn dyql w yn ymdknhkt, okxám mbdaytli ia dbhaytli
hymyigkoktny nk clnk, ia ubaqknny nk gliqtkrygrk gynkhk, uby qtkík kqkhk
gli bikm gaiqkm vythym, w ytk xyiymqyt gltqktnkm, dlt il dlhytmy ubaqkt nlm
ñbhlm; xkm én il nl ubaml glimyiqat yi iaicbik xkiytk, w kmí, my ubyhó qlhk
kubynnk ilgry gli nk gynkhk dbymqk, uby ytk nk xám ctkgalmk w ymqtkñk
pacbtk uby my dbhaytk dyimkt; w, kn hymktxktny, glxl én my axkcaikfk uby
kubynnkm qtkíhkm w nnyvkhkm uby ny hymktxkfki ytki kncbikm dtaigadknym
myñltkm w hkxkm hy kubyn gkmqannl, nym haol gli xbgrl hlikaty:

   -ibigk pbytk gkfknnytl
   hy hkxkm qki fayi mytvahl
   glxl pbytk hli ubaolqy
   gbkihl hy mb knhyk vail:
   hligynnkm gbtkfki hén;
   dtaigymkm, hyn mb tlgail,

l tlgaikiqy, uby émqy ym yn ilxfty, myñltkm xíkm, hy xa gkfknnl, w hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk yn xíl; uby, dbymql uby il ubamaytk hymgbftatxy pkmqk
uby nkm pkekñkm pygrkm yi vbymqtl mytvagal w dtl xy hymgbftaytki, nk pbytek
hy kglxlhkt kn dtldómaql dtymyiqy ymqy tlxkigy vayol hy nkiektlqy rk mahl
gkbmk uby mydáam xa ilxfty kiqym hy qlhk mkeói; dytl, qayxdl vyihtá yi uby
nkm vbymqtkm myñltíkm xy xkihyi w wl lfyhyegk, w yn vknlt hy xa ftkel
hymgbftk yn hymyl uby qyicl hy mytvatlm.

nkm xlekm, uby il ymqkfki rygrkm k lít myxyokiqym tyqótagkm, il tymdlihíki
dknkftk; mónl ny dtycbiqktli ma ubytík glxyt kncbik glmk.

-gbknubaytk wkiqktík wl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby, k nl uby yiqayihl,
xy rktík xbgrl kn gkml.

k hagrk, kgytqó k myt vaytiym kubyn hík, w il rkfík yi qlhk nk vyiqk mail
bikm tkgaliym hy bi dymgkhl uby yi gkmqannk nnkxki kfkhyol, w yi kihknbgík
fkgknnkl, w yi lqtkm dktqym gbtkhannl, w yi lqtkm qtbgrbynk. dtycbiqátliny
ma dlt vyiqbtk glxytík mb xytgyh qtbgrbynk, uby il rkfík lqtl dymgkhl uby
hknny k glxyt.

-glxl rkwk xbgrkm qtbgrbynkm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dlhtái mytvat hy bik
qtbgrk, dltuby yml my xy hk uby xy hyi lgrl tyknym yi myigannlm uby yi bik
dayek hy k lgrl. gbkiql xám, uby dlhtík myt uby pbymyi ymqkm qtbgrbynkm
glxl nk qytiytk, uby ym xyolt uby nk vkgk, w yn gkftaql uby yn gkftói.
dytl, myk nl uby pbyty, vyick nbycl, uby yn qtkfkol w dyml hy nkm ktxkm il
my dbyhy nnyvkt mai yn clfaytil hy nkm qtadkm.

dbmaétliny nk xymk k nk dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, dlt yn ptymgl, w qtúolny yn
rbémdyh bik dltgaói hyn xkn tyxlokhl w dylt glgahl fkgknnkl, w bi dki qki
iyctl w xbctayiql glxl mbm ktxkm; dytl ytk xkqytak hy ctkihy tamk vytny
glxyt, dltuby, glxl qyiík dbymqk nk gynkhk w knekhk nk vamytk, il dlhík
dliyt ikhk yi nk flgk gli mbm xkilm ma lqtl il my nl hkfk w dliík; w kimí,
bik hy kubynnkm myñltkm mytvík hymqy xyiymqyt. xkm, kn hktny hy fyfyt, il
pby dlmafny, ia nl pbytk ma yn vyiqytl il rltkhktk bik gkñk, w dbymql yn bi
gkfl yi nk flgk, dlt yn lqtl ny afk ygrkihl yn vail; w qlhl ymql nl tygyfík
yi dkgayigak, k qtbygl hy il tlxdyt nkm gaiqkm hy nk gynkhk.

ymqkihl yi ymql, nnycó kgkml k nk vyiqk bi gkmqtkhlt hy dbytglm; w, kmí
glxl nnycó, mlió mb manfkql hy gkñkm gbkqtl l gaigl vygym, gli nl gbkn
kgkfó hy glipatxkt hli ubaolqy uby ymqkfk yi kncúi pkxlml gkmqannl, w uby
ny mytvíki gli xúmagk, w uby yn kfkhyol ytki qtbgrkm; yn dki, gkihykn; w
nkm tkxytkm, hkxkm; w yn vyiqytl, gkmqynnkil hyn gkmqannl, w gli ymql hkfk
dlt fayi yxdnykhk mb hyqytxaikgaói w mknahk. xkm nl uby xám ny pkqackfk ytk
yn il vytmy ktxkhl gkfknnytl, dlt dktygytny uby il my dlhtík dliyt
nycíqaxkxyiqy yi kvyiqbtk kncbik mai tygyfat nk lthyi hy gkfknnytík.





gkdíqbnl aaa. hlihy my gbyiqk nk ctkgalmk xkiytk uby qbvl hli ubaolqy yi
ktxktmy gkfknnytl


w kmí, pkqackhl hymqy dyimkxayiql, kftyvaó mb vyiqytan w naxaqkhk gyik; nk
gbkn kgkfkhk, nnkxó kn vyiqytl, w, yigyttáihlmy gli én yi nk gkfknnytaek,
my raigó hy tlhannkm kiqy én, hagaéihlny:

-il xy nyvkiqkté okxám hy hlihy ymqlw, vknytlml gkfknnytl, pkmqk uby nk
vbymqtk gltqymík xy lqltcby bi hli uby dyhatny ubaytl, yn gbkn tyhbihktá yi
knkfkiek vbymqtk w yi dtl hyn céiytl rbxkil.

yn vyiqytl, uby val k mb rbémdyh k mbm daym w lwó myxyokiqym tkeliym,
ymqkfk glipbml xatáihlny, mai mkfyt ubé rkgytmy ia hygatny, w dltpakfk gli
én uby my nyvkiqkmy, w okxám ubaml, rkmqk uby ny rbfl hy hygat uby én ny
lqltckfk yn hli uby ny dyhík.

-il ymdytkfk wl xyilm hy nk ctki xkciapagyigak vbymqtk, myñlt xíl
-tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w kmí, lm hacl uby yn hli uby lm ry dyhahl, w hy
vbymqtk nafytknahkh xy rk mahl lqltckhl, ym uby xkñkik yi kubyn hík xy
rkféam hy ktxkt gkfknnytl, w ymqk ilgry yi nk gkdannk hymqy vbymqtl
gkmqannl vynkté nkm ktxkm; w xkñkik, glxl qyicl hagrl, my gbxdnatá nl uby
qkiql hymyl, dktk dlhyt, glxl my hyfy, at dlt qlhkm nkm gbkqtl dktqym hyn
xbihl fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm, yi dtl hy nlm xyiymqytlmlm, glxl ymqá k gktcl
hy nk gkfknnytík w hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, glxl wl mlw, gbwl hymyl k
myxyokiqym pkekñkm ym aignaikhl.

yn vyiqytl, uby, glxl ymqá hagrl, ytk bi dlgl mlgkttói w wk qyiík kncbilm
fkttbiqlm hy nk pknqk hy obagal hy mb rbémdyh, kgkfó hy gtyytnl gbkihl
kgkfó hy lítny myxyokiqym tkeliym, w, dlt qyiyt ubé tyít kubynnk ilgry,
hyqytxaió hy mycbatny yn rbxlt; w kmí, ny haol uby kihkfk xbw kgytqkhl yi
nl uby hymykfk w dyhík, w uby qkn dtlmbdbymql ytk dtldal w ikqbtkn hy nlm
gkfknnytlm qki dtaigadknym glxl én dktygík w glxl mb cknnkthk dtymyigak
xlmqtkfk; w uby én, kimaxymxl, yi nlm kñlm hy mb xlgyhkh, my rkfík hkhl k
kubyn rlitlml yoytgagal, kihkihl dlt havytmkm dktqym hyn xbihl fbmgkihl mbm
kvyiqbtkm, mai uby rbfaymy hyokhl nlm dytgrynym hy xánkck, amnkm hy taktái,
glxdám hy myvannk, kelcbyol hy myclvak, nk lnavytk hy vknyigak, tlihannk hy
ctkikhk, dnkwk hy mkinúgkt, dlqtl hy góthlfk w nkm vyiqannkm hy qlnyhl w
lqtkm havytmkm dktqym, hlihy rkfík yoytgaqkhl nk nacytyek hy mbm daym,
mbqanyek hy mbm xkilm, rkgayihl xbgrlm qbytqlm, tygbymqkihl xbgrkm vabhkm,
hymrkgayihl kncbikm hligynnkm w yickñkihl k kncbilm dbdanlm, w, paiknxyiqy,
háihlmy k glilgyt dlt gbkiqkm kbhayigakm w qtafbiknym rkw gkma yi qlhk
ymdkñk; w uby, k nl únqaxl, my rkfík vyiahl k tyglcyt k kubyn mb gkmqannl,
hlihy vavík gli mb rkgayihk w gli nkm koyikm, tyglcayihl yi én k qlhlm nlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, hy gbknubaytk gknahkh w glihagaói uby pbymyi, mónl dlt
nk xbgrk kpagaói uby nym qyiík w dltuby dktqaymyi gli én hy mbm rkfytym, yi
dkcl hy mb fbyi hymyl.

híolny qkxfaéi uby yi kubyn mb gkmqannl il rkfík gkdannk kncbik hlihy dlhyt
vynkt nkm ktxkm, dltuby ymqkfk hyttafkhk dktk rkgytnk hy ibyvl; dytl uby,
yi gkml hy iygymahkh, én mkfík uby my dlhíki vynkt hlihyubaytk, w uby
kubynnk ilgry nkm dlhtík vynkt yi bi dkqal hyn gkmqannl; uby k nk xkñkik,
mayihl halm mytvahl, my rktíki nkm hyfahkm gytyxliakm, hy xkiytk uby én
ubyhkmy ktxkhl gkfknnytl, w qki gkfknnytl uby il dbhaymy myt xám yi yn
xbihl.

dtycbiqóny ma qtkík haiytlm; tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy uby il qtkík fnkigk,
dltuby én ibigk rkfík nyíhl yi nkm ramqltakm hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym uby
iaicbil nlm rbfaymy qtkíhl. k ymql haol yn vyiqytl uby my yickñkfk; uby,
dbymql gkml uby yi nkm ramqltakm il my ymgtafík, dlt rkfytnym dktygahl k
nlm kbqltym hynnkm uby il ytk xyiymqyt ymgtyfat bik glmk qki gnktk w qki
iygymktak hy qtkytmy glxl ytki haiytlm w gkxamkm naxdakm, il dlt yml my
rkfík hy gtyyt uby il nlm qtboytli; w kmí, qbvaymy dlt gaytql w kvytacbkhl
uby qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, hy uby qkiqlm naftlm ymqái nnyilm w
kqymqkhlm, nnyvkfki fayi ryttkhkm nkm flnmkm, dlt nl uby dbhaymy
mbgyhytnym; w uby kmaxamxl nnyvkfki gkxamkm w bik ktubyqk dyubyñk nnyik hy
bicüyiqlm dktk gbtkt nkm rytahkm uby tygyfíki, dltuby il qlhkm vygym yi nlm
gkxdlm w hymaytqlm hlihy my glxfkqíki w mkníki rytahlm rkfík ubayi nlm
gbtkmy, ma wk il ytk uby qyiíki kncúi mkfal yigkiqkhlt dlt kxacl, uby nbycl
nlm mlglttík, qtkwyihl dlt yn katy, yi kncbik ibfy, kncbik hligynnk l yikil
gli kncbik tyhlxk hy kcbk hy qkn vatqbh uby, yi cbmqkihl kncbik clqk hynnk,
nbycl kn dbiql ubyhkfki mkilm hy mbm nnkckm w rytahkm, glxl ma xkn kncbil
rbfaymyi qyiahl. xkm uby, yi qkiql uby ymql il rbfaymy, qbvaytli nlm
dkmkhlm gkfknnytlm dlt glmk kgytqkhk uby mbm ymgbhytlm pbymyi dtlvyíhlm hy
haiytlm w hy lqtkm glmkm iygymktakm, glxl ytki rankm w bicüyiqlm dktk
gbtktmy; w, gbkihl mbgyhík uby nlm qknym gkfknnytlm il qyiíki ymgbhytlm,
uby ytki dlgkm w tktkm vygym, ynnlm xymxlm nl nnyvkfki qlhl yi bikm
knpltokm xbw mbqanym, uby gkma il my dktygíki, k nkm kigkm hyn gkfknnl,
glxl uby ytk lqtk glmk hy xám axdltqkigak; dltuby, il mayihl dlt lgkmaói
myxyokiqy, ymql hy nnyvkt knpltokm il pby xbw khxaqahl yiqty nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym; w dlt ymql ny hkfk dlt glimyol, dbym kúi my nl dlhík xkihkt glxl
k mb kraokhl, uby qki dtymql nl rkfík hy myt, uby il gkxaikmy hy knní
khynkiqy mai haiytlm w mai nkm dtyvyigaliym typytahkm, w uby vytík gbái
fayi my rknnkfk gli ynnkm gbkihl xyilm my dyimkmy.

dtlxyqaóny hli ubaolqy hy rkgyt nl uby my ny kglimyokfk gli qlhk
dbiqbknahkh; w kmí, my hal nbycl lthyi glxl vynkmy nkm ktxkm yi bi glttkn
ctkihy uby k bi nkhl hy nk vyiqk ymqkfk; w, tyglcaéihlnkm hli ubaolqy
qlhkm, nkm dbml mlfty bik dank uby obiql k bi dlel ymqkfk, w, yxftkekihl mb
khktck, kmaó hy mb nkiek w gli cyiqan gliqaiyiqy my glxyieó k dkmykt
hynkiqy hy nk dank; w gbkihl glxyieó yn dkmyl glxyiekfk k gyttkt nk ilgry.

gliqó yn vyiqytl k qlhlm gbkiqlm ymqkfki yi nk vyiqk nk nlgbtk hy mb
rbémdyh, nk vynk hy nkm ktxkm w nk ktxkeói hy gkfknnytík uby ymdytkfk.
khxatátlimy hy qki ymqtkñl céiytl hy nlgbtk w pbétlimynl k xatkt hymhy
nyolm, w vaytli uby, gli mlmyckhl khyxái, bikm vygym my dkmykfk; lqtkm,
kttaxkhl k mb nkiek, dliík nlm lolm yi nkm ktxkm, mai ubaqktnlm dlt bi fbyi
ymdkgal hynnkm. kgkfó hy gyttkt nk ilgry, dytl gli qkiqk gnktahkh hy nk
nbik, uby dlhík glxdyqat gli yn uby my nk dtymqkfk, hy xkiytk uby gbkiql yn
ilvyn gkfknnytl rkgík ytk fayi vamql hy qlhlm. kiqloómyny yi ymql k bil hy
nlm kttaytlm uby ymqkfki yi nk vyiqk at k hkt kcbk k mb tygbk, w pby
xyiymqyt ubaqkt nkm ktxkm hy hli ubaolqy, uby ymqkfki mlfty nk dank; yn
gbkn, vaéihlny nnyckt, yi vle knqk ny haol:

-¡lr qú, ubayiubaytk uby mykm, kqtyvahl gkfknnytl, uby nnyckm k qlgkt nkm
ktxkm hyn xám vknytlml kihkiqy uby okxám my gañó ymdkhk!, xatk nl uby rkgym
w il nkm qlubym, ma il ubaytym hyokt nk vahk yi dkcl hy qb kqtyvaxayiql.

il my gbtó yn kttaytl hymqkm tkeliym (w pbytk xyolt uby my gbtktk, dltuby
pbytk gbtktmy yi mknbh); kiqym, qtkfkihl hy nkm glttykm, nkm kttloó ctki
qtygrl hy mí. nl gbkn vamql dlt hli ubaolqy, kneó nlm lolm kn gaynl, w,
dbymql yn dyimkxayiql -k nl uby dktygaó- yi mb myñltk hbngaiyk, haol:

-kglttyhxy, myñltk xík, yi ymqk dtaxytk kptyiqk uby k ymqy vbymqtl
kvkmknnkhl dygrl my ny lptygy; il xy hympknnyegk yi ymqy dtaxytl qtkigy
vbymqtl pkvlt w kxdktl.

w, hagayihl ymqkm w lqtkm myxyokiqym tkeliym, mlnqkihl nk khktck, kneó nk
nkiek k hlm xkilm w hal gli ynnk qki ctki clndy kn kttaytl yi nk gkfyek,
uby ny hyttafó yi yn mbynl, qki xknqtygrl uby, ma mycbihktk gli lqtl, il
qbvaytk iygymahkh hy xkymqtl uby ny gbtktk. rygrl ymql, tyglcaó mbm ktxkm w
qltió k dkmyktmy gli yn xamxl tydlml uby dtaxytl. hymhy knní k dlgl, mai
mkfytmy nl uby rkfík dkmkhl (dltuby kúi ymqkfk kqbthahl yn kttaytl), nnycó
lqtl gli nk xymxk aiqyigaói hy hkt kcbk k mbm xbnlm; w, nnyckihl k ubaqkt
nkm ktxkm dktk hymyxfktkekt nk dank, mai rkfnkt hli ubaolqy dknkftk w mai
dyhat pkvlt k ikhay, mlnqó lqtk vye nk khktck w kneó lqtk vye nk nkiek, w,
mai rkgytnk dyhkelm, rael xám hy qtym nk gkfyek hyn mycbihl kttaytl, dltuby
my nk kftaó dlt gbkqtl. kn tbahl kgbhaó qlhk nk cyiqy hy nk vyiqk, w yiqty
ynnlm yn vyiqytl. vayihl ymql hli ubaolqy, yxftkeó mb khktck, w, dbymqk
xkil k mb ymdkhk, haol:

-¡lr myñltk hy nk pytxlmbtk, ympbytel w vaclt hyn hyfanaqkhl gltkeói xíl!
krltk ym qayxdl uby vbynvkm nlm lolm hy qb ctkihyek k ymqy qb gkbqavl
gkfknnytl, uby qkxkñk kvyiqbtk ymqá kqyihayihl.

gli ymql glftó, k mb dktygyt, qkiql áiaxl, uby ma ny kglxyqaytki qlhlm nlm
kttaytlm hyn xbihl, il vlnvaytk yn day kqtám. nlm glxdkñytlm hy nlm
rytahlm, uby qknym nlm vaytli, glxyiektli hymhy nyolm k nnlvyt dayhtkm
mlfty hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn, nl xyolt uby dlhík, my tydktkfk gli mb khktck,
w il my lmkfk kdktqkt hy nk dank dlt il hymkxdktkt nkm ktxkm. yn vyiqytl
hkfk vlgym uby ny hyokmyi, dltuby wk nym rkfík hagrl glxl ytk nlgl, w uby
dlt nlgl my naftktík, kbiuby nlm xkqkmy k qlhlm. qkxfaéi hli ubaolqy nkm
hkfk, xkwltym, nnkxáihlnlm hy knyvlmlm w qtkahltym, w uby yn myñlt hyn
gkmqannl ytk bi plnnói w xkn ikgahl gkfknnytl, dbym hy qkn xkiytk glimyiqík
uby my qtkqkmyi nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm; w uby ma én rbfaytk tygyfahl nk
lthyi hy gkfknnytík, uby én ny haytk k yiqyihyt mb knyvlmík:

-dytl hy vlmlqtlm, mlye w fkok gkiknnk, il rkcl gkml kncbil: qatkh, nnyckh,
vyiah w lpyihyhxy yi gbkiql dbhaétyhym, uby vlmlqtlm vytéam yn dkcl uby
nnyváam hy vbymqtk mkihye w hyxkmík.

hygík ymql gli qkiql ftíl w hyibyhl, uby aipbihaó bi qyttafny qyxlt yi nlm
uby ny kglxyqíki; w, kmí dlt ymql glxl dlt nkm dytmbkmaliym hyn vyiqytl, ny
hyoktli hy qatkt, w én hyoó tyqatkt k nlm rytahlm w qltió k nk vynk hy mbm
ktxkm gli nk xamxk ubayqbh w mlmaycl uby dtaxytl.

il ny dktygaytli fayi kn vyiqytl nkm fbtnkm hy mb rbémdyh, w hyqytxaió
kftyvakt w hktny nk iyctk lthyi hy gkfknnytík nbycl, kiqym uby lqtk
hymctkgak mbgyhaymy. w kmí, nnycáihlmy k én, my hymgbndó hy nk aimlnyigak
uby kubynnk cyiqy fkok gli én rkfík bmkhl, mai uby én mbdaymy glmk kncbik;
dytl uby fayi gkmqackhlm ubyhkfki hy mb kqtyvaxayiql. híolny glxl wk ny
rkfík hagrl uby yi kubyn gkmqannl il rkfík gkdannk, w dktk nl uby tymqkfk
hy rkgyt qkxdlgl ytk iygymktak; uby qlhl yn qluby hy ubyhkt ktxkhl
gkfknnytl glimamqík yi nk dymglekhk w yi yn ymdknhktkel, mycúi én qyiík
ilqagak hyn gytyxliakn hy nk lthyi, w uby kubynnl yi xaqkh hy bi gkxdl my
dlhík rkgyt, w uby wk rkfík gbxdnahl gli nl uby qlgkfk kn vynkt hy nkm
ktxkm, uby gli mlnkm hlm rltkm hy vynk my gbxdník, gbkiql xám, uby én rkfík
ymqkhl xám hy gbkqtl. qlhl my nl gtywó hli ubaolqy, w haol uby én ymqkfk
knní dtliql dktk lfyhygytny, w uby glignbwymy gli nk xkwlt ftyvyhkh uby
dbhaymy; dltuby ma pbymy lqtk vye kglxyqahl w my vaymy ktxkhl gkfknnytl, il
dyimkfk hyokt dytmlik vavk yi yn gkmqannl, ygyql kubynnkm uby én ny
xkihkmy, k ubayi dlt mb tymdyql hyoktík.

khvytqahl w xyhtlml hymql yn gkmqynnkil, qtbol nbycl bi naftl hlihy
kmyiqkfk nk dkok w gyfkhk uby hkfk k nlm kttaytlm, w gli bi gkfl hy vynk
uby ny qtkík bi xbgrkgrl, w gli nkm hlm wk hagrkm hligynnkm, my vail khlihy
hli ubaolqy ymqkfk, kn gbkn xkihó raigkt hy tlhannkm; w, nywyihl yi mb
xkibkn, glxl uby hygík kncbik hyvlqk ltkgaói, yi xaqkh hy nk nywyihk kneó
nk xkil w halny mlfty yn gbynnl bi fbyi clndy, w qtkm én, gli mb xymxk
ymdkhk, bi cyiqan ymdknhkektl, mayxdty xbtxbtkihl yiqty hayiqym, glxl uby
tyekfk. rygrl ymql, xkihó k bik hy kubynnkm hkxkm uby ny gañymy nk ymdkhk,
nk gbkn nl rael gli xbgrk hymyivlnqbtk w hamgtygaói, dltuby il pby xyiymqyt
dlgk dktk il tyvyiqkt hy tamk k gkhk dbiql hy nkm gytyxliakm; dytl nkm
dtlyekm uby wk rkfíki vamql hyn ilvyn gkfknnytl nym qyiík nk tamk k tkwk.
kn gyñatny nk ymdkhk, haol nk fbyik myñltk:

-halm rkck k vbymqtk xytgyh xbw vyiqbtlml gkfknnytl w ny hé vyiqbtk yi
nahym.

hli ubaolqy ny dtycbiqó góxl my nnkxkfk, dltuby én mbdaymy hy knní khynkiqy
k ubaéi ubyhkfk lfnackhl dlt nk xytgyh tygyfahk; dltuby dyimkfk hktny
kncbik dktqy hy nk rlitk uby kngkiekmy dlt yn vknlt hy mb ftkel. ynnk
tymdlihaó gli xbgrk rbxanhkh uby my nnkxkfk nk qlnlmk, w uby ytk raok hy bi
tyxyihói ikqbtkn hy qlnyhl uby vavík k nkm qyihannkm hy mkigrl fayikwk, w
uby hlihyubaytk uby ynnk ymqbvaymy ny mytvatík w ny qyihtík dlt myñlt. hli
ubaolqy ny tydnagó uby, dlt mb kxlt, ny ragaymy xytgyh uby hy knní khynkiqy
my dbmaymy hli w my nnkxkmy hlñk qlnlmk. ynnk my nl dtlxyqaó, w nk lqtk ny
gkneó nk ymdbynk, gli nk gbkn ny dkmó gkma yn xamxl glnlubal uby gli nk hy
nk ymdkhk: dtycbiqóny mb ilxfty, w haol uby my nnkxkfk nk xlnaiytk, w uby
ytk raok hy bi rlitkhl xlnaiytl hy kiqyubytk; k nk gbkn qkxfaéi tlcó hli
ubaolqy uby my dbmaymy hli w my nnkxkmy hlñk xlnaiytk, lptygaéihlny ibyvlm
mytvagalm w xytgyhym.

rygrkm, dbym, hy cknldy w kdtamk nkm rkmqk knní ibigk vamqkm gytyxliakm, il
val nk rltk hli ubaolqy hy vytmy k gkfknnl w mknat fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm;
w, yimannkihl nbycl k tlgaikiqy, mbfaó yi én, w, kftkekihl k mb rbémdyh, ny
haol glmkm qki ymqtkñkm, kctkhygaéihlny nk xytgyh hy rkfytny ktxkhl
gkfknnytl, uby il ym dlmafny kgytqkt k typytatnkm. yn vyiqytl, dlt vytny wk
pbytk hy nk vyiqk, gli il xyilm tyqótagkm, kbiuby gli xám ftyvym dknkftkm,
tymdlihaó k nkm mbwkm, w, mai dyhatny nk glmqk hy nk dlmkhk, ny hyoó at k
nk fbyi rltk.





gkdíqbnl av. hy nl uby ny mbgyhaó k ibymqtl gkfknnytl gbkihl mknaó hy nk
vyiqk


nk hyn knfk mytík gbkihl hli ubaolqy mknaó hy nk vyiqk, qki gliqyiql, qki
cknnkthl, qki knfltlekhl dlt vytmy wk ktxkhl gkfknnytl, uby yn clel ny
tyvyiqkfk dlt nkm gaigrkm hyn gkfknnl. xkm, vaiaéihlny k nk xyxltak nlm
glimyolm hy mb rbémdyh gytgk hy nkm dtyvyigaliym qki iygymktakm uby rkfík
hy nnyvkt glimacl, ymdygakn nk hy nlm haiytlm w gkxamkm, hyqytxaió vlnvyt k
mb gkmk w kglxlhktmy hy qlhl, w hy bi ymgbhytl, rkgayihl gbyiqk hy tygyfat
k bi nkftkhlt vygail mbwl, uby ytk dlfty w gli raolm, dytl xbw k dtldómaql
dktk yn lpagal ymgbhytan hy nk gkfknnytík. gli ymqy dyimkxayiql cbaó k
tlgaikiqy rkgak mb knhyk, yn gbkn, gkma glilgayihl nk ubytyigak, gli qkiqk
ckik glxyieó k gkxaikt, uby dktygík uby il dliík nlm daym yi yn mbynl.

il rkfík kihkhl xbgrl, gbkihl ny dktygaó uby k mb haymqtk xkil, hy nk
ymdymbtk hy bi flmuby uby knní ymqkfk, mkníki bikm vlgym hynagkhkm, glxl hy
dytmlik uby my ubyokfk; w kdyikm nkm rbfl líhl, gbkihl haol:

-ctkgakm hlw kn gaynl dlt nk xytgyh uby xy rkgy, dbym qki dtymql xy dliy
lgkmaliym hynkiqy hlihy wl dbyhk gbxdnat gli nl uby hyfl k xa dtlpymaói, w
hlihy dbyhk glcyt yn ptbql hy xam fbyilm hymylm. ymqkm vlgym, mai hbhk, mli
hy kncúi xyiymqytlml l xyiymqytlmk, uby rk xyiymqyt xa pkvlt w kwbhk.

w, vlnvayihl nkm tayihkm, yigkxaió k tlgaikiqy rkgak hlihy ny dktygaó uby
nkm vlgym mkníki. w, k dlglm dkmlm uby yiqtó dlt yn flmuby, val kqkhk bik
wycbk k bik yigaik, w kqkhl yi lqtk k bi xbgrkgrl, hymibhl hy xyhal gbytdl
kttafk, rkmqk hy yhkh hy ubaigy kñlm, uby ytk yn uby nkm vlgym hkfk; w il
mai gkbmk, dltuby ny ymqkfk hkihl gli bik dtyqaik xbgrlm kelqym bi nkftkhlt
hy fbyi qknny, w gkhk kelqy ny kglxdkñkfk gli bik tydtyryimaói w glimyol.
dltuby hygík:

-nk nyicbk ubyhk w nlm lolm namqlm.

w yn xbgrkgrl tymdlihík:

-il nl rkté lqtk vye, myñlt xíl; dlt nk dkmaói hy halm, uby il nl rkté lqtk
vye; w wl dtlxyql hy qyiyt hy kubí khynkiqy xám gbahkhl gli yn rkql.

w, vayihl hli ubaolqy nl uby dkmkfk, gli vle katkhk haol:

-hymgltqém gkfknnytl, xkn dktygy qlxktlm gli ubayi hypyihyt il my dbyhy;
mbfah mlfty vbymqtl gkfknnl w qlxkh vbymqtk nkiek -uby qkxfaéi qyiík bik
nkiek kttaxkhk k nk yigaxk khlihy ymqkfk kttyihkhk nk wycbk-, uby wl lm
rkté glilgyt myt hy glfkthym nl uby ymqáam rkgayihl.

yn nkftkhlt, uby val mlfty mí kubynnk pacbtk nnyik hy ktxkm fnkihayihl nk
nkiek mlfty mb tlmqtl, qúvlmy dlt xbytql, w gli fbyikm dknkftkm tymdlihaó:

-myñlt gkfknnytl, ymqy xbgrkgrl uby ymqlw gkmqackihl ym bi xa gtakhl, uby
xy matvy hy cbkthkt bik xkikhk hy lvyokm uby qyicl yi ymqlm gliqltilm, yn
gbkn ym qki hymgbahkhl, uby gkhk hík xy pknqk bik; w, dltuby gkmqacl mb
hymgbahl, l fynnkubytík, hagy uby nl rkcl hy xamytkfny, dlt il dkcknny nk
mlnhkhk uby ny hyfl, w yi halm w yi xa áiaxk uby xayiqy.

-¿"xayiqy", hynkiqy hy xí, tbai vannkil? -haol hli ubaolqy-. dlt yn mln uby
ilm knbxftk, uby ymqlw dlt dkmktlm hy dktqy k dktqy gli ymqk nkiek. dkckhny
nbycl mai xám tédnagk; ma il, dlt yn halm uby ilm tacy, uby lm glignbwk w
kiaubany yi ymqy dbiql. hymkqkhnl nbycl.

yn nkftkhlt fkoó nk gkfyek w, mai tymdlihyt dknkftk, hymkqó k mb gtakhl, kn
gbkn dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy uby gbáiql ny hyfík mb kxl. Én haol uby ibyvy
xymym, k mayqy tyknym gkhk xym. rael nk gbyiqk hli ubaolqy w rknnó uby
xliqkfki myqyiqk w qtym tyknym, w híolny kn nkftkhlt uby kn xlxyiql nlm
hymyxflnmkmy, ma il ubytík xltat dlt ynnl. tymdlihaó yn xyhtlml vannkil uby
dktk yn dkml yi uby ymqkfk w obtkxyiql uby rkfík rygrl -w kúi il rkfík
obtkhl ikhk-, uby il ytki qkiqlm, dltuby my ny rkfíki hy hymgliqkt w
tygyfat yi gbyiqk qtym dktym hy ekdkqlm uby ny rkfík hkhl w bi tykn hy hlm
mkictíkm uby ny rkfíki rygrl ymqkihl yipytxl.

-fayi ymqá qlhl yml -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dytl ubéhyimy nlm ekdkqlm w nkm
mkictíkm dlt nlm kelqym uby mai gbndk ny rkféam hkhl; uby ma én tlxdaó yn
gbytl hy nlm ekdkqlm uby vlm dkckmqym, vlm ny rkféam tlxdahl yn hy mb
gbytdl; w ma ny mkgó yn fktfytl mkicty ymqkihl yipytxl, vlm yi mkiahkh my
nk rkféam mkgkhl; kimí uby, dlt ymqk dktqy, il lm hyfy ikhk.

-yn hkñl ymqá, myñlt gkfknnytl, yi uby il qyicl kubí haiytlm: véickmy
kihtém glixacl k xa gkmk, uby wl my nlm dkckté bi tykn mlfty lqtl.

-¿atxy wl gli én? -haol yn xbgrkgrl-. xkm, ¡xkn kñl! il, myñlt, ia dlt
dayiml; dltuby, yi vaéihlmy mlnl, xy hymbynny glxl k bi mki fktqlnlxé.

-il rktá qkn -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-: fkmqk uby wl my nl xkihy dktk uby xy
qyick tymdyql; w gli uby én xy nl obty dlt nk nyw hy gkfknnytík uby rk
tygyfahl, ny hyokté at nafty w kmycbtkté nk dkck.

-xaty vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt, nl uby hagy -haol yn xbgrkgrl-, uby ymqy xa
kxl il ym gkfknnytl ia rk tygyfahl lthyi hy gkfknnytík kncbik; uby ym obki
rknhbhl yn tagl, yn vygail hyn ubaiqkikt.

-axdltqk yml dlgl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby rknhbhlm dbyhy rkfyt
gkfknnytlm; gbkiql xám, uby gkhk bil ym raol hy mbm lftkm.

-kmí ym vythkh -haol kihtém-; dytl ymqy xa kxl, ¿hy ubé lftkm ym raol, dbym
xy iayck xa mlnhkhk w xa mbhlt w qtkfkol?

-il iaycl, rytxkil kihtém -tymdlihaó yn nkftkhlt-; w rkgyhxy dnkgyt hy
vyiatlm glixacl, uby wl obtl dlt qlhkm nkm óthyiym uby hy gkfknnytíkm rkw
yi yn xbihl hy dkcktlm, glxl qyicl hagrl, bi tykn mlfty lqtl, w kbi
mkrbxkhlm.

-hyn mkrbxytal lm rkcl ctkgak -haol hli ubaolqy-; háhmynlm yi tyknym, uby
gli yml xy gliqyiql; w xatkh uby nl gbxdnáam glxl nl rkféam obtkhl; ma il,
dlt yn xamxl obtkxyiql lm obtl hy vlnvyt k fbmgktlm w k gkmqacktlm, w uby
lm qyicl hy rknnkt, kbiuby lm ymgliháam xám uby bik nkcktqaok. w ma ubytéam
mkfyt ubaéi lm xkihk ymql, dktk ubyhkt gli xám vytkm lfnackhl k gbxdnatnl,
mkfyh uby wl mlw yn vknytlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, yn hympkgyhlt hy
kctkvalm w maitkeliym; w k halm ubyhkh, w il my lm dktqk hy nkm xayiqym nl
dtlxyqahl w obtkhl, ml dyik hy nk dyik dtlibigakhk.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, dagó k mb tlgaikiqy, w yi ftyvy ymdkgal my kdktqó
hynnlm. macbaóny yn nkftkhlt gli nlm lolm, w, gbkihl val uby rkfík
qtkmdbymql hyn flmuby w uby wk il dktygík, vlnvaómy k mb gtakhl kihtém w
híolny:

-vyiah kgá, raol xíl, uby lm ubaytl dkckt nl uby lm hyfl, glxl kubyn
hymrkgyhlt hy kctkvalm xy hyoó xkihkhl.

-yml obtl wl -haol kihtém-; w ¡góxl uby kihktá vbymqtk xytgyh kgytqkhl yi
gbxdnat yn xkihkxayiql hy kubyn fbyi gkfknnytl, uby xan kñlm vavk; uby,
mycúi ym hy vknytlml w hy fbyi obye, vavy tluby, uby ma il xy dkck, uby
vbynvk w yoygbqy nl uby haol!

-qkxfaéi nl obtl wl -haol yn nkftkhlt-; dytl, dlt nl xbgrl uby lm ubaytl,
ubaytl kgtygyiqkt nk hybhk dlt kgtygyiqkt nk dkck.

w, kmaéihlny hyn ftkel, ny qltió k kqkt k nk yigaik, hlihy ny hal qkiqlm
kelqym, uby ny hyoó dlt xbytql.

-nnkxkh, myñlt kihtém, krltk -hygík yn nkftkhlt- kn hympkgyhlt hy kctkvalm,
vytéam góxl il hympkgy kubémqy; kbiuby gtyl uby il ymqá kgkfkhl hy rkgyt,
dltuby xy vayiy ckik hy hymlnnktlm vavl, glxl vlm qyxíkhym.

dytl, kn pai, ny hymkqó w ny hal nagyigak uby pbymy k fbmgkt mb obye, dktk
uby yoygbqkmy nk dtlibigakhk myiqyigak. kihtém my dktqaó kncl xlríil,
obtkihl hy at k fbmgkt kn vknytlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk w gliqknny
dbiql dlt dbiql nl uby rkfík dkmkhl, w uby my nl rkfík hy dkckt gli nkm
myqyikm. dytl, gli qlhl ymql, én my dktqaó nnltkihl w mb kxl my ubyhó
tayihl.

w hymqk xkiytk hymrael yn kctkval yn vknytlml hli ubaolqy; yn gbkn,
gliqyiqímaxl hy nl mbgyhahl, dktygaéihlny uby rkfík hkhl pynagímaxl w knql
dtaigadal k mbm gkfknnytíkm, gli ctki mkqampkgaói hy mí xamxl afk gkxaikihl
rkgak mb knhyk, hagayihl k xyhak vle:

-fayi qy dbyhym nnkxkt hagrlmk mlfty gbkiqkm rlw vavyi yi nk qayttk, ¡lr
mlfty nkm fynnkm fynnk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml!, dbym qy gbdl yi mbytqy qyiyt
mboyql w tyihahl k qlhk qb vlnbiqkh y qknkiqy k bi qki vknayiqy w qki
ilxftkhl gkfknnytl glxl nl ym w mytá hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, yn gbkn,
glxl qlhl yn xbihl mkfy, kwyt tymgafaó nk lthyi hy gkfknnytík, w rlw rk
hympygrl yn xkwlt qbytql w kctkval uby pltxó nk maitkeói w glxyqaó nk
gtbynhkh: rlw ubaqó yn náqacl hy nk xkil k kubyn hymdakhkhl yiyxacl uby qki
mai lgkmaói vkdbnkfk k kubyn hynagkhl aipkiqy.

yi ymql, nnycó k bi gkxail uby yi gbkqtl my havahík, w nbycl my ny vail k
nk axkcaikgaói nkm yigtbgyokhkm hlihy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym my dliíki k
dyimkt gbán gkxail hy kubénnlm qlxktíki, w, dlt axaqktnlm, ymqbvl bi tkql
ubyhl; w, kn gkfl hy rkfytnl xbw fayi dyimkhl, mlnqó nk tayihk k tlgaikiqy,
hyokihl k nk vlnbiqkh hyn tlgíi nk mbwk, yn gbkn macbaó mb dtaxyt aiqyiql,
uby pby yn atmy gkxail hy mb gkfknnytaek.

w, rkfayihl kihkhl glxl hlm xannkm, hymgbftaó hli ubaolqy bi ctkihy qtldyn
hy cyiqy, uby, glxl hymdbém my mbdl, ytki bilm xytgkhytym qlnyhkilm uby
afki k glxdtkt myhk k xbtgak. ytki myam, w vyiíki gli mbm ubaqkmlnym, gli
lqtlm gbkqtl gtakhlm k gkfknnl w qtym xlelm hy xbnkm k day. kdyikm nlm
havamó hli ubaolqy, gbkihl my axkcaió myt glmk hy ibyvk kvyiqbtk; w, dlt
axaqkt yi qlhl gbkiql k én ny dktygík dlmafny nlm dkmlm uby rkfík nyíhl yi
mbm naftlm, ny dktygaó vyiat knní hy xlnhy bil uby dyimkfk rkgyt. w kmí,
gli cyiqan gliqaiyiqy w hyibyhl, my kpatxó fayi yi nlm ymqtaflm, kdtyqó nk
nkiek, nnycó nk khktck kn dygrl, w, dbymql yi nk xaqkh hyn gkxail, ymqbvl
ymdytkihl uby kubynnlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym nnyckmyi, uby wk én dlt qknym
nlm qyiík w obeckfk; w, gbkihl nnycktli k qtygrl uby my dbhaytli vyt w lít,
nyvkiqó hli ubaolqy nk vle, w gli khyxái kttlckiqy haol:

-qlhl yn xbihl my qyick, ma qlhl yn xbihl il glipaymk uby il rkw yi yn
xbihl qlhl hligynnk xám rytxlmk uby nk yxdytkqtae hy nk xkigrk, nk mai dkt
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

dktátlimy nlm xytgkhytym kn mli hymqkm tkeliym, w k vyt nk ymqtkñk pacbtk
hyn uby nkm hygík; w, dlt nk pacbtk w dlt nkm tkeliym, nbycl ygrktli hy vyt
nk nlgbtk hy mb hbyñl; xkm ubamaytli vyt hymdkgal yi ubé dktkfk kubynnk
glipymaói uby my nym dyhík, w bil hynnlm, uby ytk bi dlgl fbtnói w xbw
xbgrl hamgtyql, ny haol:

-myñlt gkfknnytl, ilmlqtlm il glilgyxlm ubaéi myk ymk fbyik myñltk uby
hygím; xlmqtáhilmnk: uby ma ynnk pbyty hy qkiqk rytxlmbtk glxl maciapagáam,
hy fbyik ckik w mai kdtyxal kncbil glipymktyxlm nk vythkh uby dlt dktqy
vbymqtk ilm ym dyhahk.

-ma lm nk xlmqtktk -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, ¿ubé ragaétkhym vlmlqtlm yi
glipymkt bik vythkh qki ilqltak? nk axdltqkigak ymqá yi uby mai vytnk nl
rkféam hy gtyyt, glipymkt, kpatxkt, obtkt w hypyihyt; hlihy il, glixacl
mlam yi fkqknnk, cyiqy hymglxbikn w mlfytfak. uby, krltk vyicáam bil k bil,
glxl dahy nk lthyi hy gkfknnytík, ltk qlhlm obiqlm, glxl ym glmqbxfty w
xknk bmkiek hy nlm hy vbymqtk tknyk, kubí lm kcbkthl w ymdytl, glipakhl yi
nk tkeói uby hy xa dktqy qyicl.

-myñlt gkfknnytl -tydnagó yn xytgkhyt-, mbdnagl k vbymqtk xytgyh, yi ilxfty
hy qlhlm ymqlm dtíigadym uby kubí ymqkxlm, uby, dltuby il yigktcbyxlm
ibymqtkm gligayigakm glipymkihl bik glmk dlt ilmlqtlm okxám vamqk ia líhk,
w xám mayihl qki yi dytobagal hy nkm yxdytkqtagym w tyaikm hyn kngkttak w
ymqtyxkhbtk, uby vbymqtk xytgyh myk mytvahl hy xlmqtktilm kncúi tyqtkql hy
ymk myñltk, kbiuby myk qkxkñl glxl bi ctkil hy qtacl; uby dlt yn ranl my
mkgktá yn lvannl, w ubyhktyxlm gli ymql mkqampygrlm w mycbtlm, w vbymqtk
xytgyh ubyhktá gliqyiql w dkckhl; w kbi gtyl uby ymqkxlm wk qki hy mb dktqy
uby, kbiuby mb tyqtkql ilm xbymqty uby ym qbytqk hy bi lol w uby hyn lqtl
ny xkik fytxynnói w dayhtk kebpty, gli qlhl yml, dlt glxdnkgyt k vbymqtk
xytgyh, hatyxlm yi mb pkvlt qlhl nl uby ubamayty.

-il ny xkik, gkiknnk aipkxy -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy, yigyihahl yi gónytk-;
il ny xkik, hacl, yml uby hygím, mail áxfkt w kncknak yiqty knclhliym; w il
ym qbytqk ia gltglvkhk, mail xám hytygrk uby bi rbml hy cbkhkttkxk. dytl
vlmlqtlm dkcktéam nk ctkihy fnkmpyxak uby rkféam hagrl gliqtk qkxkñk fynhkh
glxl ym nk hy xa myñltk.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, kttyxyqaó gli nk nkiek fkok gliqtk yn uby nl rkfík
hagrl, gli qkiqk pbtak w yilol uby, ma nk fbyik mbytqy il ragaytk uby yi nk
xaqkh hyn gkxail qtldyektk w gkwytk tlgaikiqy, nl dkmktk xkn yn kqtyvahl
xytgkhyt. gkwó tlgaikiqy, w pby tlhkihl mb kxl bik fbyik dayek dlt yn
gkxdl; w, ubytaéihlmy nyvkiqkt, okxám dbhl: qkn yxfktkel ny gkbmkfki nk
nkiek, khktck, ymdbynkm w gynkhk, gli yn dyml hy nkm kiqacbkm ktxkm. w,
yiqtyqkiql uby dbcikfk dlt nyvkiqktmy w il dlhík, ymqkfk hagayihl:

-¡ili pbwáam, cyiqy glfkthy; cyiqy gkbqavk, kqyihyh!; uby il dlt gbndk xík,
mail hy xa gkfknnl, ymqlw kubí qyihahl.

bi xlel hy xbnkm hy nlm uby knní vyiíki, uby il hyfík hy myt xbw fayi
aiqyigalikhl, lwyihl hygat kn dlfty gkíhl qkiqkm kttlckigakm, il nl dbhl
mbptat mai hktny nk tymdbymqk yi nkm glmqannkm. w, nnycáihlmy k én, qlxó nk
nkiek, w, hymdbém hy rkfytnk rygrl dyhkelm, gli bil hynnlm glxyieó k hkt k
ibymqtl hli ubaolqy qkiqlm dknlm uby, k hymdygrl w dymkt hy mbm ktxkm, ny
xlnaó glxl gafytk. háfkiny vlgym mbm kxlm uby il ny haymy qkiql w uby ny
hyokmy, dytl ymqkfk wk yn xlel dagkhl w il ubaml hyokt yn obycl rkmqk
yivahkt qlhl yn tymql hy mb gónytk; w, kgbhayihl dlt nlm hyxám qtlelm hy nk
nkiek, nlm kgkfó hy hymrkgyt mlfty yn xamytkfny gkíhl, uby, gli qlhk
kubynnk qyxdymqkh hy dknlm uby mlfty én vík, il gyttkfk nk flgk, kxyikekihl
kn gaynl w k nk qayttk, w k nlm xknkihtaiym, uby qkn ny dktygíki.

gkimómy yn xlel, w nlm xytgkhytym macbaytli mb gkxail, nnyvkihl ubé gliqkt
yi qlhl én hyn dlfty kdknykhl. yn gbkn, hymdbém uby my val mlnl, qltió k
dtlfkt ma dlhík nyvkiqktmy; dytl ma il nl dbhl rkgyt gbkihl mkil w fbyil,
¿góxl nl rktík xlnahl w gkma hymrygrl? w kúi my qyiík dlt hagrlml,
dktygaéihlny uby kubénnk ytk dtldak hymctkgak hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, w
qlhk nk kqtafbík k nk pknqk hy mb gkfknnl, w il ytk dlmafny nyvkiqktmy,
mycúi qyiík ftbxkhl qlhl yn gbytdl.





gkdíqbnl v. hlihy my dtlmacby nk ikttkgaói hy nk hymctkgak hy ibymqtl
gkfknnytl


vayihl, dbym, uby, yi ypyql, il dlhík xyiyktmy, kglthó hy kglcytmy k mb
lthaiktal tyxyhal, uby ytk dyimkt yi kncúi dkml hy mbm naftlm; w qtúolny mb
nlgbtk k nk xyxltak kubyn hy vknhlvailm w hyn xktubém hy xkiqbk, gbkihl
gktnlql ny hyoó rytahl yi nk xliqañk, ramqltak mkfahk hy nlm iañlm, il
aciltkhk hy nlm xlelm, gynyftkhk w kbi gtyíhk hy nlm vayolm; w, gli qlhl
ymql, il xám vythkhytk uby nlm xankctlm hy xkrlxk. Émqk, dbym, ny dktygaó k
én uby ny vyiík hy xlnhy dktk yn dkml yi uby my rknnkfk; w kmí, gli
xbymqtkm hy ctkihy myiqaxayiql, my glxyieó k vlngkt dlt nk qayttk w k hygat
gli hyfanaqkhl knayiql nl xymxl uby hagyi hygík yn rytahl gkfknnytl hyn
flmuby:

   -¿hlihy ymqám, myñltk xík,
   uby il qy hbyny xa xkn?
   l il nl mkfym, myñltk,
   l ytym pknmk w hymnykn.

w, hymqk xkiytk, pby dtlmacbayihl yn tlxkigy rkmqk kubynnlm vytmlm uby
hagyi:

   -¡lr ilfny xktubém hy xkiqbk,
   xa qíl w myñlt gktikn!

w ubaml nk mbytqy uby, gbkihl nnycó k ymqy vytml, kgytqó k dkmkt dlt knní
bi nkftkhlt hy mb xymxl nbckt w vygail mbwl, uby vyiík hy nnyvkt bik gktck
hy qtacl kn xlnail; yn gbkn, vayihl kubyn rlxfty knní qyihahl, my nnycó k
én w ny dtycbiqó uby ubaéi ytk w ubé xkn myiqík uby qki qtamqyxyiqy my
ubyokfk. hli ubaolqy gtywó, mai hbhk, uby kubén ytk yn xktubém hy xkiqbk,
mb qíl; w kmí, il ny tymdlihaó lqtk glmk ma il pby dtlmycbat yi mb tlxkigy,
hlihy ny hkfk gbyiqk hy mb hymctkgak w hy nlm kxltym hyn raol hyn yxdytkiqy
gli mb ymdlmk, qlhl hy nk xymxk xkiytk uby yn tlxkigy nl gkiqk.

yn nkftkhlt ymqkfk khxatkhl lwyihl kubynnlm hamdktkqym; w, ubaqáihlny nk
vamytk, uby wk ymqkfk rygrk dyhkelm hy nlm dknlm, ny naxdaó yn tlmqtl, uby
ny qyiík gbfaytql hy dlnvl; w kdyikm ny rbfl naxdakhl, gbkihl ny glilgaó w
ny haol:

-myñlt ubaokik -uby kmí my hyfík hy nnkxkt gbkihl én qyiík obagal w il
rkfík dkmkhl hy rahkncl mlmyckhl k gkfknnytl kihkiqy-, ¿ubaéi rk dbymql k
vbymqtk xytgyh hymqk mbytqy?

dytl én mycbík gli mb tlxkigy k gbkiql ny dtycbiqkfk. vayihl ymql yn fbyi
rlxfty, nl xyolt uby dbhl ny ubaqó yn dyql w ymdknhkt, dktk vyt ma qyiík
kncbik rytahk; dytl il val mkicty ia myñkn kncbik. dtlgbtó nyvkiqktny hyn
mbynl, w il gli dlgl qtkfkol ny mbfaó mlfty mb obxyiql, dlt dktygyt
gkfknnytík xám mlmyckhk. tyglcaó nkm ktxkm, rkmqk nkm kmqannkm hy nk nkiek,
w naónkm mlfty tlgaikiqy, kn gbkn qlxó hy nk tayihk, w hyn gkfymqtl kn
kmil, w my yigkxaió rkgak mb dbyfnl, fayi dyimkqavl hy lít nlm hamdktkqym
uby hli ubaolqy hygík; w il xyilm afk hli ubaolqy, uby, hy dbtl xlnahl w
ubyftkiqkhl, il my dlhík qyiyt mlfty yn flttagl, w hy gbkihl yi gbkihl hkfk
bilm mbmdatlm uby nlm dliík yi yn gaynl; hy xlhl uby hy ibyvl lfnacó k uby
yn nkftkhlt ny dtycbiqkmy ny haoymy ubé xkn myiqík; w il dktygy mail uby yn
hakfnl ny qtkík k nk xyxltak nlm gbyiqlm kglxlhkhlm k mbm mbgymlm, dltuby,
yi kubyn dbiql, lnvaháihlmy hy vknhlvailm, my kglthó hyn xltl kfaihkttáye,
gbkihl yn kngkahy hy kiqyubytk, tlhtacl hy iktváye, ny dtyihaó w nnyvó
gkbqavl k mb kngkahík. hy mbytqy uby, gbkihl yn nkftkhlt ny vlnvaó k
dtycbiqkt uby góxl ymqkfk w ubé myiqík, ny tymdlihaó nkm xymxkm dknkftkm w
tkeliym uby yn gkbqavl kfyigyttkoy tymdlihík k tlhtacl hy iktváye, hyn
xymxl xlhl uby én rkfík nyíhl nk ramqltak yi nk hakik, hy oltcy hy
xliqyxkwlt, hlihy my ymgtafy; kdtlvygráihlmy hynnk qki k dtldómaql, uby yn
nkftkhlt my afk hkihl kn hakfnl hy lít qkiqk xáubaik hy iygyhkhym; dlt
hlihy glilgaó uby mb vygail ymqkfk nlgl, w háfkny dtaymk k nnyckt kn
dbyfnl, dlt ymgbmkt yn yipkhl uby hli ubaolqy ny gkbmkfk gli mb nktck
ktyick. kn gkfl hy nl gbkn, haol:

-mydk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli tlhtacl hy iktváye, uby ymqk rytxlmk oktapk
uby ry hagrl ym krltk nk naihk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, dlt ubayi wl ry rygrl,
rkcl w rkté nlm xám pkxlmlm rygrlm hy gkfknnytíkm uby my rki vamql, vyki ia
vytái yi yn xbihl.

k ymql tymdlihaó yn nkftkhlt:

-xaty vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt, dygkhlt hy xí, uby wl il mlw hli tlhtacl hy
iktváye, ia yn xktubém hy xkiqbk, mail dyhtl knliml, mb vygail; ia vbymqtk
xytgyh ym vknhlvailm, ia kfaihkttáye, mail yn rlitkhl rahkncl hyn myñlt
ubaokik.

-wl mé ubaéi mlw -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w mé uby dbyhl myt il mónl nlm
uby ry hagrl, mail qlhlm nlm hlgy dktym hy ptkigak, w kbi qlhlm nlm ibyvy
hy nk pkxk, dbym k qlhkm nkm rkekñkm uby ynnlm qlhlm obiqlm w gkhk bil dlt
mí ragaytli, my kvyiqkoktái nkm xíkm.

yi ymqkm dnáqagkm w yi lqtkm myxyokiqym, nnycktli kn nbckt k nk rltk uby
kilgrygík, dytl yn nkftkhlt kcbkthó k uby pbymy kncl xám ilgry, dltuby il
vaymyi kn xlnahl rahkncl qki xkn gkfknnytl. nnyckhk, dbym, nk rltk uby ny
dktygaó, yiqtó yi yn dbyfnl, w yi nk gkmk hy hli ubaolqy, nk gbkn rknnó
qlhk knfltlqkhk; w ymqkfki yi ynnk yn gbtk w yn fktfytl hyn nbckt, uby ytki
ctkihym kxaclm hy hli ubaolqy, uby ymqkfk hagaéihlnym mb kxk k vlgym:

-¿ubé ny dktygy k vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt nagyigakhl dytl détye -uby kmí my
nnkxkfk yn gbtk-, hy nk hymctkgak hy xa myñlt? qtym híkm rk uby il dktygyi
én, ia yn tlgíi, ia nk khktck, ia nk nkiek ia nkm ktxkm. ¡hymvyiqbtkhk hy
xí!, uby xy hlw k yiqyihyt, w kmí ym ynnl nk vythkh glxl ikgí dktk xltat,
uby ymqlm xknhaqlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm uby én qayiy w mbyny nyyt qki hy
lthaiktal ny rki vbynql yn obagal; uby krltk xy kgbythl rkfytny líhl hygat
xbgrkm vygym, rkfnkihl yiqty mí, uby ubytík rkgytmy gkfknnytl kihkiqy y
atmy k fbmgkt nkm kvyiqbtkm dlt ymlm xbihlm. yiglxyihkhlm myki k mkqkiám w
k fkttkfám qknym naftlm, uby kmí rki ygrkhl k dythyt yn xám hynagkhl
yiqyihaxayiql uby rkfík yi qlhk nk xkigrk.

nk mlftaik hygík nl xymxl, w kbi hygík xám:

-mydk, myñlt xkymy iaglnám -uby émqy ytk yn ilxfty hyn fktfytl-, uby xbgrkm
vygym ny kgliqygaó k xa myñlt qíl ymqktmy nywyihl yi ymqlm hymknxkhlm
naftlm hy hymvyiqbtkm hlm híkm gli mbm ilgrym, kn gkfl hy nlm gbknym,
kttlokfk yn naftl hy nkm xkilm, w dliík xkil k nk ymdkhk w kihkfk k
gbgrannkhkm gli nkm dktyhym; w gbkihl ymqkfk xbw gkimkhl, hygík uby rkfík
xbytql k gbkqtl cackiqym glxl gbkqtl qlttym, w yn mbhlt uby mbhkfk hyn
gkimkigal hygík uby ytk mkicty hy nkm pytahkm uby rkfík tygyfahl yi nk
fkqknnk; w fyfíkmy nbycl bi ctki okttl hy kcbk ptík, w ubyhkfk mkil w
mlmyckhl, hagayihl uby kubynnk kcbk ytk bik dtygalmímaxk fyfahk uby ny
rkfík qtkíhl yn mkfal ymubapy, bi ctkihy yigkiqkhlt w kxacl mbwl. xkm wl xy
qyicl nk gbndk hy qlhl, uby il kvamé k vbymqtkm xytgyhym hy nlm hamdktkqym
hy xa myñlt qíl, dktk uby nl tyxyhaktki kiqym hy nnyckt k nl uby rk
nnyckhl, w ubyxktki qlhlm ymqlm hymglxbnckhlm naftlm, uby qayiy xbgrlm, uby
fayi xytygyi myt kftkmkhlm, glxl ma pbymyi hy rytyoym.

-ymql hacl wl qkxfaéi -haol yn gbtk-, w k pyy uby il my dkmy yn hík hy
xkñkik mai uby hynnlm il my rkck kgql dúfnagl w myki glihyikhlm kn pbycl,
dltuby il hyi lgkmaói k ubayi nlm nywyty hy rkgyt nl uby xa fbyi kxacl hyfy
hy rkfyt rygrl.

qlhl ymql ymqkfki lwyihl yn nkftkhlt w hli ubaolqy, gli uby kgkfó hy
yiqyihyt yn nkftkhlt nk yipytxyhkh hy mb vygail; w kmí, glxyieó k hygat k
vlgym:

-kftki vbymqtkm xytgyhym kn myñlt vknhlvailm w kn myñlt xktubém hy xkiqbk,
uby vayiy xknpytahl, w kn myñlt xltl kfaihkttáye, uby qtky gkbqavl yn
vknytlml tlhtacl hy iktváye, kngkahy hy kiqyubytk.

k ymqkm vlgym mknaytli qlhlm, w, glxl glilgaytli nlm bilm k mb kxacl, nkm
lqtkm k mb kxl w qíl, uby kúi il my rkfík kdykhl hyn obxyiql, dltuby il
dlhík, glttaytli k kftkektny. Én haol:

-qéickimy qlhlm, uby vyicl xknpytahl dlt nk gbndk hy xa gkfknnl. nnévyixy k
xa nygrl w nnáxymy, ma pbyty dlmafny, k nk mkfak btckihk, uby gbty w gkqy
hy xam pytahkm.

-¡xatá, yi rltk xkek -haol k ymqy dbiql yn kxk-, ma xy hygík k xí fayi xa
gltkeói hyn day uby gloykfk xa myñlt! mbfk vbymqtk xytgyh yi fbyi rltk,
uby, mai uby vyick ymk rbtckhk, ny mkftyxlm kubí gbtkt. ¡xknhaqlm, hacl,
myki lqtk vye w lqtkm gayiql ymqlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, uby qkn rki
dktkhl k vbymqtk xytgyh!

nnyvátliny nbycl k nk gkxk, w, gkqáihlny nkm pytahkm, il ny rknnktli
iaicbik; w én haol uby qlhl ytk xlnaxayiql, dlt rkfyt hkhl bik ctki gkíhk
gli tlgaikiqy, mb gkfknnl, glxfkqaéihlmy gli haye okwkiym, nlm xám
hymkpltkhlm w kqtyvahlm uby my dbhaytki pknnkt yi ctki dktqy hy nk qayttk.

-¡qk, qk! -haol yn gbtk-. ¿okwkiym rkw yi nk hkiek? dktk xa mkiqacbkhk, uby
wl nlm ubyxy xkñkik kiqym uby nnycby nk ilgry.

ragaétliny k hli ubaolqy xan dtycbiqkm, w k iaicbik ubaml tymdlihyt lqtk
glmk mail uby ny haymyi hy glxyt w ny hyokmyi hltxat, uby ytk nl uby xám ny
axdltqkfk. ríelmy kmí, w yn gbtk my aipltxó xbw k nk nktck hyn nkftkhlt hyn
xlhl uby rkfík rknnkhl k hli ubaolqy. Én my nl gliqó qlhl, gli nlm
hamdktkqym uby kn rknnktny w kn qtkytny rkfík hagrl; uby pby dliyt xám
hymyl yi yn nagyigakhl hy rkgyt nl uby lqtl hík rael, uby pby nnkxkt k mb
kxacl yn fktfytl xkymy iaglnám, gli yn gbkn my vail k gkmk hy hli ubaolqy,





gkdíqbnl va. hyn hlilml w ctkihy ymgtbqaial uby yn gbtk w yn fktfytl
ragaytli yi nk naftytík hy ibymqtl aicyialml rahkncl


yn gbkn kúi qlhkvík hltxík. dahaó nkm nnkvym, k nk mlftaik, hyn kdlmyiql
hlihy ymqkfki nlm naftlm, kbqltym hyn hkñl, w ynnk my nkm hal hy xbw fbyik
ckik. yiqtktli hyiqtl qlhlm, w nk kxk gli ynnlm, w rknnktli xám hy gayi
gbytdlm hy naftlm ctkihym, xbw fayi yigbkhytikhlm, w lqtlm dyubyñlm; w, kmí
glxl yn kxk nlm val, vlnvaómy k mknat hyn kdlmyiql gli ctki dtaymk, w qltió
nbycl gli bik ymgbhannk hy kcbk fyihaqk w bi ramldl, w haol:

-qlxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt nagyigakhl: tlgíy ymqy kdlmyiql, il ymqé kubí
kncúi yigkiqkhlt hy nlm xbgrlm uby qayiyi ymqlm naftlm, w ilm yigkiqyi, yi
dyik hy nkm uby nym ubytyxlm hkt ygráihlnlm hyn xbihl.

gkbmó tamk kn nagyigakhl nk maxdnagahkh hyn kxk, w xkihó kn fktfytl uby ny
pbymy hkihl hy kubynnlm naftlm bil k bil, dktk vyt hy ubé qtkqkfki, dbym
dlhík myt rknnkt kncbilm uby il xytygaymyi gkmqacl hy pbycl.

-il -haol nk mlftaik-, il rkw dktk ubé dythlikt k iaicbil, dltuby qlhlm rki
mahl nlm hkñkhltym; xyolt mytá kttloktnlm dlt nkm vyiqkikm kn dkqal, w
rkgyt bi taxytl hynnlm w dycktnym pbycl; w ma il, nnyvktnlm kn glttkn, w
knní my rktá nk rlcbytk, w il lpyihytá yn rbxl.

nl xamxl haol yn kxk: qkn ytk nk ckik uby nkm hlm qyiíki hy nk xbytqy hy
kubynnlm ailgyiqym; xkm yn gbtk il vail yi ynnl mai dtaxytl nyyt maubaytk
nlm qíqbnlm. w yn dtaxytl uby xkymy iaglnám ny hal yi nkm xkilm pby nlm
gbkqtl hy kxkhím hy ckbnk, w haol yn gbtk:

-dktygy glmk hy xamqytal émqk; dltuby, mycúi ry líhl hygat, ymqy naftl pby
yn dtaxytl hy gkfknnytíkm uby my axdtaxaó yi ymdkñk, w qlhlm nlm hyxám rki
qlxkhl dtaigadal w ltacyi hémqy; w kmí, xy dktygy uby, glxl k hlcxkqaekhlt
hy bik mygqk qki xknk, ny hyfyxlm, mai ymgbmk kncbik, glihyikt kn pbycl.

-il, myñlt -haol yn fktfytl-, uby qkxfaéi ry líhl hygat uby ym yn xyolt hy
qlhlm nlm naftlm uby hy ymqy céiytl my rki glxdbymql; w kmí, glxl k úiagl
yi mb ktqy, my hyfy dythlikt.

-kmí ym vythkh -haol yn gbtk-, w dlt ymk tkeói my ny lqltck nk vahk dlt
krltk. vykxlm ymlqtl uby ymqá obiql k én.

-ym -haol yn fktfytl- nkm mytckm hy ymdnkihaái, raol nycíqaxl hy kxkhím hy
ckbnk.

-dbym, yi vythkh -haol yn gbtk- uby il ny rk hy vknyt kn raol nk flihkh hyn
dkhty. qlxkh, myñltk kxk: kftah ymk vyiqkik w ygrkhny kn glttkn, w hé
dtaigadal kn xliqói hy nk rlcbytk uby my rk hy rkgyt.

ríelnl kmí yn kxk gli xbgrl gliqyiql, w yn fbyil hy ymdnkihaái pby vlnkihl
kn glttkn, ymdytkihl gli qlhk dkgayigak yn pbycl uby ny kxyikekfk.

-khynkiqy -haol yn gbtk.

-ymqy uby vayiy -haol yn fktfytl- ym kxkhím hy ctygak; w kbi qlhlm nlm
hymqy nkhl, k nl uby gtyl, mli hyn xymxl naikoy hy kxkhím.

-dbym vkwki qlhlm kn glttkn -haol yn gbtk-; uby, k qtbygl hy ubyxkt k nk
tyaik daiqaubaiaymqtk, w kn dkmqlt hktaiyn, w k mbm écnlckm, w k nkm
yihakfnkhkm w tyvbynqkm tkeliym hy mb kbqlt, ubyxkté gli ynnlm kn dkhty uby
xy yicyihtó, ma kihbvaytk yi pacbtk hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy.

-hy ymy dktygyt mlw wl -haol yn fktfytl.

-w kbi wl -kñkhaó nk mlftaik.

-dbym kmí ym -haol yn kxk-, vyicki, w kn glttkn gli ynnlm.

haétlimynlm, uby ytki xbgrlm, w ynnk krlttó nk ymgknytk w hal gli ynnlm dlt
nk vyiqkik kfkol.

-¿ubaéi ym ymy qliyn? -haol yn gbtk.

-Émqy ym -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl- hli lnavkiqy hy nkbtk.

-yn kbqlt hy ymy naftl -haol yn gbtk- pby yn xymxl uby glxdbml k okthíi hy
pnltym; w yi vythkh uby il mydk hyqytxaikt gbán hy nlm hlm naftlm ym xám
vythkhytl, l, dlt hygat xyolt, xyilm xyiqatlml; mónl mé hygat uby émqy atá
kn glttkn dlt hamdktkqkhl w kttlckiqy.

-Émqy uby my macby ym pnltaxltqy hy ratgkiak -haol yn fktfytl.

-¿krí ymqá yn myñlt pnltaxltqy? -tydnagó yn gbtk-. dbym k py uby rk hy
dktkt dtymql yi yn glttkn, k dymkt hy mb ymqtkñl ikgaxayiql w mlikhkm
kvyiqbtkm; uby il hk nbckt k lqtk glmk nk hbtyek w myubyhkh hy mb ymqanl.
kn glttkn gli én w gli ymlqtl, myñltk kxk.

-uby xy dnkgy, myñlt xíl -tymdlihík ynnk; w gli xbgrk knyctík yoygbqkfk nl
uby ny ytk xkihkhl.

-Émqy ym yn gkfknnytl dnkqat -haol yn fktfytl.

-kiqacbl naftl ym émqy -haol yn gbtk-, w il rknnl yi én glmk uby xytyegk
vyiak. kglxdkñy k nlm hyxám mai tédnagk.

w kmí pby rygrl. kftaómy lqtl naftl w vaytli uby qyiík dlt qíqbnl yn
gkfknnytl hy nk gtbe.

-dlt ilxfty qki mkiql glxl ymqy naftl qayiy, my dlhík dythlikt mb
aciltkigak; xkm qkxfaéi my mbyny hygat: "qtkm nk gtbe ymqá yn hakfnl"; vkwk
kn pbycl.

qlxkihl yn fktfytl lqtl naftl, haol:

-Émqy ym ymdyol hy gkfknnytíkm.

-wk glilegl k mb xytgyh -haol yn gbtk-. krí kihk yn myñlt tyaiknhlm hy
xliqknfái gli mbm kxaclm w glxdkñytlm, xám nkhtliym uby gkgl, w nlm hlgy
dktym, gli yn vythkhytl ramqltakhlt qbtdíi; w yi vythkh uby ymqlw dlt
glihyiktnlm il xám uby k hymqayttl dytdyqbl, maubaytk dltuby qayiyi dktqy
hy nk aivyigaói hyn pkxlml xkqyl flwkthl, hy hlihy qkxfaéi qyoaó mb qynk yn
gtamqakil dlyqk nbhlvagl ktalmql; kn gbkn, ma kubí ny rknnl, w uby rkfnk yi
lqtk nyicbk uby nk mbwk, il ny cbkthkté tymdyql kncbil; dytl ma rkfnk yi mb
ahalxk, ny dlihté mlfty xa gkfyek.

-dbym wl ny qyicl yi aqknakil -haol yn fktfytl-, xkm il ny yiqayihl.

-ia kbi pbytk fayi uby vlm ny yiqyihaétkhym -tymdlihaó yn gbtk-, w kubí ny
dythliátkxlm kn myñlt gkdaqái uby il ny rbfaytk qtkíhl k ymdkñk w rygrl
gkmqynnkil; uby ny ubaqó xbgrl hy mb ikqbtkn vknlt, w nl xymxl rktái qlhlm
kubynnlm uby nlm naftlm hy vytml ubamaytyi vlnvyt yi lqtk nyicbk: uby, dlt
xbgrl gbahkhl uby dlicki w rkfanahkh uby xbymqtyi, okxám nnycktái kn dbiql
uby ynnlm qayiyi yi mb dtaxyt ikgaxayiql. hacl, yi ypyql, uby ymqy naftl, w
qlhlm nlm uby my rknnktyi uby qtkqki hymqkm glmkm hy ptkigak, my ygryi w
hydlmaqyi yi bi dlel mygl, rkmqk uby gli xám kgbythl my vyk nl uby my rk hy
rkgyt hynnlm, ygyqbkihl k bi fytikthl hyn gktdal uby kihk dlt krí w k lqtl
nnkxkhl tligymvknnym; uby émqlm, yi nnyckihl k xam xkilm, rki hy ymqkt yi
nkm hyn kxk, w hynnkm yi nkm hyn pbycl, mai tyxamaói kncbik.

qlhl nl glipatxó yn fktfytl, w nl qbvl dlt fayi w dlt glmk xbw kgytqkhk,
dlt yiqyihyt uby ytk yn gbtk qki fbyi gtamqakil w qki kxacl hy nk vythkh,
uby il hatík lqtk glmk dlt qlhkm nkm hyn xbihl. w, kftayihl lqtl naftl, val
uby ytk dknxytíi hy lnavk, w obiql k én ymqkfk lqtl uby my nnkxkfk dknxytíi
hy aicknkqyttk; nl gbkn vamql dlt yn nagyigakhl, haol:

-ymk lnavk my rkck nbycl tkokm w my ubyxy, uby kbi il ubyhyi hynnk nkm
gyiaekm; w ymk dknxk hy aicknkqyttk my cbkthy w my glimytvy glxl k glmk
úiagk, w my rkck dktk ynnl lqtk gkok glxl nk uby rknnó knyokihtl yi nlm
hymdlolm hy hktal, uby nk hadbqó dktk cbkthkt yi ynnk nkm lftkm hyn dlyqk
rlxytl. ymqy naftl, myñlt glxdkhty, qayiy kbqltahkh dlt hlm glmkm: nk bik,
dltuby én dlt mí ym xbw fbyil, w nk lqtk, dltuby ym pkxk uby ny glxdbml bi
hamgtyql tyw hy dltqbckn. qlhkm nkm kvyiqbtkm hyn gkmqannl hy xatkcbkthk
mli fliímaxkm w hy ctkihy ktqapagal; nkm tkeliym, gltqymkikm w gnktkm, uby
cbkthki w xatki yn hygltl hyn uby rkfnk gli xbgrk dtldtayhkh w
yiqyihaxayiql. hacl, dbym, mknvl vbymqtl fbyi dktygyt, myñlt xkymy iaglnám,
uby émqy w kxkhím hy ckbnk ubyhyi naftym hyn pbycl, w qlhlm nlm hyxám, mai
rkgyt xám gknk w gkqk, dytyegki.

-il, myñlt glxdkhty -tydnagó yn fktfytl-; uby émqy uby kubí qyicl ym yn
kpkxkhl hli fynakiím.

-dbym émy -tydnagó yn gbtk-, gli nk mycbihk, qytgytk w gbktqk dktqy, qayiyi
iygymahkh hy bi dlgl hy tbafktfl dktk dbtckt nk hyxkmakhk gónytk mbwk, w ym
xyiymqyt ubaqktnym qlhl kubynnl hyn gkmqannl hy nk pkxk w lqtkm
axdytqaiyigakm hy xám axdltqkigak, dktk nl gbkn my nym hk qétxail
bnqtkxktail, w glxl my yixyihktyi, kmí my bmktá gli ynnlm hy xamytaglthak l
hy obmqagak; w yi qkiql, qyiyhnlm vlm, glxdkhty, yi vbymqtk gkmk, xkm il
nlm hyoéam nyyt k iaicbil.

-uby xy dnkgy -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl.

w, mai ubytyt gkimktmy xám yi nyyt naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, xkihó kn kxk uby
qlxkmy qlhlm nlm ctkihym w haymy gli ynnlm yi yn glttkn. il my haol k qliqk
ia k mlthk, mail k ubayi qyiík xám ckik hy ubyxknnlm uby hy ygrkt bik qynk,
dlt ctkihy w hynckhk uby pbytk; w, kmayihl gkma lgrl hy bik vye, nlm kttloó
dlt nk vyiqkik. dlt qlxkt xbgrlm obiqlm, my ny gkwó bil k nlm daym hyn
fktfytl, uby ny qlxó ckik hy vyt hy ubaéi ytk, w val uby hygík: ramqltak
hyn pkxlml gkfknnytl qatkiqy yn fnkigl.

-¡vánkxy halm! -haol yn gbtk, hkihl bik ctki vle-. ¡uby kubí ymqé qatkiqy
yn fnkigl! háhxyny kgá, glxdkhty; uby rkcl gbyiqk uby ry rknnkhl yi én bi
qymltl hy gliqyiql w bik xaik hy dkmkqayxdlm. kubí ymqá hli ubataynyamói hy
xliqknfái, vknytlml gkfknnytl, w mb rytxkil qlxám hy xliqknfái, w yn
gkfknnytl plimygk, gli nk fkqknnk uby yn vknayiqy hy qatkiqy rael gli yn
knkil, w nkm kcbhyekm hy nk hligynnk dnkgythyxavahk, gli nlm kxltym w
yxfbmqym hy nk vabhk tydlmkhk, w nk myñltk yxdytkqtae, yikxltkhk hy
radónaql, mb ymgbhytl. hícllm vythkh, myñlt glxdkhty, uby, dlt mb ymqanl,
ym émqy yn xyolt naftl hyn xbihl: kubí glxyi nlm gkfknnytlm, w hbytxyi, w
xbytyi yi mbm gkxkm, w rkgyi qymqkxyiql kiqym hy mb xbytqy, gli ymqkm glmkm
hy uby qlhlm nlm hyxám naftlm hymqy céiytl gktygyi. gli qlhl yml, lm hacl
uby xytygík yn uby ny glxdbml, dbym il rael qkiqkm iygyhkhym hy aihbmqtak,
uby ny ygrktki k cknytkm dlt qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk. nnyvkhny k gkmk w
nyyhny, w vytéam uby ym vythkh gbkiql hén lm ry hagrl.

-kmí mytá -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl-; dytl, ¿ubé rktyxlm hymqlm dyubyñlm naftlm
uby ubyhki?

-Émqlm -haol yn gbtk- il hyfyi hy myt hy gkfknnytíkm, mail hy dlymík.

w kftayihl bil, val uby ytk nk hakik, hy oltcy hy xliqyxkwlt, w haol,
gtywyihl uby qlhlm nlm hyxám ytki hyn xymxl céiytl:

-Émqlm il xytygyi myt ubyxkhlm, glxl nlm hyxám, dltuby il rkgyi ia rktái yn
hkñl uby nlm hy gkfknnytíkm rki rygrl; uby mli naftlm hy yiqyihaxayiql, mai
dytobagal hy qytgytl.

-¡kw myñlt! -haol nk mlftaik-, fayi nlm dbyhy vbymqtk xytgyh xkihkt ubyxkt,
glxl k nlm hyxám, dltuby il mytík xbgrl uby, rkfayihl mkikhl xa myñlt qíl
hy nk yipytxyhkh gkfknnytymgk, nywyihl émqlm, my ny kiqlokmy hy rkgytmy
dkmqlt w kihktmy dlt nlm flmubym w dtkhlm gkiqkihl w qkñyihl; w, nl uby
mytík dylt, rkgytmy dlyqk; uby, mycúi hagyi, ym yipytxyhkh aigbtkfny w
dyckhaek.

-vythkh hagy ymqk hligynnk -haol yn gbtk-, w mytá fayi ubaqktny k ibymqtl
kxacl ymqy qtldayel w lgkmaói hynkiqy. w, dbym glxyiekxlm dlt nk hakik hy
xliqyxkwlt, mlw hy dktygyt uby il my ubyxy, mail uby my ny ubaqy qlhl
kubynnl uby qtkqk hy nk mkfak pynagak w hy nk kcbk yigkiqkhk, w gkma qlhlm
nlm vytmlm xkwltym, w ubéhymyny yi rltk fbyik nk dtlmk, w nk rlitk hy myt
dtaxytl yi myxyokiqym naftlm.

-Émqy uby my macby -haol yn fktfytl- ym nk hakik nnkxkhk mycbihk hyn
mknxkiqail; w émqy, lqtl uby qayiy yn xymxl ilxfty, gbwl kbqlt ym can dlnl.

-dbym nk hyn mknxkiqail -tymdlihaó yn gbtk-, kglxdkñy w kgtygayiqy yn
iúxytl hy nlm glihyikhlm kn glttkn, w nk hy can dlnl my cbkthy glxl ma
pbytk hyn xymxl kdlnl; w dkmy khynkiqy, myñlt glxdkhty, w héxlilm dtamk,
uby my vk rkgayihl qkthy.

-ymqy naftl ym -haol yn fktfytl, kftayihl lqtl- nlm haye naftlm hy pltqbik
hy kxlt, glxdbymqlm dlt kiqlial hy nlptkml, dlyqk mkthl.

-dlt nkm óthyiym uby tygyfí -haol yn gbtk-, uby, hymhy uby kdlnl pby kdlnl,
w nkm xbmkm xbmkm, w nlm dlyqkm dlyqkm, qki ctkgalml ia qki hamdktkqkhl
naftl glxl émy il my rk glxdbymql, w uby, dlt mb gkxail, ym yn xyolt w yn
xám úiagl hy gbkiqlm hymqy céiytl rki mknahl k nk nbe hyn xbihl; w yn uby
il ny rk nyíhl dbyhy rkgyt gbyiqk uby il rk nyíhl okxám glmk hy cbmql.
háhxyny kgá, glxdkhty, uby dtygal xám rkfytny rknnkhl uby ma xy haytki bik
mlqkik hy tkok hy pnltyigak.

dúmlny kdktqy gli ctkihímaxl cbmql, w yn fktfytl dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-ymqlm uby my macbyi mli yn dkmqlt hy afytak, iaipkm hy ryiktym w
hymyickñlm hy gynlm.

-dbym il rkw xám uby rkgyt -haol yn gbtk-, mail yiqtycktnlm kn ftkel mycnkt
hyn kxk; w il my xy dtycbiqy yn dltubé, uby mytík ibigk kgkfkt.

-ymqy uby vayiy ym yn dkmqlt hy pínahk.

-il ym émy dkmqlt -haol yn gbtk-, mail xbw hamgtyql gltqymkil; cbáthymy
glxl olwk dtygalmk.

-ymqy ctkihy uby kubí vayiy my aiqaqbnk -haol yn fktfytl- qymltl hy vktakm
dlymíkm.

-glxl ynnkm il pbytki qkiqkm -haol yn gbtk-, pbytki xám ymqaxkhkm; xyiymqyt
ym uby ymqy naftl my ymgkthy w naxday hy kncbikm fkoyekm uby yiqty mbm
ctkihyekm qayiy. cbáthymy, dltuby mb kbqlt ym kxacl xíl, w dlt tymdyql hy
lqtkm xám rytlagkm w nyvkiqkhkm lftkm uby rk ymgtaql.

-Émqy ym -macbaó yn fktfytl- yn gkigaliytl hy nódye xknhlikhl.

-qkxfaéi yn kbqlt hy ymy naftl -tydnagó yn gbtk- ym ctkihy kxacl xíl, w mbm
vytmlm yi mb flgk khxatki k ubayi nlm lwy; w qkn ym nk mbkvahkh hy nk vle
gli uby nlm gkiqk, uby yigkiqk. kncl nktcl ym yi nkm écnlckm, dytl ibigk nl
fbyil pby xbgrl: cbáthymy gli nlm ymglcahlm. dytl, ¿ubé naftl ym ymy uby
ymqá obiql k én?

-nk cknkqyk, hy xacbyn hy gytvkiqym -haol yn fktfytl.

-xbgrlm kñlm rk uby ym ctkihy kxacl xíl ymy gytvkiqym, w mé uby ym xám
vytmkhl yi hymhagrkm uby yi vytmlm. mb naftl qayiy kncl hy fbyik aivyigaói;
dtldliy kncl, w il glignbwy ikhk: ym xyiymqyt ymdytkt nk mycbihk dktqy uby
dtlxyqy; ubaeá gli nk yxayihk kngkiektá hyn qlhl nk xamytaglthak uby krltk
my ny iayck; w, yiqty qkiql uby ymql my vy, qyiyhny tygnbml yi vbymqtk
dlmkhk, myñlt glxdkhty.

-uby xy dnkgy -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl-. w kubí vayiyi qtym, qlhlm obiqlm: nk
ktkbgkik, hy hli knliml hy ytgannk; nk kbmqtíkhk, hy obki tbpl, obtkhl hy
góthlfk, w yn xlimyttkql, hy gtamqófkn hy vatbém, dlyqk vknyigakil.

-qlhlm ymlm qtym naftlm -haol yn gbtk- mli nlm xyoltym uby, yi vytml
rytlagl, yi nyicbk gkmqynnkik ymqái ymgtaqlm, w dbyhyi glxdyqat gli nlm xám
pkxlmlm hy aqknak: cbáthyimy glxl nkm xám tagkm dtyihkm hy dlymík uby qayiy
ymdkñk.

gkimómy yn gbtk hy vyt xám naftlm; w kmí, k gktck gyttkhk, ubaml uby qlhlm
nlm hyxám my ubyxkmyi; dytl wk qyiík kfaytql bil yn fktfytl, uby my nnkxkfk
nkm náctaxkm hy kicénagk.

-nnltátknkm wl -haol yn gbtk yi lwyihl yn ilxfty- ma qkn naftl rbfaytk
xkihkhl ubyxkt; dltuby mb kbqlt pby bil hy nlm pkxlmlm dlyqkm hyn xbihl, il
mónl hy ymdkñk, w pby pynagímaxl yi nk qtkhbgaói hy kncbikm páfbnkm hy
lvahal.





gkdíqbnl vaa. hy nk mycbihk mknahk hy ibymqtl fbyi gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy
nk xkigrk


ymqkihl yi ymql, glxyieó k hkt vlgym hli ubaolqy, hagayihl:

-kubí, kubí, vknytlmlm gkfknnytlm; kubí ym xyiymqyt xlmqtkt nk pbytek hy
vbymqtlm vknytlmlm ftkelm, uby nlm gltqymkilm nnyvki nl xyolt hyn qltiyl.

dlt kgbhat k ymqy tbahl w ymqtbyihl, il my dkmó khynkiqy gli yn ymgtbqaial
hy nlm hyxám naftlm uby ubyhkfki; w kmí, my gtyy uby pbytli kn pbycl, mai
myt vamqlm ia líhlm, nk gktlnyk w nyói hy ymdkñk, gli nlm rygrlm hyn
yxdytkhlt, glxdbymqlm dlt hli nbam hy Ávank, uby, mai hbhk, hyfíki hy ymqkt
yiqty nlm uby ubyhkfki; w ubaeá, ma yn gbtk nlm vaytk, il dkmktki dlt qki
tacbtlmk myiqyigak.

gbkihl nnycktli k hli ubaolqy, wk én ymqkfk nyvkiqkhl hy nk gkxk, w
dtlmycbík yi mbm vlgym w yi mbm hymkqailm, hkihl gbgrannkhkm w tyvymym k
qlhkm dktqym, ymqkihl qki hymdaytql glxl ma ibigk rbfaytk hltxahl.
kftkeátlimy gli én, w dlt pbytek ny vlnvaytli kn nygrl; w, hymdbém uby rbfl
mlmyckhl bi dlgl, vlnvaéihlmy k rkfnkt gli yn gbtk, ny haol:

-dlt gaytql, myñlt ktelfamdl qbtdíi, uby ym ctki xyicbk hy nlm uby ilm
nnkxkxlm hlgy dktym hyokt, qki mai xám ia xám, nnyvkt nk vaqltak hymqy
qltiyl k nlm gkfknnytlm gltqymkilm, rkfayihl ilmlqtlm nlm kvyiqbtytlm
ckikhl yn dtye yi nlm qtym híkm kiqygyhyiqym.

-gknny vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt glxdkhty -haol yn gbtk-, uby halm mytá mytvahl
uby nk mbytqy my xbhy, w uby nl uby rlw my daythy my ckiy xkñkik; w kqayihk
vbymqtk xytgyh k mb mknbh dlt kcltk, uby xy dktygy uby hyfy hy ymqkt
hyxkmakhkxyiqy gkimkhl, ma wk il ym uby ymqá xknpytahl.

-pytahl il -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl xlnahl w ubyftkiqkhl, il rkw hbhk yi
ynnl; dltuby kubyn fkmqkthl hy hli tlnhái xy rk xlnahl k dknlm gli yn
qtligl hy bik yigaik, w qlhl hy yivahak, dltuby vy uby wl mlnl mlw yn
ldbymql hy mbm vknyiqíkm. xkm il xy nnkxktík wl tyaiknhlm hy xliqknfái ma,
yi nyvkiqáihlxy hymqy nygrl, il xy nl dkckty, k dymkt hy qlhlm mbm
yigkiqkxyiqlm; w, dlt kcltk, qtáackixy hy wkiqkt, uby mé uby ym nl uby xám
xy rktá kn gkml, w ubéhymy nl hyn vyicktxy k xa gktcl.

ragaétlinl kimí: haétliny hy glxyt, w ubyhómy lqtk vye hltxahl, w ynnlm,
khxatkhlm hy mb nlgbtk.

kubynnk ilgry ubyxó w kftkmó yn kxk gbkiqlm naftlm rkfík yi yn glttkn w yi
qlhk nk gkmk, w qknym hyfaytli hy kthyt uby xytygíki cbkthktmy yi dytdyqblm
ktgravlm; xkm il nl dytxaqaó mb mbytqy w nk dytyek hyn ymgtbqañkhlt; w kmí,
my gbxdnaó yn typtái yi ynnlm hy uby dkcki k nkm vygym obmqlm dlt
dygkhltym.

bil hy nlm tyxyhalm uby yn gbtk w yn fktfytl haytli, dlt yiqligym, dktk yn
xkn hy mb kxacl, pby uby ny xbtkmyi w qkdakmyi yn kdlmyiql hy nlm naftlm,
dltuby gbkihl my nyvkiqkmy il nlm rknnkmy -ubaeá ubaqkihl nk gkbmk, gymktík
yn ypyql-, w uby haoymyi uby bi yigkiqkhlt my nlm rkfík nnyvkhl, w yn
kdlmyiql w qlhl; w kmí pby rygrl gli xbgrk dtymqyek. hy knní k hlm híkm my
nyvkiqó hli ubaolqy, w nl dtaxytl uby rael pby at k

vyt mbm naftlm; w, glxl il rknnkfk yn kdlmyiql hlihy ny rkfík hyokhl,
kihkfk hy bik yi lqtk dktqy fbmgáihlny. nnyckfk khlihy mlník qyiyt nk
dbytqk, w qyiqáfknk gli nkm xkilm, w vlnvík w tyvlnvík nlm lolm dlt qlhl,
mai hygat dknkftk; dytl, kn gkfl hy bik fbyik dayek, dtycbiqó k mb kxk uby
rkgak ubé dktqy ymqkfk yn kdlmyiql hy mbm naftlm. yn kxk, uby wk ymqkfk
fayi khvytqahk hy nl uby rkfík hy tymdlihyt, ny haol:

-¿ubé kdlmyiql, l ubé ikhk, fbmgk vbymqtk xytgyh? wk il rkw kdlmyiql ia
naftlm yi ymqk gkmk, dltuby qlhl my nl nnyvó yn xymxl hakfnl.

-il ytk hakfnl -tydnagó nk mlftaik-, mail bi yigkiqkhlt uby vail mlfty bik
ibfy bik ilgry, hymdbém hyn hík uby vbymqtk xytgyh hy kubí my dktqaó, w,
kdyáihlmy hy bik maytdy yi uby vyiík gkfknnytl, yiqtó yi yn kdlmyiql, w il
mé nl uby my rael hyiqtl, uby k gkfl hy dlgk dayek mknaó vlnkihl dlt yn
qyokhl, w hyoó nk gkmk nnyik hy rbxl; w, gbkihl kglthkxlm k xatkt nl uby
hyokfk rygrl, il vaxlm naftl ia kdlmyiql kncbil; mónl my ilm kgbythk xbw
fayi k xí w kn kxk uby, kn qayxdl hyn dktqatmy kubyn xkn vayol, haol yi
knqkm vlgym uby, dlt yiyxamqkh mygtyqk uby qyiík kn hbyñl hy kubynnlm
naftlm w kdlmyiql, hyokfk rygrl yn hkñl yi kubynnk gkmk uby hymdbém my
vytík. haol qkxfaéi uby my nnkxkfk yn mkfal xbñkqói.

-ptymqói hatík -haol hli ubaolqy.

-il mé -tymdlihaó yn kxk- ma my nnkxkfk ptymqói l ptaqói; mónl mé uby kgkfó
yi qói mb ilxfty.

-kmí ym -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby émy ym bi mkfal yigkiqkhlt, ctkihy yiyxacl
xíl, uby xy qayiy loytaek, dltuby mkfy dlt mbm ktqym w nyqtkm uby qyicl hy
vyiat, kihkihl nlm qayxdlm, k dynykt yi maicbnkt fkqknnk gli bi gkfknnytl k
ubayi én pkvltygy, w ny qyicl hy vyigyt, mai uby én nl dbyhk ymqltfkt, w
dlt ymql dtlgbtk rkgytxy qlhlm nlm maimkfltym uby dbyhy; w xáihlny wl uby
xkn dlhtá én gliqtkhygat ia yvaqkt nl uby dlt yn gaynl ymqá lthyikhl.

-¿ubaéi hbhk hy yml? -haol nk mlftaik-. dytl, ¿ubaéi ny xyqy k vbymqtk
xytgyh, myñlt qíl, yi ymkm dyihyigakm? ¿il mytá xyolt ymqktmy dkgípagl yi
mb gkmk w il atmy dlt yn xbihl k fbmgkt dki hy qtkmqtacl, mai glimahytkt
uby xbgrlm vki dlt nkik w vbynvyi qtymubankhlm?

-¡lr mlftaik xík -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w gbái xkn uby ymqám yi nk
gbyiqk! dtaxytl uby k xí xy qtymubanyi, qyihté dynkhkm w ubaqkhkm nkm
fktfkm k gbkiqlm axkcaiktyi qlgktxy yi nk dbiqk hy bi mlnl gkfynnl.

il ubamaytli nkm hlm tydnagktny xám, dltuby vaytli uby my ny yigyihík nk
gónytk.

ym, dbym, yn gkml uby én ymqbvl ubaigy híkm yi gkmk xbw mlmyckhl, mai hkt
xbymqtkm hy ubytyt mycbihkt mbm dtaxytlm hyvkiylm, yi nlm gbknym híkm dkmó
ctkgalmímaxlm gbyiqlm gli mbm hlm glxdkhtym yn gbtk w yn fktfytl, mlfty uby
én hygík uby nk glmk hy uby xám iygymahkh qyiík yn xbihl ytk hy gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym w hy uby yi én my tymbgaqkmy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqymgk. yn gbtk
kncbikm vygym ny gliqtkhygík w lqtkm gligyhík, dltuby ma il cbkthkfk ymqy
ktqapagal, il rkfík dlhyt kvytacbktmy gli én.

yi ymqy qayxdl, mlnagaqó hli ubaolqy k bi nkftkhlt vygail mbwl, rlxfty hy
fayi -ma ym uby ymqy qíqbnl my dbyhy hkt kn uby ym dlfty-, dytl hy xbw dlgk
mkn yi nk xlnnytk. yi tymlnbgaói, qkiql ny haol, qkiql ny dytmbkhaó w
dtlxyqaó, uby yn dlfty vannkil my hyqytxaió hy mknatmy gli én w mytvatny hy
ymgbhytl. hygíkny, yiqty lqtkm glmkm, hli ubaolqy uby my hamdbmaymy k at
gli én hy fbyik ckik, dltuby qkn vye ny dlhík mbgyhyt kvyiqbtk uby ckikmy,
yi ubíqkxy knná ymkm dkokm, kncbik íimbnk, w ny hyokmy k én dlt clfytikhlt
hynnk. gli ymqkm dtlxymkm w lqtkm qknym, mkigrl dkiek, uby kmí my nnkxkfk
yn nkftkhlt, hyoó mb xboyt w raolm w kmyiqó dlt ymgbhytl hy mb vygail.

hal nbycl hli ubaolqy lthyi yi fbmgkt haiytlm; w, vyihayihl bik glmk w
yxdyñkihl lqtk, w xknfktkqáihlnkm qlhkm, nnycó bik tkelikfny gkiqahkh.
kglxlhómy kmaxymxl hy bik tlhynk, uby dahaó dtymqkhk k bi mb kxacl, w,
dytqtygrkihl mb tlqk gynkhk nl xyolt uby dbhl, kvamó k mb ymgbhytl mkigrl
hyn hík w nk rltk uby dyimkfk dliytmy yi gkxail, dktk uby én my kglxlhkmy
hy nl uby vaymy uby xám ny ytk xyiymqyt. mlfty qlhl ny yigktcó uby nnyvkmy
knpltokm; y haol uby mí nnyvktík, w uby kimaxymxl dyimkfk nnyvkt bi kmil
uby qyiík xbw fbyil, dltuby én il ymqkfk hbygrl k kihkt xbgrl k day. yi nl
hyn kmil tydktó bi dlgl hli ubaolqy, axkcaikihl ma my ny kglthkfk ma kncúi
gkfknnytl kihkiqy rkfík qtkíhl ymgbhytl gkfknnytl kmiknxyiqy, dytl ibigk ny
vail kncbil k nk xyxltak; xkm, gli qlhl ymql, hyqytxaió uby ny nnyvkmy, gli
dtymbdbymql hy kglxlhktny hy xám rlitkhk gkfknnytík yi rkfayihl lgkmaói
dktk ynnl, ubaqáihlny yn gkfknnl kn dtaxyt hymgltqém gkfknnytl uby qldkmy.
dtlvywómy hy gkxamkm w hy nkm hyxám glmkm uby én dbhl, glipltxy kn glimyol
uby yn vyiqytl ny rkfík hkhl; qlhl nl gbkn rygrl w gbxdnahl, mai hymdyhatmy
dkiek hy mbm raolm w xboyt, ia hli ubaolqy hy mb kxk w mlftaik, bik ilgry
my mknaytli hyn nbckt mai uby dytmlik nlm vaymy; yi nk gbkn gkxaiktli
qkiql, uby kn kxkiygyt my qbvaytli dlt mycbtlm hy uby il nlm rknnktíki
kbiuby nlm fbmgkmyi.

afk mkigrl dkiek mlfty mb obxyiql glxl bi dkqtaktgk, gli mbm knpltokm w mb
flqk, w gli xbgrl hymyl hy vytmy wk clfytikhlt hy nk íimbnk uby mb kxl ny
rkfík dtlxyqahl. kgytqó hli ubaolqy k qlxkt nk xamxk hyttlqk w gkxail uby
yn uby én rkfík qlxkhl yi mb dtaxyt vakoy, uby pby dlt yn gkxdl hy xliqayn,
dlt yn gbkn gkxaikfk gli xyilm dymkhbxfty uby nk vye dkmkhk, dltuby, dlt
myt nk rltk hy nk xkñkik w rytatnym k mlmnkwl nlm tkwlm hyn mln, il nym
pkqackfki. haol yi ymql mkigrl dkiek k mb kxl:

-xaty vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl kihkiqy, uby il my ny lnvahy nl uby
hy nk íimbnk xy qayiy dtlxyqahl; uby wl nk mkfté clfytikt, dlt ctkihy uby
myk.

k nl gbkn ny tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-rkm hy mkfyt, kxacl mkigrl dkiek, uby pby glmqbxfty xbw bmkhk hy nlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym kiqacblm rkgyt clfytikhltym k mbm ymgbhytlm hy nkm
íimbnkm l tyailm uby ckikfki, w wl qyicl hyqytxaikhl hy uby dlt xí il pknqy
qki kctkhygahk bmkiek; kiqym, dayiml kvyiqkoktxy yi ynnk: dltuby ynnlm
kncbikm vygym, w ubaeá nkm xám, ymdytkfki k uby mbm ymgbhytlm pbymyi
vayolm; w, wk hymdbém hy rktqlm hy mytvat w hy nnyvkt xknlm híkm w dyltym
ilgrym, nym hkfki kncúi qíqbnl hy glihy, l, dlt nl xbgrl, hy xktubém, hy
kncúi vknny l dtlvaigak hy dlgl xám k xyilm; dytl, ma qú vavym w wl vavl,
fayi dlhtík myt uby kiqym hy myam híkm ckikmy wl qkn tyail uby qbvaymy
lqtlm k én khrytyiqym, uby vaiaymyi hy xlnhy dktk gltliktqy dlt tyw hy bil
hynnlm. w il nl qyickm k xbgrl, uby glmkm w gkmlm kgliqygyi k nlm qknym
gkfknnytlm, dlt xlhlm qki ibigk vamqlm ia dyimkhlm, uby gli pkganahkh qy
dlhtík hkt kúi xám hy nl uby qy dtlxyql.

-hy ymk xkiytk -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek-, ma wl pbymy tyw dlt kncúi xankctl
hy nlm uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, dlt nl xyilm, obkik cbqaéttye, xa límnl,
vyihtík k myt tyaik, w xam raolm aipkiqym.

-dbym, ¿ubaéi nl hbhk? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-wl nl hbhl -tydnagó mkigrl dkiek-; dltuby qyicl dktk xí uby, kbiuby
nnlvaymy halm tyailm mlfty nk qayttk, iaicbil kmyiqktík fayi mlfty nk
gkfyek hy xkta cbqaéttye. mydk, myñlt, uby il vkny hlm xktkvyhím dktk
tyaik; glihymk ny gkytá xyolt, w kbi halm w kwbhk.

-yiglxaéihknl qú k halm, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby Én hktá nl uby
xám ny glivyick, dytl il kdlubym qb áiaxl qkiql, uby qy vyickm k gliqyiqkt
gli xyilm uby gli myt khynkiqkhl.

-il nl rkté, myñlt xíl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w xám qyiayihl qki dtaigadkn kxl
yi vbymqtk xytgyh, uby xy mkftá hkt qlhl kubynnl uby xy ymqé fayi w wl
dbyhk nnyvkt.





gkdíqbnl vaaa. hyn fbyi mbgyml uby yn vknytlml hli ubaolqy qbvl yi nk
ymdkiqkfny w okxám axkcaikhk kvyiqbtk hy nlm xlnailm hy vayiql, gli lqtlm
mbgymlm hacilm hy pynagy tyglthkgaói


yi ymql, hymgbftaytli qtyaiqk l gbktyiqk xlnailm hy vayiql uby rkw yi kubyn
gkxdl; w, kmí glxl hli ubaolqy nlm val, haol k mb ymgbhytl:

-nk vyiqbtk vk cbakihl ibymqtkm glmkm xyolt hy nl uby kgytqátkxlm k hymykt,
dltuby vym knní, kxacl mkigrl dkiek, hlihy my hymgbftyi qtyaiqk, l dlglm
xám, hymkpltkhlm cackiqym, gli ubayi dayiml rkgyt fkqknnk w ubaqktnym k
qlhlm nkm vahkm, gli gbwlm hymdlolm glxyiektyxlm k yitaubygyt; uby émqk ym
fbyik cbyttk, w ym ctki mytvagal hy halm ubaqkt qki xknk maxayiqy hy mlfty
nk pke hy nk qayttk.

-¿ubé cackiqym? -haol mkigrl dkiek.

-kubynnlm uby knní vym -tymdlihaó mb kxl- hy nlm ftkelm nktclm, uby nlm
mbynyi qyiyt kncbilm hy gkma hlm nycbkm.

-xaty vbymqtk xytgyh -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby kubynnlm uby knní my dktygyi il
mli cackiqym, mail xlnailm hy vayiql, w nl uby yi ynnlm dktygyi ftkelm mli
nkm kmdkm, uby, vlnqykhkm hyn vayiql, rkgyi kihkt nk dayhtk hyn xlnail.

-fayi dktygy -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby il ymqám gbtmkhl yi ymql hy nkm
kvyiqbtkm: ynnlm mli cackiqym; w ma qayiym xayhl, ubíqkqy hy krí, w dliqy
yi ltkgaói yi yn ymdkgal uby wl vlw k yiqtkt gli ynnlm yi paytk w hymacbkn
fkqknnk.

w, hagayihl ymql, hal hy ymdbynkm k mb gkfknnl tlgaikiqy, mai kqyihyt k nkm
vlgym uby mb ymgbhytl mkigrl ny hkfk, khvatqaéihlny uby, mai hbhk kncbik,
ytki xlnailm hy vayiql, w il cackiqym, kubynnlm uby afk k kglxyqyt. dytl én
afk qki dbymql yi uby ytki cackiqym, uby ia lík nkm vlgym hy mb ymgbhytl
mkigrl ia ygrkfk hy vyt, kbiuby ymqkfk wk fayi gytgk, nl uby ytki; kiqym,
afk hagayihl yi vlgym knqkm:

-ili pbwkhym, glfkthym w vanym gtakqbtkm, uby bi mlnl gkfknnytl ym yn uby
lm kglxyqy.

nyvkiqómy yi ymql bi dlgl hy vayiql w nkm ctkihym kmdkm glxyiektli k
xlvytmy, nl gbkn vamql dlt hli ubaolqy, haol:

-dbym, kbiuby xlváam xám ftkelm uby nlm hyn cackiqy ftaktyl, xy nl rkféam
hy dkckt.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, w yiglxyiháihlmy hy qlhl gltkeói k mb myñltk hbngaiyk,
dahaéihlny uby yi qkn qtkigy ny mlglttaymy, fayi gbfaytql hy mb tlhynk, gli
nk nkiek yi yn tamqty, kttyxyqaó k qlhl yn cknldy hy tlgaikiqy w yxfamqaó
gli yn dtaxytl xlnail uby ymqkfk hynkiqy; w, háihlny bik nkiekhk yi yn
kmdk, nk vlnvaó yn vayiql gli qkiqk pbtak uby rael nk nkiek dyhkelm,
nnyváihlmy qtkm mí kn gkfknnl w kn gkfknnytl, uby pby tlhkihl xbw xknqtygrl
dlt yn gkxdl. kgbhaó mkigrl dkiek k mlglttytny, k qlhl yn glttyt hy mb
kmil, w gbkihl nnycó rknnó uby il my dlhík xyiykt: qkn pby yn clndy uby hal
gli én tlgaikiqy.

-¡vánkxy halm! -haol mkigrl-. ¿il ny haoy wl k vbymqtk xytgyh uby xatkmy
fayi nl uby rkgík, uby il ytki mail xlnailm hy vayiql, w il nl dlhík
aciltkt mail ubayi nnyvkmy lqtlm qknym yi nk gkfyek?

-gknnk, kxacl mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby nkm glmkm hy nk cbyttk,
xám uby lqtkm, ymqái mboyqkm k gliqaibk xbhkiek; gbkiql xám, uby wl dayiml,
w ym kmí vythkh, uby kubyn mkfal ptymqói uby xy tlfó yn kdlmyiql w nlm
naftlm rk vbynql ymqlm cackiqym yi xlnailm dlt ubaqktxy nk cnltak hy mb
vyigaxayiql: qkn ym nk yiyxamqkh uby xy qayiy; xkm, kn gkfl kn gkfl, rki hy
dlhyt dlgl mbm xknkm ktqym gliqtk nk flihkh hy xa ymdkhk.

-halm nl rkck glxl dbyhy -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek.

w, kwbháihlny k nyvkiqkt, qltió k mbfat mlfty tlgaikiqy, uby xyhal
hymdknhkhl ymqkfk. w, rkfnkihl yi nk dkmkhk kvyiqbtk, macbaytli yn gkxail
hyn dbytql nádagy, dltuby knní hygík hli ubaolqy uby il ytk dlmafny hyokt
hy rknnktmy xbgrkm w havytmkm kvyiqbtkm, dlt myt nbckt xbw dkmkoytl; mail
uby afk xbw dymktlml dlt rkfytny pknqkhl nk nkiek; w, hagaéihlmynl k mb
ymgbhytl, ny haol:

-wl xy kgbythl rkfyt nyíhl uby bi gkfknnytl ymdkñln, nnkxkhl haycl détye hy
vktckm, rkfaéihlmyny yi bik fkqknnk tlql nk ymdkhk, hymckoó hy bik yigaik
bi dymkhl tkxl l qtligl, w gli én rael qknym glmkm kubyn hík, w xkgrkgó
qkiqlm xltlm, uby ny ubyhó dlt mlftyilxfty xkgrbgk, w kmí én glxl mbm
hygyihayiqym my nnkxktli, hymhy kubyn hík yi khynkiqy, vktckm w xkgrbgk.
ryqy hagrl ymql, dltuby hy nk dtaxytk yigaik l tlfny uby my xy hydkty
dayiml hymckokt lqtl qtligl qkn w qki fbyil glxl kubén, uby xy axkcail w
dayiml rkgyt gli én qknym rkekñkm, uby qú qy qyickm dlt fayi kpltqbikhl hy
rkfyt xytygahl vyiat k vynnkm w k myt qymqacl hy glmkm uby kdyikm dlhtái
myt gtyíhkm.

-k nk xkil hy halm -haol mkigrl-; wl nl gtyl qlhl kmí glxl vbymqtk xytgyh
nl hagy; dytl yihytégymy bi dlgl, uby dktygy uby vk hy xyhal nkhl, w hyfy
hy myt hyn xlnaxayiql hy nk gkíhk.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w ma il xy ubyol hyn hlnlt, ym
dltuby il ym hkhl k nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym ubyoktmy hy rytahk kncbik,
kbiuby my ny mkncki nkm qtadkm dlt ynnk.

-ma yml ym kmí, il qyicl wl ubé tydnagkt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl mkfy halm
ma wl xy rlncktk uby vbymqtk xytgyh my ubyoktk gbkihl kncbik glmk ny
hlnaytk. hy xí mé hygat uby xy ry hy ubyokt hyn xám dyubyñl hlnlt uby
qyick, ma wk il my yiqayihy qkxfaéi gli nlm ymgbhytlm hy nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym yml hyn il ubyoktmy.

il my hyoó hy tyít hli ubaolqy hy nk maxdnagahkh hy mb ymgbhytl; w kmí, ny
hygnktó uby dlhík xbw fayi ubyoktmy, glxl w gbkihl ubamaymy, mai ckik l gli
ynnk; uby rkmqk yiqligym il rkfík nyíhl glmk yi gliqtktal yi nk lthyi hy
gkfknnytík. híolny mkigrl uby xatkmy uby ytk rltk hy glxyt. tymdlihaóny mb
kxl uby dlt yiqligym il ny rkgík xyiymqyt; uby glxaymy én gbkihl my ny
kiqlokmy. gli ymqk nagyigak, my kglxlhó mkigrl nl xyolt uby dbhl mlfty mb
obxyiql, w, mkgkihl hy nkm knpltokm nl uby yi ynnkm rkfík dbymql, afk
gkxaikihl w glxayihl hyqtám hy mb kxl xbw hy mb ymdkgal, w hy gbkihl yi
gbkihl yxdaikfk nk flqk, gli qkiql cbmql, uby ny dbhaytk yivahakt yn xám
tycknkhl flhycliytl hy xánkck. w, yi qkiql uby én afk hy kubynnk xkiytk
xyibhykihl qtkclm, il my ny kglthkfk hy iaicbik dtlxymk uby mb kxl ny
rbfaymy rygrl, ia qyiík dlt iaicúi qtkfkol, mail dlt xbgrl hymgkiml, kihkt
fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm, dlt dynactlmkm uby pbymyi.

yi tymlnbgaói, kubynnk ilgry nk dkmktli yiqty bilm átflnym, w hyn bil
hynnlm hymckoó hli ubaolqy bi tkxl mygl uby gkma ny dlhík mytvat hy nkiek,
w dbml yi én yn rayttl uby ubaqó hy nk uby my ny rkfík ubyftkhl. qlhk
kubynnk ilgry il hbtxaó hli ubaolqy, dyimkihl yi mb myñltk hbngaiyk, dlt
kglxlhktmy k nl uby rkfík nyíhl yi mbm naftlm, gbkihl nlm gkfknnytlm
dkmkfki mai hltxat xbgrkm ilgrym yi nkm pnltymqkm w hymdlfnkhlm,
yiqtyqyiahlm gli nkm xyxltakm hy mbm myñltkm. il nk dkmó kimí mkigrl dkiek,
uby, glxl qyiík yn ymqóxkcl nnyil, w il hy kcbk hy gragltak, hy bi mbyñl my
nk nnyvó qlhk; w il pbytki dktqy dktk hymdytqktny, ma mb kxl il nl nnkxktk,
nlm tkwlm hyn mln, uby ny hkfki yi yn tlmqtl, ia yn gkiql hy nkm kvym, uby,
xbgrkm w xbw tyclgaokhkxyiqy, nk vyiahk hyn ibyvl hík mknbhkfki. kn
nyvkiqktmy hal bi qayiql k nk flqk, w rknnónk kncl xám pnkgk uby nk ilgry
kiqym; w kpnacaómyny yn gltkeói, dlt dktygytny uby il nnyvkfki gkxail hy
tyxyhakt qki dtymql mb pknqk. il ubaml hymkwbiktmy hli ubaolqy, dltuby,
glxl ymqá hagrl, hal yi mbmqyiqktmy hy mkftlmkm xyxltakm. qltiktli k mb
glxyiekhl gkxail hyn dbytql nádagy, w k lftk hy nkm qtym hyn hík ny
hymgbftaytli.

-kubí -haol, yi vaéihlny, hli ubaolqy- dlhyxlm, rytxkil mkigrl dkiek, xyqyt
nkm xkilm rkmqk nlm glhlm yi ymql uby nnkxki kvyiqbtkm. xkm khvaytqy uby,
kbiuby xy vykm yi nlm xkwltym dynactlm hyn xbihl, il rkm hy dliyt xkil k qb
ymdkhk dktk hypyihytxy, ma wk il vaytym uby nlm uby xy lpyihyi ym gkiknnk w
cyiqy fkok, uby yi qkn gkml fayi dbyhym kwbhktxy; dytl ma pbytyi
gkfknnytlm, yi iaicbik xkiytk qy ym nígaql ia gligyhahl dlt nkm nywym hy
gkfknnytík uby xy kwbhym, rkmqk uby mykm ktxkhl gkfknnytl.

-dlt gaytql, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby vbymqtk xytgyh myk xbw fayi
lfyhagahl yi ymql; w xám, uby wl hy xíl xy mlw dkgípagl w yiyxacl hy
xyqytxy yi tbahlm ia dyihyigakm. fayi ym vythkh uby, yi nl uby qlgkty k
hypyihyt xa dytmlik, il qyihté xbgrk gbyiqk gli ymkm nywym, dbym nkm
havaikm w rbxkikm dytxaqyi uby gkhk bil my hypayihk hy ubayi ubamayty
kctkvaktny.

-il hacl wl xyilm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; dytl, yi ymql hy kwbhktxy gliqtk
gkfknnytlm, rkm hy qyiyt k tkwk qbm ikqbtknym íxdyqbm.

-hacl uby kmí nl rkté -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w uby cbkthkté ymy dtygyql qki
fayi glxl yn hík hyn hlxaicl.

ymqkihl yi ymqkm tkeliym, kmlxktli dlt yn gkxail hlm ptkanym hy nk lthyi hy
mki fyiaql, gkfknnytlm mlfty hlm htlxyhktalm: uby il ytki xám dyubyñkm hlm
xbnkm yi uby vyiíki. qtkíki mbm kiqlolm hy gkxail w mbm ubaqkmlnym. hyqtám
hynnlm vyiík bi glgry, gli gbkqtl l gaigl hy k gkfknnl uby ny kglxdkñkfki w
hlm xlelm hy xbnkm k day. vyiík yi yn glgry, glxl hymdbém my mbdl, bik
myñltk vaegkíik, uby afk k myvannk, hlihy ymqkfk mb xktahl, uby dkmkfk k
nkm aihakm gli bi xbw rlitlml gktcl. il vyiíki nlm ptkanym gli ynnk, kbiuby
afki yn xymxl gkxail; xkm, kdyikm nlm havamó hli ubaolqy, gbkihl haol k mb
ymgbhytl:

-l wl xy yickñl, l émqk rk hy myt nk xám pkxlmk kvyiqbtk uby my rkwk vamql;
dltuby kubynnlm fbnqlm iyctlm uby knní dktygyi hyfyi hy myt, w mli mai
hbhk, kncbilm yigkiqkhltym uby nnyvki rbtqkhk kncbik dtaigymk yi kubyn
glgry, w ym xyiymqyt hymrkgyt ymqy qbytql k qlhl xa dlhytíl.

-dylt mytá ymql uby nlm xlnailm hy vayiql -haol mkigrl-. xaty, myñlt, uby
kubénnlm mli ptkanym hy mki fyiaql, w yn glgry hyfy hy myt hy kncbik cyiqy
dkmkoytk. xaty uby hacl uby xaty fayi nl uby rkgy, il myk yn hakfnl uby ny
yickñy.

-wk qy ry hagrl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby mkfym dlgl hy kgrkuby
hy kvyiqbtkm; nl uby wl hacl ym vythkh, w krltk nl vytám.

w, hagayihl ymql, my khynkiqó w my dbml yi nk xaqkh hyn gkxail dlt hlihy
nlm ptkanym vyiíki, w, yi nnyckihl qki gytgk uby k én ny dktygaó uby ny
dlhtíki lít nl uby haoymy, yi knqk vle haol:

-cyiqy yihakfnkhk w hymglxbikn, hyokh nbycl kn dbiql nkm knqkm dtaigymkm
uby yi ymy glgry nnyváam pltekhkm; ma il, kdktyoklm k tygyfat dtymqk
xbytqy, dlt obmql gkmqacl hy vbymqtkm xknkm lftkm.

hyqbvaytli nlm ptkanym nkm tayihkm, w ubyhktli khxatkhlm, kmí hy nk pacbtk
hy hli ubaolqy glxl hy mbm tkeliym, k nkm gbknym tymdlihaytli:

-myñlt gkfknnytl, ilmlqtlm il mlxlm yihakfnkhlm ia hymglxbiknym, mail hlm
tynacalmlm hy mki fyiaql uby vkxlm ibymqtl gkxail, w il mkfyxlm ma yi ymqy
glgry vayiyi, l il, iaicbikm pltekhkm dtaigymkm.

-dktk glixacl il rkw dknkftkm fnkihkm, uby wk wl lm glilegl, pyxyiqahk
gkiknnk -haol hli ubaolqy.

w, mai ymdytkt xám tymdbymqk, dagó k tlgaikiqy w, nk nkiek fkok, kttyxyqaó
gliqtk yn dtaxytl ptkany, gli qkiqk pbtak w hyibyhl uby, ma yn ptkany il my
hyoktk gkyt hy nk xbnk, én ny ragaytk vyiat kn mbynl xkn hy mb ctkhl, w kbi
xknpytahl, ma il gkwytk xbytql. yn mycbihl tynacalml, uby val hyn xlhl uby
qtkqkfki k mb glxdkñytl, dbml daytikm kn gkmqannl hy mb fbyik xbnk, w
glxyieó k glttyt dlt kubynnk gkxdkñk, xám nacytl uby yn xymxl vayiql.

mkigrl dkiek, uby val yi yn mbynl kn ptkany, kdyáihlmy nacytkxyiqy hy mb
kmil, kttyxyqaó k én w ny glxyieó k ubaqkt nlm ráfaqlm. nnycktli yi ymql
hlm xlelm hy nlm ptkanym w dtycbiqátliny uby dlt ubé ny hymibhkfk.
tymdlihaónym mkigrl uby kubynnl ny qlgkfk k én nacíqaxkxyiqy, glxl hymdlolm
hy nk fkqknnk uby mb myñlt hli ubaolqy rkfík ckikhl. nlm xlelm, uby il
mkfíki hy fbtnkm, ia yiqyihíki kubynnl hy hymdlolm ia fkqknnkm, vayihl uby
wk hli ubaolqy ymqkfk hymvakhl hy knní, rkfnkihl gli nkm uby yi yn glgry
vyiíki, kttyxyqaytli gli mkigrl w haytli gli én yi yn mbynl; w, mai hyoktny
dynl yi nkm fktfkm, ny xlnaytli k glgym w ny hyoktli qyihahl yi yn mbynl
mai knayiql ia myiqahl. w, mai hyqyiytmy bi dbiql, qltió k mbfat yn ptkany,
qlhl qyxytlml w kglfkthkhl w mai glnlt yi yn tlmqtl; w, gbkihl my val k
gkfknnl, dagó qtkm mb glxdkñytl, uby bi fbyi ymdkgal hy knní ny ymqkfk
kcbkthkihl, w ymdytkihl yi ubé dktkfk kubyn mlftymknql; w, mai ubytyt
kcbkthkt yn pai hy qlhl kubyn glxyiekhl mbgyml, macbaytli mb gkxail,
rkgaéihlmy xám gtbgym uby ma nnyvktki kn hakfnl k nkm ymdknhkm.

hli ubaolqy ymqkfk, glxl my rk hagrl, rkfnkihl gli nk myñltk hyn glgry,
hagaéihlny:

-nk vbymqtk pytxlmbtk, myñltk xík, dbyhy pkgyt hy mb dytmlik nl uby xám ny
vaiayty yi qknkiqy, dltuby wk nk mlfytfak hy vbymqtlm tlfkhltym wkgy dlt yn
mbynl, hyttafkhk dlt ymqy xa pbytqy ftkel; w, dltuby il dyiéam dlt mkfyt yn
ilxfty hy vbymqtl nafytqkhlt, mkfyh uby wl xy nnkxl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, gkfknnytl kihkiqy w kvyiqbtytl, w gkbqavl hy nk mai dkt w rytxlmk
hlñk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml; w, yi dkcl hyn fyiypagal uby hy xí rkféam
tygyfahl, il ubaytl lqtk glmk mail uby vlnváam kn qlflml, w uby hy xa dktqy
lm dtymyiqéam kiqy ymqk myñltk w ny hacáam nl uby dlt vbymqtk nafytqkh ry
pygrl.

qlhl ymql uby hli ubaolqy hygík ymgbgrkfk bi ymgbhytl hy nlm uby yn glgry
kglxdkñkfki, uby ytk vaegkíil; yn gbkn, vayihl uby il ubytík hyokt dkmkt yn
glgry khynkiqy, mail uby hygík uby nbycl rkfík hy hkt nk vbynqk kn qlflml,
my pby dktk hli ubaolqy w, kmaéihlny hy nk nkiek, ny haol, yi xknk nyicbk
gkmqynnkik w dylt vaegkíik, hymqk xkiytk:

-kihk, gkfknnytl uby xkn kihym; dlt yn halm uby gtaóxy, uby, ma il hyokm
glgry, kmí qy xkqkm glxl ymqám krí vaegkíil.

yiqyihaóny xbw fayi hli ubaolqy, w gli xbgrl mlmaycl ny tymdlihaó:

-ma pbytkm gkfknnytl, glxl il nl ytym, wk wl rbfaytk gkmqackhl qb mkihye w
kqtyvaxayiql, gkbqavk gtakqbtk.

k nl gbkn tydnagó yn vaegkíil:

-¿wl il gkfknnytl? obtl k halm qki xayiqym glxl gtamqakil. ma nkiek
kttlokm w ymdkhk mkgkm, ¡yn kcbk gbái dtymql vytám uby kn ckql nnyvkm!
vaegkíil dlt qayttk, rahkncl dlt xkt, rahkncl dlt yn hakfnl; w xayiqym uby
xatk ma lqtk hagym glmk.

-¡krltk nl vytyhym, haol kctkoym! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

w, kttlokihl nk nkiek yi yn mbynl, mkgó mb ymdkhk w yxftkeó mb tlhynk, w
kttyxyqaó kn vaegkíil gli hyqytxaikgaói hy ubaqktny nk vahk. yn vaegkíil,
uby kmí ny val vyiat, kbiuby ubamaytk kdyktmy hy nk xbnk, uby, dlt myt hy
nkm xknkm hy knubanyt, il rkfík uby pakt yi ynnk, il dbhl rkgyt lqtk glmk
mail mkgkt mb ymdkhk; dytl kvíilny fayi uby my rknnó obiql kn glgry, hy
hlihy dbhl qlxkt bik knxlrkhk uby ny matvaó hy ymgbhl, w nbycl my pbytli yn
bil dktk yn lqtl, glxl ma pbytki hlm xltqknym yiyxaclm. nk hyxám cyiqy
ubamaytk dliytnlm yi dke, xkm il dbhl, dltuby hygík yn vaegkíil yi mbm xkn
qtkfkhkm tkeliym uby ma il ny hyokfki kgkfkt mb fkqknnk, uby én xamxl rkfík
hy xkqkt k mb kxk w k qlhk nk cyiqy uby my nl ymqltfkmy. nk myñltk hyn
glgry, khxatkhk w qyxytlmk hy nl uby vyík, rael kn glgrytl uby my hymvakmy
hy knní kncúi dlgl, w hymhy nyolm my dbml k xatkt nk tacbtlmk gliqayihk, yi
yn hamgbtml hy nk gbkn hal yn vaegkíil bik ctki gbgrannkhk k hli ubaolqy
yigaxk hy bi rlxftl, dlt yigaxk hy nk tlhynk, uby, k hátmynk mai hypyimk,
ny kftaytk rkmqk nk gaiqbtk. hli ubaolqy, uby maiqaó nk dymkhbxfty hy kubyn
hymkpltkhl clndy, hal bik ctki vle, hagayihl:

-¡lr myñltk hy xa knxk, hbngaiyk, pnlt hy nk pytxlmbtk, mlglttyh k ymqy
vbymqtl gkfknnytl, uby, dlt mkqampkgyt k nk vbymqtk xbgrk flihkh, yi ymqy
tacbtlml qtkigy my rknnk!

yn hygat ymql, w yn kdtyqkt nk ymdkhk, w yn gbftatmy fayi hy mb tlhynk, w
yn kttyxyqyt kn vaegkíil, qlhl pby yi bi qayxdl, nnyvkihl hyqytxaikgaói hy
kvyiqbtktnl qlhl k nk hy bi clndy mlnl.

yn vaegkíil, uby kmí ny val vyiat gliqtk én, fayi yiqyihaó dlt mb hyibyhl
mb gltkoy, w hyqytxaió hy rkgyt nl xymxl uby hli ubaolqy; w kmí, ny kcbkthó
fayi gbfaytql hy mb knxlrkhk, mai dlhyt tlhykt nk xbnk k bik ia k lqtk
dktqy; uby wk, hy dbtl gkimkhk w il rygrk k myxyokiqym iañytíkm, il dlhík
hkt bi dkml.

vyiík, dbym, glxl my rk hagrl, hli ubaolqy gliqtk yn gkbql vaegkíil, gli nk
ymdkhk yi knql, gli hyqytxaikgaói hy kftatny dlt xyhal, w yn vaegkíil ny
kcbkthkfk kimaxymxl nyvkiqkhk nk ymdkhk w kplttkhl gli mb knxlrkhk, w qlhlm
nlm gatgbimqkiqym ymqkfki qyxytlmlm w glnckhlm hy nl uby rkfík hy mbgyhyt
hy kubynnlm qkxkñlm clndym gli uby my kxyikekfki; w nk myñltk hyn glgry w
nkm hyxám gtakhkm mbwkm ymqkfki rkgayihl xan vlqlm w lptygaxayiqlm k qlhkm
nkm axácyiym w gkmkm hy hyvlgaói hy ymdkñk, dltuby halm naftkmy k mb
ymgbhytl w k ynnkm hy kubyn qki ctkihy dynactl yi uby my rknnkfki.

dytl ymqá yn hkñl hy qlhl ymql uby yi ymqy dbiql w qétxail hyok dyihayiqy
yn kbqlt hymqk ramqltak ymqk fkqknnk, hamgbndáihlmy uby il rknnó xám
ymgtaql hymqkm rkekñkm hy hli ubaolqy hy nkm uby hyok typytahkm. fayi ym
vythkh uby yn mycbihl kbqlt hymqk lftk il ubaml gtyyt uby qki gbtalmk
ramqltak ymqbvaymy yiqtyckhk k nkm nywym hyn lnvahl, ia uby rbfaymyi mahl
qki dlgl gbtalmlm nlm aicyialm hy nk xkigrk uby il qbvaymyi yi mbm ktgravlm
l yi mbm ymgtaqltalm kncbilm dkdynym uby hymqy pkxlml gkfknnytl qtkqkmyi; w
kmí, gli ymqk axkcaikgaói, il my hymymdytó hy rknnkt yn pai hymqk kdkgafny
ramqltak, yn gbkn, maéihlny yn gaynl pkvltkfny, ny rknnó hyn xlhl uby my
gliqktá yi nk mycbihk dktqy.

mycbihk dktqy hyn aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk





gkdíqbnl az. hlihy my glignbwy w hk pai k nk ymqbdyihk fkqknnk uby yn
cknnkthl vaegkíil w yn vknayiqy xkigrycl qbvaytli


hyokxlm yi nk dtaxytk dktqy hymqk ramqltak kn vknytlml vaegkíil w kn pkxlml
hli ubaolqy gli nkm ymdkhkm knqkm w hymibhkm, yi cbamk hy hymgktckt hlm
pbtafbihlm pyihayiqym, qknym uby, ma yi nnyil my kgytqkfki, dlt nl xyilm
my havahatíki w pyihytíki hy kttafk kfkol w kftatíki glxl bik ctkikhk; w
uby yi kubyn dbiql qki hbhlml dktó w ubyhó hymqtligkhk qki mkftlmk
ramqltak, mai uby ilm haymy ilqagak mb kbqlt hóihy my dlhtík rknnkt nl uby
hynnk pknqkfk.

gkbmóxy ymql xbgrk dymkhbxfty, dltuby yn cbmql hy rkfyt nyíhl qki dlgl my
vlnvík yi hamcbmql, hy dyimkt yn xkn gkxail uby my lptygík dktk rknnkt nl
xbgrl uby, k xa dktygyt, pknqkfk hy qki mkftlml gbyiql. dktygaóxy glmk
axdlmafny w pbytk hy qlhk fbyik glmqbxfty uby k qki fbyi gkfknnytl ny
rbfaymy pknqkhl kncúi mkfal uby qlxktk k gktcl yn ymgtyfat mbm ibigk vamqkm
rkekñkm, glmk uby il pknqó k iaicbil hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym,

   hy nlm uby hagyi nkm cyiqym
   uby vki k mbm kvyiqbtkm,

dltuby gkhk bil hynnlm qyiík bil l hlm mkfalm, glxl hy xlnhy, uby il
mlnkxyiqy ymgtafíki mbm rygrlm, mail uby daiqkfki mbm xám xíiaxlm
dyimkxayiqlm w iañytíkm, dlt xám ymglihahkm uby pbymyi; w il rkfík hy myt
qki hymhagrkhl qki fbyi gkfknnytl, uby ny pknqkmy k én nl uby mlftó k
dnkqat w k lqtlm myxyokiqym. w kmí, il dlhík aignaiktxy k gtyyt uby qki
cknnkthk ramqltak rbfaymy ubyhkhl xkigk w ymqtldykhk; w ygrkfk nk gbndk k
nk xknaciahkh hyn qayxdl, hyvltkhlt w glimbxahlt hy qlhkm nkm glmkm, yn
gbkn, l nk qyiík lgbnqk l glimbxahk.

dlt lqtk dktqy, xy dktygík uby, dbym yiqty mbm naftlm my rkfíki rknnkhl qki
xlhytilm glxl hymyickñl hy gynlm w iaipkm w dkmqltym hy ryiktym, uby
qkxfaéi mb ramqltak hyfík hy myt xlhytik; w uby, wk uby il ymqbvaymy
ymgtaqk, ymqktík yi nk xyxltak hy nk cyiqy hy mb knhyk w hy nkm k ynnk
gatgbivygaikm. ymqk axkcaikgaói xy qtkík glipbml w hymylml hy mkfyt, tykn w
vythkhytkxyiqy, qlhk nk vahk w xankctlm hy ibymqtl pkxlml ymdkñln hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, nbe w ymdyol hy nk gkfknnytík xkigryck, w yn dtaxytl
uby yi ibymqtk yhkh w yi ymqlm qki gknkxaqlmlm qayxdlm my dbml kn qtkfkol w
yoytgagal hy nkm kihkiqym ktxkm, w kn hympkgyt kctkvalm, mlglttyt vabhkm,
kxdktkt hligynnkm, hy kubynnkm uby kihkfki gli mbm kelqym w dknkptyiym, w
gli qlhk mb vatcaiahkh k gbymqkm, hy xliqy yi xliqy w hy vknny yi vknny;
uby, ma il ytk uby kncúi plnnói, l kncúi vannkil hy rkgrk w gkdynnaik, l
kncúi hymglxbikn cackiqy nkm pltekfk, hligynnk rbfl yi nlm dkmkhlm qayxdlm
uby, kn gkfl hy lgryiqk kñlm, uby yi qlhlm ynnlm il hbtxaó bi hík hyfkol hy
qyokhl, w my pby qki yiqytk k nk mydbnqbtk glxl nk xkhty uby nk rkfík
dktahl. hacl, dbym, uby, dlt ymqlm w lqtlm xbgrlm tymdyqlm, ym hacil
ibymqtl cknnkthl ubaolqy hy gliqaibkm w xyxltkfnym knkfkiekm; w kbi k xí il
my xy hyfyi iyckt, dlt yn qtkfkol w hanacyigak uby dbmy yi fbmgkt yn pai
hymqk kctkhkfny ramqltak; kbiuby fayi mé uby ma yn gaynl, yn gkml w nk
pltqbik il xy kwbhki, yn xbihl ubyhktá pknql w mai yn dkmkqayxdl w cbmql
uby fayi gkma hlm rltkm dlhtá qyiyt yn uby gli kqyigaói nk nywyty. dkmó,
dbym, yn rknnktnk yi ymqk xkiytk:

ymqkihl wl bi hík yi yn kngkiá hy qlnyhl, nnycó bi xbgrkgrl k vyihyt bilm
gktqkdkgalm w dkdynym vayolm k bi myhytl; w, glxl wl mlw kpagalikhl k nyyt,
kbiuby myki nlm dkdynym tlqlm hy nkm gknnym, nnyvkhl hymqk xa ikqbtkn
aignaikgaói, qlxé bi gktqkdkgal hy nlm uby yn xbgrkgrl vyihík, w vany gli
gktkgqytym uby glilgí myt ktáfaclm. w, dbymql uby, kbiuby nlm glilgík, il
nlm mkfík nyyt, kihbvy xatkihl ma dktygík dlt knní kncúi xltamgl knokxakhl
uby nlm nywymy; w il pby xbw hapagbnqlml rknnkt aiqétdtyqy myxyokiqy, dbym,
kbiuby ny fbmgktk hy lqtk xyolt w xám kiqacbk nyicbk, ny rknnktk. yi pai,
nk mbytqy xy hydktó bil, uby, hagaéihlny xa hymyl w dliaéihlny yn naftl yi
nkm xkilm, ny kftaó dlt xyhal, w, nywyihl bi dlgl yi én, my glxyieó k tyít.

dtycbiqény wl uby hy ubé my tyík, w tymdlihaóxy uby hy bik glmk uby qyiík
kubyn naftl ymgtaqk yi yn xktcyi dlt kilqkgaói. híoyny uby xy nk haoymy; w
én, mai hyokt nk tamk, haol:

-ymqá, glxl ry hagrl, kubí yi yn xktcyi ymgtaql ymql: "ymqk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml, qkiqkm vygym yi ymqk ramqltak typytahk, hagyi uby qbvl nk xyolt
xkil dktk mknkt dbytglm uby lqtk xboyt hy qlhk nk xkigrk".

gbkihl wl lí hygat "hbngaiyk hyn qlflml", ubyhé kqóiaql w mbmdyiml, dltuby
nbycl my xy tydtymyiqó uby kubynnlm gktqkdkgalm gliqyiíki nk ramqltak hy
hli ubaolqy. gli ymqk axkcaikgaói, ny ha dtaymk uby nywymy yn dtaigadal, w,
rkgaéihlnl kimí, vlnvayihl hy axdtlvaml yn ktáfacl yi gkmqynnkil, haol uby
hygík: ramqltak hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, ymgtaqk dlt gahy rkxyqy
fyiyicyna, ramqltakhlt ktáfacl. xbgrk hamgtygaói pby xyiymqyt dktk
hamaxbnkt yn gliqyiql uby tygyfí gbkihl nnycó k xam líhlm yn qíqbnl hyn
naftl; w, mknqyáihlmyny kn myhytl, glxdté kn xbgrkgrl qlhlm nlm dkdynym w
gktqkdkgalm dlt xyhal tykn; uby, ma én qbvaytk hamgtygaói w mbdaytk nl uby
wl nlm hymykfk, fayi my dbhaytk dtlxyqyt w nnyvkt xám hy myam tyknym hy nk
glxdtk. kdktqéxy nbycl gli yn xltamgl dlt yn gnkbmqtl hy nk acnymak xkwlt,
w tlcbény xy vlnvaymy kubynnlm gktqkdkgalm, qlhlm nlm uby qtkqkfki hy hli
ubaolqy, yi nyicbk gkmqynnkik, mai ubaqktnym ia kñkhatnym ikhk,
lptygaéihlny nk dkck uby én ubamaymy. gliqyiqómy gli hlm kttlfkm hy dkmkm w
hlm pkiyckm hy qtacl, w dtlxyqaó hy qtkhbgatnlm fayi w paynxyiqy w gli
xbgrk ftyvyhkh. dytl wl, dlt pkganaqkt xám yn iyclgal w dlt il hyokt hy nk
xkil qki fbyi rknnkecl, ny qtboy k xa gkmk, hlihy yi dlgl xám hy xym w
xyhal nk qtkhbol qlhk, hyn xymxl xlhl uby kubí my typayty.

ymqkfk yi yn dtaxytl gktqkdkgal, daiqkhk xbw kn ikqbtkn, nk fkqknnk hy hli
ubaolqy gli yn vaegkíil, dbymqlm yi nk xymxk dlmqbtk uby nk ramqltak
gbyiqk, nyvkiqkhkm nkm ymdkhkm, yn bil gbfaytql hy mb tlhynk, yn lqtl hy nk
knxlrkhk, w nk xbnk hyn vaegkíil qki kn vavl, uby ymqkfk xlmqtkihl myt hy
knubanyt k qatl hy fknnymqk. qyiík k nlm daym ymgtaql yn vaegkíil bi qíqbnl
uby hygík: hli mkigrl hy kedyqak, uby, mai hbhk, hyfík hy myt mb ilxfty, w
k nlm daym hy tlgaikiqy ymqkfk lqtl uby hygík: hli ubaolqy. ymqkfk
tlgaikiqy xktkvannlmkxyiqy daiqkhl, qki nktcl w qyihahl, qki kqyibkhl w
pnkgl, gli qkiql ymdaikel, qki réqagl glipatxkhl, uby xlmqtkfk fayi kn
hymgbfaytql gli gbáiqk khvytqyigak w dtldtayhkh my ny rkfík dbymql yn
ilxfty hy tlgaikiqy. obiql k én ymqkfk mkigrl dkiek, uby qyiík hyn gkfymqtl
k mb kmil, k nlm daym hyn gbkn ymqkfk lqtl téqbnl uby hygík: mkigrl ekigkm,
w hyfík hy myt uby qyiík, k nl uby xlmqtkfk nk daiqbtk, nk fkttack ctkihy,
yn qknny gltql w nkm ekigkm nktckm; w dlt ymql my ny hyfaó hy dliyt ilxfty
hy dkiek w hy ekigkm, uby gli ymqlm hlm mlftyilxftym ny nnkxk kncbikm vygym
nk ramqltak. lqtkm kncbikm xyibhyigakm rkfík uby khvytqat, dytl qlhkm mli
hy dlgk axdltqkigak w uby il rkgyi kn gkml k nk vythkhytk tynkgaói hy nk
ramqltak; uby iaicbik ym xknk glxl myk vythkhytk.

ma k émqk my ny dbyhy dliyt kncbik lfoygaói gytgk hy mb vythkh, il dlhtá
myt lqtk mail rkfyt mahl mb kbqlt ktáfacl, mayihl xbw dtldal hy nlm hy
kubynnk ikgaói myt xyiqatlmlm; kbiuby, dlt myt qki ibymqtlm yiyxaclm, kiqym
my dbyhy yiqyihyt rkfyt ubyhkhl pknql yi ynnk uby hyxkmakhl. w kimí xy
dktygy k xí, dbym, gbkihl dbhaytk w hyfaytk ymqyihyt nk dnbxk yi nkm
knkfkiekm hy qki fbyi gkfknnytl, dktygy uby hy aihbmqtak nkm dkmk yi
manyigal: glmk xkn rygrk w dylt dyimkhk, rkfayihl w hyfayihl myt nlm
ramqltakhltym dbiqbknym, vythkhytlm w il ikhk kdkmalikhlm, w uby ia yn
aiqytém ia yn xayhl, yn tkiglt ia nk kpagaói, il nym rkcki qltgyt hyn
gkxail hy nk vythkh, gbwk xkhty ym nk ramqltak, éxbnk hyn qayxdl, hydómaql
hy nkm kggaliym, qymqacl hy nl dkmkhl, yoyxdnl w kvaml hy nl dtymyiqy,
khvytqyigak hy nl dlt vyiat. yi émqk mé uby my rknnktá qlhl nl uby my
kgytqkty k hymykt yi nk xám kdkgafny; w ma kncl fbyil yi ynnk pknqkty, dktk
xí qyicl uby pby dlt gbndk hyn ckncl hy mb kbqlt, kiqym uby dlt pknqk hyn
mboyql. yi pai, mb mycbihk dktqy, macbayihl nk qtkhbgaói, glxyiekfk hymqk
xkiytk:

dbymqkm w nyvkiqkhkm yi knql nkm gltqkhltkm ymdkhkm hy nlm hlm vknytlmlm w
yilokhlm glxfkqayiqym, il dktygík mail uby ymqkfki kxyikekihl kn gaynl, k
nk qayttk w kn kfamxl: qkn ytk yn hyibyhl w gliqaiyiqy uby qyiíki. w yn
dtaxytl uby pby k hymgktckt yn clndy pby yn glnétagl vaegkíil, yn gbkn pby
hkhl gli qkiqk pbytek w qkiqk pbtak uby, k il vlnvétmyny nk ymdkhk yi yn
gkxail, kubyn mlnl clndy pbytk fkmqkiqy dktk hkt pai k mb tacbtlmk
gliqayihk w k qlhkm nkm kvyiqbtkm hy ibymqtl gkfknnytl; xkm nk fbyik
mbytqy, uby dktk xkwltym glmkm ny qyiík cbkthkhl, qltgaó nk ymdkhk hy mb
gliqtktal, hy xlhl uby, kbiuby ny kgytqó yi yn rlxftl aeubaythl, il ny rael
lqtl hkñl uby hymktxktny qlhl kubyn nkhl, nnyváihlny hy gkxail ctki dktqy
hy nk gynkhk, gli nk xaqkh hy nk ltyok; uby qlhl ynnl gli ymdkiqlmk tbaik
vail kn mbynl, hyoáihlny xbw xknqtygrl.

¡vánkxy halm, w ubaéi mytá kubyn uby fbyikxyiqy dbyhk gliqkt krltk nk tkfak
uby yiqtó yi yn gltkeói hy ibymqtl xkigrycl, vaéihlmy dktkt hy kubynnk
xkiytk! il my hack xám, mail uby pby hy xkiytk uby my kneó hy ibyvl yi nlm
ymqtaflm, w, kdtyqkihl xám nk ymdkhk yi nkm hlm xkilm, gli qkn pbtak
hymgktcó mlfty yn vaegkíil, kgytqáihlny hy nnyil mlfty nk knxlrkhk w mlfty
nk gkfyek, uby, mai myt dktqy qki fbyik hypyimk, glxl ma gkwytk mlfty én
bik xliqkñk, glxyieó k ygrkt mkicty dlt nkm iktagym, w dlt nk flgk w dlt
nlm líhlm, w k hkt xbymqtkm hy gkyt hy nk xbnk kfkol, hy hlihy gkwytk, mai
hbhk, ma il my kftkektk gli yn gbynnl; dytl, gli qlhl yml, mkgó nlm daym hy
nlm ymqtaflm w nbycl mlnqó nlm ftkelm; w nk xbnk, ymdkiqkhk hyn qyttafny
clndy, hal k glttyt dlt yn gkxdl, w k dlglm gltglvlm hal gli mb hbyñl yi
qayttk.

ymqáfkmynl gli xbgrl mlmaycl xatkihl hli ubaolqy, w, glxl nl val gkyt,
mknqó hy mb gkfknnl w gli xbgrk nacytyek my nnycó k én, w, dliaéihlny nk
dbiqk hy nk ymdkhk yi nlm lolm, ny haol uby my taihaymy; ma il, uby ny
gltqktík nk gkfyek. ymqkfk yn vaegkíil qki qbtfkhl uby il dlhík tymdlihyt
dknkftk, w én nl dkmktk xkn, mycúi ymqkfk gaycl hli ubaolqy, ma nkm myñltkm
hyn glgry, uby rkmqk yiqligym gli ctki hymxkwl rkfíki xatkhl nk dyihyigak,
il pbytki khlihy ymqkfk w ny dahaytki gli xbgrl yigktygaxayiql nym ragaymy
qki ctki xytgyh w pkvlt hy dythlikt nk vahk k kubyn mb ymgbhytl. k nl gbkn
hli ubaolqy tymdlihaó, gli xbgrl yiqlil w ctkvyhkh:

-dlt gaytql, pytxlmkm myñltkm, wl mlw xbw gliqyiql hy rkgyt nl uby xy
dyhím; xkm rk hy myt gli bik glihagaói w gligaytql, w ym uby ymqy gkfknnytl
xy rk hy dtlxyqyt hy at kn nbckt hyn qlflml w dtymyiqktmy hy xa dktqy kiqy
nk mai dkt hlñk hbngaiyk, dktk uby ynnk rkck hén nl uby xám pbyty hy mb
vlnbiqkh.

nk qyxytlmk w hymglimlnkhk myñltk, mai yiqtkt yi gbyiqk hy nl uby hli
ubaolqy dyhík, w mai dtycbiqkt ubaéi hbngaiyk pbymy, ny dtlxyqaó uby yn
ymgbhytl rktík qlhl kubynnl uby hy mb dktqy ny pbymy xkihkhl.

-dbym yi py hy ymk dknkftk, wl il ny rkté xám hkñl, dbymql uby xy nl qyiík
fayi xytygahl.





gkdíqbnl z. hy nl uby xám ny kvail k hli ubaolqy gli yn vaegkíil, w hyn
dynactl yi uby my val gli bik qbtfk hy wkicüymym


wk yi ymqy qayxdl my rkfík nyvkiqkhl mkigrl dkiek, kncl xknqtkqkhl hy nlm
xlelm hy nlm ptkanym, w rkfík ymqkhl kqyiql k nk fkqknnk hy mb myñlt hli
ubaolqy, w tlckfk k halm yi mb gltkeói pbymy mytvahl hy hktny vaqltak w uby
yi ynnk ckikmy kncbik íimbnk hy hlihy ny ragaymy clfytikhlt, glxl my nl
rkfík dtlxyqahl. vayihl, dbym, wk kgkfkhk nk dyihyigak, w uby mb kxl vlnvík
k mbfat mlfty tlgaikiqy, nnycó k qyiytny yn ymqtafl; w kiqym uby mbfaymy my
raigó hy tlhannkm hynkiqy hén, w, kmaéihlny hy nk xkil, my nk fymó w ny
haol:

-myk vbymqtk xytgyh mytvahl, myñlt hli ubaolqy xíl, hy hktxy yn clfaytil hy
nk íimbnk uby yi ymqk tacbtlmk dyihyigak my rk ckikhl; uby, dlt ctkihy uby
myk, wl xy mayiql gli pbytekm hy mkfytnk clfytikt qkn w qki fayi glxl lqtl
uby rkwk clfytikhl íimbnkm yi yn xbihl.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-khvytqah, rytxkil mkigrl, uby ymqk kvyiqbtk w nkm k émqk myxyokiqym il
mli kvyiqbtkm hy íimbnkm, mail hy yigtbgaokhkm, yi nkm gbknym il my ckik
lqtk glmk uby mkgkt tlqk nk gkfyek l bik ltyok xyilm. qyiyh dkgayigak, uby
kvyiqbtkm my lptygytái hlihy il mlnkxyiqy lm dbyhk rkgyt clfytikhlt, mail
xám khynkiqy.

kctkhygaómynl xbgrl mkigrl, w, fymáihlny lqtk vye nk xkil w nk pknhk hy nk
nltack, ny kwbhó k mbfat mlfty tlgaikiqy; w én mbfaó mlfty mb kmil w
glxyieó k mycbat k mb myñlt, uby, k dkml qatkhl, mai hymdyhatmy ia rkfnkt
xám gli nkm hyn glgry, my yiqtó dlt bi flmuby uby knní obiql ymqkfk.
mycbíkny mkigrl k qlhl yn qtlqy hy mb obxyiql, dytl gkxaikfk qkiql
tlgaikiqy uby, vaéihlmy ubyhkt kqtám, ny pby pltelml hkt vlgym k mb kxl uby
my kcbkthkmy. ríelnl kmí hli ubaolqy, qyiayihl nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy
rkmqk uby nnyckmy mb gkimkhl ymgbhytl, yn gbkn, yi nnyckihl, ny haol:

-dktégyxy, myñlt, uby mytík kgytqkhl atilm k tyqtkyt k kncbik acnymak; uby,
mycúi ubyhó xknqtygrl kubyn gli ubayi lm glxfkqamqym, il mytá xbgrl uby hyi
ilqagak hyn gkml k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh w ilm dtyihki; w k py uby ma nl
rkgyi, uby dtaxytl uby mknckxlm hy nk gátgyn uby ilm rk hy mbhkt yn rldl.

-gknnk -haol hli ubaolqy-. w ¿hóihy rkm vamql qú, l nyíhl okxám, uby
gkfknnytl kihkiqy rkwk mahl dbymql kiqy nk obmqagak, dlt xám rlxagahalm uby
rbfaymy glxyqahl?

-wl il mé ikhk hy lxygannlm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ia yi xa vahk ny gkqé k
iaicbil; mónl mé uby nk mkiqk rytxkihkh qayiy uby vyt gli nlm uby dynyki yi
yn gkxdl, w yi ymlqtl il xy yiqtyxyql.

-dbym il qyickm dyik, kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby wl qy mkgkté hy
nkm xkilm hy nlm gknhylm, gbkiql xám hy nkm hy nk rytxkihkh. dytl haxy, dlt
qb vahk: ¿rkm vamql xám vknytlml gkfknnytl uby wl yi qlhl nl hymgbfaytql hy
nk qayttk? ¿rkm nyíhl yi ramqltakm lqtl uby qyick ia rkwk qyiahl xám ftíl
yi kglxyqyt, xám knayiql yi yn dytmyvytkt, xám hymqtyek yi yn rytat, ia xám
xkñk yi yn hyttafkt?

-nk vythkh myk -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby wl il ry nyíhl iaicbik ramqltak
okxám, dltuby ia mé nyyt ia ymgtyfat; xkm nl uby lmkté kdlmqkt ym uby xám
kqtyvahl kxl uby vbymqtk xytgyh wl il ny ry mytvahl yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa
vahk, w ubaytk halm uby ymqlm kqtyvaxayiqlm il my dkcbyi hlihy qyicl
hagrl. nl uby ny tbycl k vbymqtk xytgyh ym uby my gbty, uby ny vk xbgrk
mkicty hy ymk ltyok; uby kubí qtkacl rankm w bi dlgl hy bicüyiql fnkigl yi
nkm knpltokm.

-qlhl yml pbytk fayi ymgbmkhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- ma k xí my xy
kglthktk hy rkgyt bik tyhlxk hyn fánmkxl hy paytkftám, uby gli mlnk bik
clqk my krlttktki qayxdl w xyhagaikm.

-¿ubé tyhlxk w ubé fánmkxl ym émy? -haol mkigrl dkiek.

-ym bi fánmkxl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- hy ubayi qyicl nk tygyqk yi nk
xyxltak, gli yn gbkn il rkw uby qyiyt qyxlt k nk xbytqy, ia rkw dyimkt
xltat hy pytahk kncbik. w kimí, gbkihl wl ny rkck w qy ny hé, il qayiym xám
uby rkgyt mail uby, gbkihl vaytym uby yi kncbik fkqknnk xy rki dktqahl dlt
xyhal hyn gbytdl (glxl xbgrkm vygym mbyny kgliqygyt), fliaqkxyiqy nk dktqy
hyn gbytdl uby rbfayty gkíhl yi yn mbynl, w gli xbgrk mlqanyek, kiqym uby
nk mkicty my wyny, nk dlihtám mlfty nk lqtk xaqkh uby ubyhkty yi nk mannk,
khvatqayihl hy yigkoknnl acbknxyiqy w kn obmql; nbycl xy hktám k fyfyt
mlnlm hlm qtkclm hyn fánmkxl uby ry hagrl, w vytámxy ubyhkt xám mkil uby
bik xkiekik.

-ma yml rkw -haol dkiek-, wl tyibigal hymhy kubí yn clfaytil hy nk
dtlxyqahk íimbnk, w il ubaytl lqtk glmk, yi dkcl hy xam xbgrlm w fbyilm
mytvagalm, mail uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy hé nk tygyqk hy ymy ymqtyxkhl naglt;
uby dktk xí qyicl uby vknhtá nk liek khlihyubaytk xám hy k hlm tyknym, w il
ry xyiymqyt wl xám dktk dkmkt ymqk vahk rlitkhk w hymgkimkhkxyiqy. dytl ym
hy mkfyt kcltk ma qayiy xbgrk glmqk yn rkgynny.

-gli xyilm hy qtym tyknym my dbyhyi rkgyt qtym kebxftym -tymdlihaó hli
ubaolqy.

-¡dygkhlt hy xí! -tydnagó mkigrl-. ¿dbym k ubé kcbkthk vbymqtk xytgyh k
rkgynny w k yimyñátxyny?

-gknnk, kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby xkwltym mygtyqlm dayiml
yimyñktqy w xkwltym xytgyhym rkgytqy; w, dlt kcltk, gbtéxlilm, uby nk ltyok
xy hbyny xám hy nl uby wl ubamaytk.

mkgó mkigrl hy nkm knpltokm rankm w bicüyiql. xkm, gbkihl hli ubaolqy nnycó
k vyt tlqk mb gynkhk, dyimó dythyt yn obagal, w, dbymqk nk xkil yi nk
ymdkhk w knekihl nlm lolm kn gaynl, haol:

-wl rkcl obtkxyiql kn gtakhlt hy qlhkm nkm glmkm w k nlm mkiqlm gbkqtl
yvkicynalm, hlihy xám nktckxyiqy ymqái ymgtaqlm, hy rkgyt nk vahk uby rael
yn ctkihy xktubém hy xkiqbk gbkihl obtó hy vyickt nk xbytqy hy mb mlftail
vknhlvailm, uby pby hy il glxyt dki k xkiqynym, ia gli mb xboyt plnckt, w
lqtkm glmkm uby, kbiuby hynnkm il xy kgbythl, nkm hlw kubí dlt yzdtymkhkm,
rkmqk qlxkt yiqytk vyickiek hyn uby qkn hymkcbamkhl xy pael.

lwyihl ymql mkigrl, ny haol:

-khvaytqk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby ma yn gkfknnytl gbxdnaó nl
uby my ny hyoó lthyikhl hy atmy k dtymyiqkt kiqy xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml, wk rkftá gbxdnahl gli nl uby hyfík, w il xytygy lqtk dyik ma il
glxyqy ibyvl hynaql.

-rkm rkfnkhl w kdbiqkhl xbw fayi -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w kmí, kibnl yn
obtkxyiql yi gbkiql nl uby qlgk k qlxkt hén ibyvk vyickiek; dytl ráclny w
glipítxlny hy ibyvl hy rkgyt nk vahk uby ry hagrl, rkmqk qkiql uby ubaqy
dlt pbytek lqtk gynkhk qkn w qki fbyik glxl émqk k kncúi gkfknnytl. w il
dayimym, mkigrl, uby kmí k rbxl hy dkokm rkcl ymql, uby fayi qyicl k ubayi
axaqkt yi ynnl; uby ymql xymxl dkmó, kn day hy nk nyqtk, mlfty yn wynxl hy
xkxftail, uby qki gktl ny glmqó k mkgtadkiqy.

-uby hé kn hakfnl vbymqtk xytgyh qknym obtkxyiqlm, myñlt xíl -tydnagó
mkigrl-; uby mli xbw yi hkñl hy nk mknbh w xbw yi dytobagal hy nk
gligayigak. ma il, híckxy krltk: ma kgkml yi xbgrlm híkm il qldkxlm rlxfty
ktxkhl gli gynkhk, ¿ubé ryxlm hy rkgyt? ¿rkmy hy gbxdnat yn obtkxyiql, k
hymdygrl hy qkiqlm aiglivyiayiqym y aiglxlhahkhym, glxl mytá yn hltxat
vymqahl, w yn il hltxat yi dlfnkhl, w lqtkm xan dyiaqyigakm uby gliqyiík yn
obtkxyiql hy kubyn nlgl vayol hyn xktubém hy xkiqbk, uby vbymqtk xytgyh
ubayty tyvknahkt krltk? xaty vbymqtk xytgyh fayi, uby dlt qlhlm ymqlm
gkxailm il kihki rlxftym ktxkhlm, mail kttaytlm w gkttyqytlm, uby il mónl
il qtkyi gynkhkm, dytl ubaeá il nkm rki líhl ilxftkt yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy
mb vahk.

-yicáñkmqy yi yml -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby il rkftyxlm ymqkhl hlm rltkm
dlt ymqkm yigtbgaokhkm, gbkihl vykxlm xám ktxkhlm uby nlm uby vaiaytli
mlfty knftkgk k nk gliubamqk hy kicénagk nk fynnk.

-knql, dbym; myk kimí -haol mkigrl-, w k halm dtkeck uby ilm mbgyhk fayi, w
uby my nnycby wk yn qayxdl hy ckikt ymqk íimbnk uby qki gktk xy gbymqk, w
xbétkxy wl nbycl.

-wk qy ry hagrl, mkigrl, uby il qy hé yml gbahkhl kncbil; uby, gbkihl
pknqkty íimbnk, krí ymqá yn tyail hy haikxktgk l yn hy mlnakhamk, uby qy
vyihtái glxl kiannl kn hyhl; w xám, uby, dlt myt yi qayttk patxy, qy hyfym
xám knyctkt. dytl hyoyxlm ymql dktk mb qayxdl, w xatk ma qtkym kncl yi ymkm
knpltokm uby glxkxlm, dltuby vkxlm nbycl yi fbmgk hy kncúi gkmqannl hlihy
knloyxlm ymqk ilgry w rkckxlm yn fánmkxl uby qy ry hagrl; dltuby wl qy vlql
k halm uby xy vk hlnayihl xbgrl nk ltyok.

-kubí qtkwl bik gyflnnk, w bi dlgl hy ubyml w il mé gbáiqlm xyihtbclm hy
dki -haol mkigrl-, dytl il mli xkioktym uby dytqyiygyi k qki vknayiqy
gkfknnytl glxl vbymqtk xytgyh.

-¡ubé xkn nl yiqayihym! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. ráclqy mkfyt, mkigrl, uby
ym rlitk hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym il glxyt yi bi xym; w, wk uby glxki,
myk hy kubynnl uby rknnktyi xám k xkil; w ymql my qy ragaytk gaytql ma
rbfaytkm nyíhl qkiqkm ramqltakm glxl wl; uby, kbiuby rki mahl xbgrkm, yi
qlhkm ynnkm il ry rknnkhl rygrk tynkgaói hy uby nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym
glxaymyi, ma il ytk kgkml w yi kncbilm mbiqblmlm fkiubyqym uby nym rkgíki,
w nlm hyxám híkm my nlm dkmkfki yi pnltym. w, kbiuby my hyok yiqyihyt uby
il dlhíki dkmkt mai glxyt w mai rkgyt qlhlm nlm lqtlm xyiymqytym ikqbtknym,
dltuby, yi ypyql, ytki rlxftym glxl ilmlqtlm, rkmy hy yiqyihyt qkxfaéi uby,
kihkihl nl xám hyn qayxdl hy mb vahk dlt nkm pnltymqkm w hymdlfnkhlm, w mai
glgaiytl, uby mb xám lthaiktak glxahk mytík hy vakihkm túmqagkm, qknym glxl
nkm uby qú krltk xy lptygym. kmí uby, mkigrl kxacl, il qy glicloy nl uby k
xí xy hk cbmql. ia ubyttám qú rkgyt xbihl ibyvl, ia mkgkt nk gkfknnytík
kihkiqy hy mbm ubagalm.

-dythóiyxy vbymqtk xytgyh -haol mkigrl-; uby, glxl wl il mé nyyt ia
ymgtyfat, glxl lqtk vye ry hagrl, il mé ia ry gkíhl yi nkm tycnkm hy nk
dtlpymaói gkfknnytymgk; w, hy kubí khynkiqy, wl dtlvyyté nkm knpltokm hy
qlhl céiytl hy ptbqk mygk dktk vbymqtk xytgyh, uby ym gkfknnytl, w dktk xí
nkm dtlvyyté, dbym il nl mlw, hy lqtkm glmkm vlnáqanym w hy xám mbmqkigak.

-il hacl wl, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby myk pltelml k nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym il glxyt lqtk glmk mail ymkm ptbqkm uby hagym, mail uby mb xám
lthaiktal mbmqyiql hyfík hy myt hynnkm, w hy kncbikm wytfkm uby rknnkfki
dlt nlm gkxdlm, uby ynnlm glilgíki w wl qkxfaéi glilegl.

-vatqbh ym -tymdlihaó mkigrl- glilgyt ymkm wytfkm; uby, mycúi wl xy vlw
axkcaikihl, kncúi hík mytá xyiymqyt bmkt hy ymy glilgaxayiql.

w, mkgkihl, yi ymql, nl uby haol uby qtkík, glxaytli nlm hlm yi fbyik dke w
glxdkñk. dytl, hymylmlm hy fbmgkt hlihy knlokt kubynnk ilgry, kgkfktli gli
xbgrk ftyvyhkh mb dlfty w mygk glxahk. mbfaytli nbycl k gkfknnl, w haétlimy
dtaymk dlt nnyckt k dlfnkhl kiqym uby kilgrygaymy; dytl pknqónym yn mln, w
nk ymdytkiek hy kngkiekt nl uby hymykfki, obiql k bikm grlekm hy bilm
gkftytlm, w kmí, hyqytxaiktli hy dkmktnk knní; uby gbkiql pby hy dymkhbxfty
dktk mkigrl il nnyckt k dlfnkhl, pby hy gliqyiql dktk mb kxl hltxatnk kn
gaynl hymgbfaytql, dlt dktygytny uby gkhk vye uby ymql ny mbgyhík ytk rkgyt
bi kgql dlmymavl uby pkganaqkfk nk dtbyfk hy mb gkfknnytík.





gkdíqbnl za. hy nl uby ny mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy gli bilm gkftytlm


pby tyglcahl hy nlm gkftytlm gli fbyi áiaxl; w, rkfayihl mkigrl, nl xyolt
uby dbhl, kglxlhkhl k tlgaikiqy w k mb obxyiql, my pby qtkm yn lnlt uby
hymdyhíki hy mí gaytqlm qkmkolm hy gkftk uby ratvayihl kn pbycl yi bi
gknhytl ymqkfki; w, kbiuby én ubamaytk yi kubyn xymxl dbiql vyt ma ymqkfki
yi mkeói hy qtkmnkhktnlm hyn gknhytl kn ymqóxkcl, nl hyoó hy rkgyt, dltuby
nlm gkftytlm nlm ubaqktli hyn pbycl, w, qyihayihl dlt yn mbynl bikm daynym
hy lvyokm, khytyektli gli xbgrk dtaymk mb túmqagk xymk w glivahktli k nlm
hlm, gli xbymqtkm hy xbw fbyik vlnbiqkh, gli nl uby qyiíki. myiqátlimy k nk
tyhlihk hy nkm daynym myam hynnlm, uby ytki nlm uby yi nk xkokhk rkfík,
rkfayihl dtaxytl gli ctlmytkm gytyxliakm tlckhl k hli ubaolqy uby my
myiqkmy mlfty bi hltikol uby vbynql hyn tyvém ny dbmaytli. myiqómy hli
ubaolqy, w ubyháfkmy mkigrl yi day dktk mytvatny nk gldk, uby ytk rygrk hy
gbytil. vaéihlny yi day mb kxl, ny haol:

-dltuby vykm, mkigrl, yn fayi uby yi mí yigayttk nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, w
gbái k dauby ymqái nlm uby yi gbknubaytk xaiamqytal hynnk my yoytgaqki hy
vyiat ftyvyxyiqy k myt rlitkhlm w ymqaxkhlm hyn xbihl, ubaytl uby kubí k xa
nkhl w yi glxdkñík hymqk fbyik cyiqy qy mayiqym, w uby mykm bik xymxk glmk
glixacl, uby mlw qb kxl w ikqbtkn myñlt; uby glxkm yi xa dnkql w fyfkm dlt
hlihy wl fyfayty; dltuby hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy my dbyhy hygat nl xymxl
uby hyn kxlt my hagy: uby qlhkm nkm glmkm acbknk.

-¡ctki xytgyh! -haol mkigrl-; dytl mé hygat k vbymqtk xytgyh uby, glxl wl
qbvaymy fayi hy glxyt, qki fayi w xyolt xy nl glxytík yi day w k xam mlnkm
glxl myiqkhl k dkt hy bi yxdytkhlt. w kbi, ma vk k hygat vythkh, xbgrl
xyolt xy mkfy nl uby glxl yi xa taigói, mai xynaihtym ia tymdyqlm, kbiuby
myk dki w gyflnnk, uby nlm cknnadkvlm hy lqtkm xymkm hlihy xy myk pltelml
xkmgkt hymdkgal, fyfyt dlgl, naxdaktxy k xyibhl, il ymqltibhkt ia qlmyt ma
xy vayiy ckik, ia rkgyt lqtkm glmkm uby nk mlnyhkh w nk nafytqkh qtkyi
glimacl. kimí uby, myñlt xíl, ymqkm rlitkm uby vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty hktxy
dlt myt xaiamqtl w khrytyiqy hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy, glxl nl mlw mayihl
ymgbhytl hy vbymqtk xytgyh, glivaétqknkm yi lqtkm glmkm uby xy myki hy xám
góxlhl w dtlvygrl; uby émqkm, kbiuby nkm hlw dlt fayi tygyfahkm, nkm
tyibigal dktk hymhy kubí kn pai hyn xbihl.

-gli qlhl yml, qy rkm hy myiqkt; dltuby k ubayi my rbxannk, halm ny
yimknek.

w, kmaéihlny dlt yn ftkel, ny plteó k uby obiql hén my myiqkmy.

il yiqyihíki nlm gkftytlm kubynnk oytacliek hy ymgbhytlm w hy gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym, w il rkgíki lqtk glmk uby glxyt w gknnkt, w xatkt k mbm
rbémdyhym, uby, gli xbgrl hlikaty w ckik, yxfkbnkfki qkmkol glxl yn dbñl.
kgkfkhl yn mytvagal hy gktiy, qyihaytli mlfty nkm eknykm ctki gkiqahkh hy
fynnlqkm kvynnkikhkm, w obiqkxyiqy dbmaytli bi xyhal ubyml, xám hbtl uby ma
pbytk rygrl hy ktckxkmk. il ymqkfk, yi ymql, lgalml yn gbytil, dltuby
kihkfk k nk tyhlihk qki k xyibhl (wk nnyil, wk vkgíl, glxl ktgkhbe hy
iltak) uby gli pkganahkh vkgaó bi ekuby hy hlm uby ymqkfki hy xkiapaymql.
hymdbém uby hli ubaolqy rbfl fayi mkqampygrl mb ymqóxkcl, qlxó bi dbñl hy
fynnlqkm yi nk xkil, w, xatáihlnkm kqyiqkxyiqy, mlnqó nk vle k myxyokiqym
tkeliym:

-hagrlmk yhkh w macnlm hagrlmlm kubénnlm k ubayi nlm kiqacblm dbmaytli
ilxfty hy hltkhlm, w il dltuby yi ynnlm yn ltl, uby yi ymqk ibymqtk yhkh hy
rayttl qkiql my ymqaxk, my kngkiekmy yi kubynnk vyiqbtlmk mai pkqack
kncbik, mail dltuby yiqligym nlm uby yi ynnk vavíki aciltkfki ymqkm hlm
dknkftkm hy qbwl w xíl. ytki yi kubynnk mkiqk yhkh qlhkm nkm glmkm glxbiym;
k ikhay ny ytk iygymktal, dktk kngkiekt mb lthaiktal mbmqyiql, qlxkt lqtl
qtkfkol uby knekt nk xkil w kngkiektny hy nkm tlfbmqkm yigaikm, uby
nafytknxyiqy nym ymqkfki glivahkihl gli mb hbngy w mkelikhl ptbql. nkm
gnktkm pbyiqym w glttayiqym tílm, yi xkciípagk kfbihkigak, mkftlmkm w
qtkimdktyiqym kcbkm nym lptygíki. yi nkm ubayftkm hy nkm dyñkm w yi nl
rbygl hy nlm átflnym pltxkfki mb tydúfnagk nkm mlnígaqkm w hamgtyqkm
kfyokm, lptygayihl k gbknubaytk xkil, mai aiqytém kncbil, nk pétqan glmygrk
hy mb hbngímaxl qtkfkol. nlm vknayiqym kngltilubym hymdyhíki hy mí, mai
lqtl ktqapagal uby yn hy mb gltqymík, mbm kigrkm w navakikm gltqyekm, gli
uby my glxyiektli k gbftat nkm gkmkm, mlfty túmqagkm ymqkgkm mbmqyiqkhkm,
il xám uby dktk hypyimk hy nkm aignyxyigakm hyn gaynl. qlhl ytk dke
yiqligym, qlhl kxamqkh, qlhl gliglthak; kúi il my rkfík kqtyvahl nk dymkhk
tyok hyn gltvl ktkhl k kftat ia vamaqkt nkm yiqtkñkm dakhlmkm hy ibymqtk
dtaxytk xkhty, uby ynnk, mai myt pltekhk, lptygík, dlt qlhkm nkm dktqym hy
mb pétqan w ymdkgalml myil, nl uby dbhaymy rktqkt, mbmqyiqkt w hynyaqkt k
nlm raolm uby yiqligym nk dlmyíki. yiqligym mí uby kihkfki nkm maxdnym w
rytxlmkm ekcknyokm hy vknny yi vknny w hy lqytl yi lqytl, yi qtyiek w yi
gkfynnl, mai xám vymqahlm hy kubynnlm uby ytki xyiymqyt dktk gbftat
rliymqkxyiqy nl uby nk rliymqahkh ubayty w rk ubytahl mayxdty uby my gbftk;
w il ytki mbm khltilm hy nlm uby krltk my bmki, k ubayi nk dútdbtk hy qatl
w nk dlt qkiqlm xlhlm xktqataekhk myhk yigktygyi, mail hy kncbikm rlokm
vythym hy nkxdkelm w wyhtk yiqtyqyoahkm, gli nl uby ubaeá afki qki dlxdlmkm
w glxdbymqkm glxl vki kcltk ibymqtkm gltqymkikm gli nkm tktkm w dytyctaikm
aivyigaliym uby nk gbtalmahkh lgalmk nym rk xlmqtkhl. yiqligym my hygltkfki
nlm gligyqlm kxltlmlm hyn knxk maxdny w myigannkxyiqy, hyn xymxl xlhl w
xkiytk uby ynnk nlm gligyfík, mai fbmgkt ktqapagalml tlhyl hy dknkftkm dktk
yigktygytnlm. il rkfík nk ptkbhy, yn yickñl ia nk xknagak xyegnáhlmy gli nk
vythkh w nnkiyek. nk obmqagak my ymqkfk yi mbm dtldtalm qétxailm, mai uby
nk lmkmyi qbtfkt ia lpyihyt nlm hyn pkvlt w nlm hyn aiqytymy, uby qkiql
krltk nk xyilmgkfki, qbtfki w dytmacbyi. nk nyw hyn yigkoy kúi il my rkfík
myiqkhl yi yn yiqyihaxayiql hyn obye, dltuby yiqligym il rkfík ubé obeckt,
ia ubaéi pbymy obeckhl. nkm hligynnkm w nk rliymqahkh kihkfki, glxl qyicl
hagrl, dlt hlihyubaytk, mlnk w myñltk, mai qyxlt uby nk koyik hymyivlnqbtk
w nkmgavl aiqyiql ny xyilmgkfkmyi, w mb dythagaói ikgík hy mb cbmql w
dtldtak vlnbiqkh. w kcltk, yi ymqlm ibymqtlm hyqymqkfnym macnlm, il ymqá
mycbtk iaicbik, kbiuby nk lgbnqy w gaytty lqtl ibyvl nkfytaiql glxl yn hy
gtyqk; dltuby knní, dlt nlm tymubagalm l dlt yn katy, gli yn gynl hy nk
xknhaqk mlnagaqbh, my nym yiqtk nk kxltlmk dymqanyigak w nym rkgy hkt gli
qlhl mb tyglcaxayiql kn qtkmqy. dktk gbwk mycbtahkh, kihkihl xám nlm
qayxdlm w gtygayihl xám nk xknagak, my aimqaqbwó nk lthyi hy nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym, dktk hypyihyt nkm hligynnkm, kxdktkt nkm vabhkm w mlglttyt k nlm
rbétpkilm w k nlm xyiymqytlmlm. hymqk lthyi mlw wl, rytxkilm gkftytlm, k
ubayi kctkhyegl yn ckmkoy w fbyi kglcaxayiql uby rkgéam k xí w k xa
ymgbhytl; uby, kbiuby dlt nyw ikqbtkn ymqái qlhlm nlm uby vavyi lfnackhlm k
pkvltygyt k nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, qlhkvík, dlt mkfyt uby mai mkfyt
vlmlqtlm ymqk lfnackgaói xy kglcamqym w tycknkmqym, ym tkeói uby, gli nk
vlnbiqkh k xí dlmafny, lm kctkhyegk nk vbymqtk.

qlhk ymqk nktck ktyick -uby my dbhaytk xbw fayi ymgbmkt- haol ibymqtl
gkfknnytl dltuby nkm fynnlqkm uby ny haytli ny qtboytli k nk xyxltak nk
yhkh hltkhk w kiqloómyny rkgyt kubyn aiúqan tkelikxayiql k nlm gkftytlm,
uby, mai tymdlihynny dknkftk, yxflfkhlm w mbmdyimlm, ny ymqbvaytli
ymgbgrkihl. mkigrl, kmaxymxl, gknnkfk w glxík fynnlqkm, w vamaqkfk xbw k
xyibhl yn mycbihl ekuby, uby, dltuby my yiptakmy yn vail, ny qyiíki glnckhl
hy bi kngltiluby.

xám qkthó yi rkfnkt hli ubaolqy uby yi kgkfktmy nk gyik; kn pai hy nk gbkn,
bil hy nlm gkftytlm haol:

-dktk uby gli xám vytkm dbyhk vbymqtk xytgyh hygat, myñlt gkfknnytl
kihkiqy, uby ny kckmkokxlm gli dtlxdqk w fbyik vlnbiqkh, ubytyxlm hktny
mlnke w gliqyiql gli rkgyt uby gkiqy bi glxdkñytl ibymqtl uby il qkthktá
xbgrl yi ymqkt kubí; yn gbkn ym bi ekckn xbw yiqyihahl w xbw yikxltkhl, w
uby, mlfty qlhl, mkfy nyyt w ymgtyfat w ym xúmagl hy bi tkfyn, uby il rkw
xám uby hymykt.

kdyikm rkfík yn gkftytl kgkfkhl hy hygat ymql, gbkihl nnycó k mbm líhlm yn
mli hyn tkfyn, w hy knní k dlgl nnycó yn uby ny qkñík, uby ytk bi xlel hy
rkmqk vyaiqy w hlm kñlm, hy xbw fbyik ctkgak. dtycbiqátliny mbm glxdkñytlm
ma rkfík gyikhl, w, tymdlihayihl uby mí, yn uby rkfík rygrl nlm
lptygaxayiqlm ny haol:

-hy ymk xkiytk, kiqlial, fayi dlhtám rkgytilm dnkgyt hy gkiqkt bi dlgl,
dltuby vyk ymqy myñlt rbémdyh uby qyiyxlm ubayi; qkxfaéi dlt nlm xliqym w
mynvkm rkw ubayi mydk hy xúmagk. réxlmny hagrl qbm fbyikm rkfanahkhym, w
hymykxlm uby nkm xbymqtym w ilm mkubym vythkhytlm; w kmí, qy tbycl dlt qb
vahk uby qy mayiqym w gkiqym yn tlxkigy hy qbm kxltym uby qy glxdbml yn
fyiypagakhl qb qíl, uby yi yn dbyfnl rk dktygahl xbw fayi.

-uby xy dnkgy -tymdlihaó yn xlel.

w, mai rkgytmy xám hy tlckt, my myiqó yi yn qtligl hy bik hymxlgrkhk
yigaik, w, qyxdnkihl mb tkfyn, hy knní k dlgl, gli xbw fbyik ctkgak,
glxyieó k gkiqkt, hagayihl hymqk xkiytk:

kiqlial

   -wl mé, lnknnk, uby xy khltkm,
   dbymql uby il xy nl rkm hagrl
   ia kbi gli nlm lolm maubaytk,
   xbhkm nyicbkm hy kxltílm.
   dltuby mé uby ytym mkfahk,
   yi uby xy ubaytym xy kpatxl;
   uby ibigk pby hymhagrkhl
   kxlt uby pby glilgahl.
   fayi ym vythkh uby qkn vye,
   lnknnk, xy rkm hkhl aihagal
   uby qayiym hy ftligy yn knxk
   w yn fnkigl dygrl hy tamgl.
   xkm knná yiqty qbm tydtlgrym
   w rliymqímaxlm hymvílm,
   qkn vye nk ymdytkiek xbymqtk
   nk ltannk hy mb vymqahl.
   kfknáiekmy kn myñbynl
   xa py, uby ibigk rk dlhahl,
   ia xyicbkt dlt il nnkxkhl,
   ia gtygyt dlt ymglcahl.
   ma yn kxlt ym gltqymík,
   hy nk uby qayiym glnaol
   uby yn pai hy xam ymdytkiekm
   rk hy myt gbkn axkcail.
   w ma mli mytvagalm dktqy
   hy rkgyt bi dygrl fyiacil,
   kncbilm hy nlm uby ry rygrl
   pltqknygyi xa dktqahl.
   dltuby ma rkm xatkhl yi ynnl,
   xám hy bik vye rkftám vamql
   uby xy ry vymqahl yi nlm nbiym
   nl uby xy rlitkfk yn hlxaicl.
   glxl yn kxlt w nk cknk
   kihki bi xymxl gkxail,
   yi qlhl qayxdl k qbm lolm
   ubamy xlmqtktxy dlnahl.
   hyol yn fkankt dlt qb gkbmk,
   ia nkm xúmagkm qy daiql
   uby rkm ymgbgrkhl k hymrltkm
   w kn gkiql hyn cknnl dtaxl.
   il gbyiql nkm knkfkiekm
   uby hy qb fynnyek ry hagrl;
   uby, kbiuby vythkhytkm, rkgyi
   myt wl hy kncbikm xknubamql.
   qytymk hyn fyttlgkn,
   wl knkfáihlqy, xy haol:
   ''qkn dayimk uby khltk k bi áicyn,
   w vayiy k khltkt k bi oaxal;
   xytgyh k nlm xbgrlm haoym
   w k nlm gkfynnlm dlmqaelm,
   w k radógtaqkm rytxlmbtkm,
   uby yickñki kn kxlt xamxl''.
   hymxyiqínk w yiloómy;
   vlnvaó dlt ynnk mb dtaxl:
   hymkpaóxy, w wk mkfym
   nl uby wl ragy w én rael.
   il qy ubaytl wl k xliqói,
   ia qy dtyqyihl w qy matvl
   dlt nl hy fkttkckiík;
   uby xám fbyil ym xa hymacial.
   glwbihkm qayiy nk acnymak
   uby mli nkekhkm hy matcl;
   dli qú yn gbynnl yi nk ckxynnk;
   vytám glxl dlicl yn xíl.
   hlihy il, hymhy kubí obtl,
   dlt yn mkiql xám fyihaql,
   hy il mknat hymqkm mayttkm
   mail dktk gkdbgrail.

gli ymql hal yn gkftytl pai k mb gkiql; w, kbiuby hli ubaolqy ny tlcó uby
kncl xám gkiqkmy, il nl glimaiqaó mkigrl dkiek, dltuby ymqkfk xám dktk
hltxat uby dktk lít gkigaliym. w kimí, haol k mb kxl:

-fayi dbyhy vbymqtk xytgyh kglxlhktmy hymhy nbycl khlihy rk hy dlmkt ymqk
ilgry, uby yn qtkfkol uby ymqlm fbyilm rlxftym qayiyi qlhl yn hík il
dytxaqy uby dkmyi nkm ilgrym gkiqkihl.

-wk qy yiqayihl, mkigrl -ny tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; uby fayi my xy qtkmnbgy
uby nkm vamaqkm hyn ekuby dahyi xám tyglxdyimk hy mbyñl uby hy xúmagk.

-k qlhlm ilm mkfy fayi, fyihaql myk halm -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-il nl iaycl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dytl kglxóhkqy qú hlihy ubamaytym, uby
nlm hy xa dtlpymaói xyolt dktygyi vynkihl uby hbtxayihl. dytl, gli qlhl
ymql, mytík fayi, mkigrl, uby xy vbynvkm k gbtkt ymqk ltyok, uby xy vk
hlnayihl xám hy nl uby ym xyiymqyt.

rael mkigrl nl uby my ny xkihkfk; w, vayihl bil hy nlm gkftytlm nk rytahk,
ny haol uby il qbvaymy dyik, uby én dlihtík tyxyhal gli uby páganxyiqy my
mkikmy. w, qlxkihl kncbikm rlokm hy tlxytl, hy xbgrl uby dlt knní rkfík,
nkm xkmgó w nkm xyegnó gli bi dlgl hy mkn, w, kdnagáihlmynkm k nk ltyok, my
nk vyihó xbw fayi, kmycbtáihlny uby il rkfík xyiymqyt lqtk xyhagaik; w kmí
pby nk vythkh.





gkdíqbnl zaa. hy nl uby gliqó bi gkftytl k nlm uby ymqkfki gli hli ubaolqy


ymqkihl yi ymql, nnycó lqtl xlel hy nlm uby nym qtkíki hyn knhyk yn
fkmqaxyiql, w haol:

-¿mkféam nl uby dkmk yi yn nbckt, glxdkñytlm?

-¿góxl nl dlhyxlm mkfyt? -tymdlihaó bil hynnlm.

-dbym mkfyh -dtlmacbaó yn xlel- uby xbtaó ymqk xkñkik kubyn pkxlml dkmqlt
ymqbhakiqy nnkxkhl ctamómqlxl, w my xbtxbtk uby rk xbytql hy kxltym hy
kubynnk yihakfnkhk xlek hy xktgynk, nk raok hy cbannytxl yn tagl, kubénnk
uby my kihk yi ráfaql hy dkmqltk dlt ymlm kihbttaknym.

-dlt xktgynk hatám -haol bil.

-dlt émk hacl -tymdlihaó yn gkftytl-. w ym nl fbyil, uby xkihó yi mb
qymqkxyiql uby ny yiqyttkmyi yi yn gkxdl, glxl ma pbytk xltl, w uby myk kn
day hy nk dyñk hlihy ymqá nk pbyiqy hyn kngltiluby; dltuby, mycúi ym pkxk,
w én hagyi uby nl haol, kubyn nbckt ym khlihy én nk val nk vye dtaxytk. w
qkxfaéi xkihó lqtkm glmkm, qknym, uby nlm kfkhym hyn dbyfnl hagyi uby il my
rki hy gbxdnat, ia ym fayi uby my gbxdnki, dltuby dktygyi hy cyiqanym. k
qlhl nl gbkn tymdlihy kubyn ctki mb kxacl kxftlmal, yn ymqbhakiqy, uby
qkxfaéi my vamqaó hy dkmqlt gli én, uby my rk hy gbxdnat qlhl, mai pknqkt
ikhk, glxl nl hyoó xkihkhl ctamómqlxl, w mlfty ymql kihk yn dbyfnl
knfltlqkhl; xkm, k nl uby my hagy, yi pai my rktá nl uby kxftlmal w qlhlm
nlm dkmqltym mbm kxaclm ubaytyi; w xkñkik ny vayiyi k yiqyttkt gli ctki
dlxdk khlihy qyicl hagrl. w qyicl dktk xí uby rk hy myt glmk xbw hy vyt; k
nl xyilm, wl il hyokté hy at k vytnk, ma mbdaymy il vlnvyt xkñkik kn nbckt.

-qlhlm rktyxlm nl xymxl -tymdlihaytli nlm gkftytlm-; w ygrktyxlm mbytqym k
ubaéi rk hy ubyhkt k cbkthkt nkm gkftkm hy qlhlm.

-fayi hagym, dyhtl -haol bil-; kbiuby il mytá xyiymqyt bmkt hy ymk
hanacyigak, uby wl xy ubyhkté dlt qlhlm. w il nl kqtafbwkm k vatqbh w k
dlgk gbtalmahkh xík, mail k uby il xy hyok kihkt yn ckttkigrl uby yn lqtl
hík xy dkmó ymqy day.

-gli qlhl yml, qy nl kctkhygyxlm -tymdlihaó dyhtl.

w hli ubaolqy tlcó k dyhtl ny haoymy ubé xbytql ytk kubén w ubé dkmqltk
kubénnk; k nl gbkn dyhtl tymdlihaó uby nl uby mkfík ytk uby yn xbytql ytk
bi raolhkncl tagl, vygail hy bi nbckt uby ymqkfk yi kubynnkm mayttkm, yn
gbkn rkfík mahl ymqbhakiqy xbgrlm kñlm yi mknkxkigk, kn gkfl hy nlm gbknym
rkfík vbynql k mb nbckt, gli ldaiaói hy xbw mkfal w xbw nyíhl.

-«dtaigadknxyiqy, hygíki uby mkfík nk gayigak hy nkm ymqtynnkm, w hy nl uby
dkmki, knná yi yn gaynl, yn mln w nk nbik; dltuby dbiqbknxyiqy ilm hygík yn
gtam hyn mln w hy nk nbik.»

-ygnadmy my nnkxk, kxacl, uby il gtam, yn ymgbtygytmy ymlm hlm nbxaiktym
xkwltym -haol hli ubaolqy.

xkm dyhtl, il tydktkihl yi iañytíkm, dtlmacbaó mb gbyiql hagayihl:

-«kmaxymxl khyvaikfk gbáihl rkfík hy myt yn kñl kfbihkiqy l ymqan.»

-ymqétan ubytéam hygat, kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy.

-ymqétan l ymqan -tymdlihaó dyhtl-, qlhl my mkny knná. «w hacl uby gli ymql
uby hygík my ragaytli mb dkhty w mbm kxaclm, uby ny hkfki gtéhaql, xbw
taglm, dltuby rkgíki nl uby én nym kglimyokfk, hagaéihlnym: ''myxftkh ymqy
kñl gyfkhk, il qtacl; yi émqy dlhéam myxftkt cktfkielm w il gyfkhk; yn uby
vayiy mytá hy cbannk hy kgyaqy; nlm qtym macbayiqym il my glcytá clqk''.»

-ymk gayigak my nnkxk kmqtlnlcík -haol hli ubaolqy.

-il mé wl góxl my nnkxk -tydnagó dyhtl-, xkm mé uby qlhl ymql mkfík, w kúi
xám. «paiknxyiqy, il dkmktli xbgrlm xymym, hymdbém uby vail hy mknkxkigk,
gbkihl bi hík tyxkiygaó vymqahl hy dkmqlt, gli mb gkwkhl w dynnagl,
rkfaéihlmy ubaqkhl nlm ráfaqlm nktclm uby glxl ymglnkt qtkík; w obiqkxyiqy
my vamqaó gli én hy dkmqlt lqtl mb ctkihy kxacl, nnkxkhl kxftlmal, uby
rkfík mahl mb glxdkñytl yi nlm ymqbhalm. lnvaháfkmyxy hy hygat glxl
ctamómqlxl, yn hapbiql, pby ctkihy rlxfty hy glxdliyt gldnkm; qkiql, uby én
rkgík nlm vannkigaglm dktk nk ilgry hyn ikgaxayiql hyn myñlt, w nlm kbqlm
dktk yn hík hy halm, uby nlm tydtymyiqkfki nlm xlelm hy ibymqtl dbyfnl, w
qlhlm hygíki uby ytki dlt yn gkfl. gbkihl nlm hyn nbckt vaytli qki hy
axdtlvaml vymqahlm hy dkmqltym k nlm hlm ymglnktym, ubyhktli khxatkhlm, w
il dlhíki khavaikt nk gkbmk uby nym rkfík xlvahl k rkgyt kubynnk qki
ymqtkñk xbhkiek. wk yi ymqy qayxdl ytk xbytql yn dkhty hy ibymqtl
ctamómqlxl, w én ubyhó rytyhkhl yi xbgrk gkiqahkh hy rkgayihk, kimí yi
xbyfnym glxl yi tkígym, w yi il dyubyñk gkiqahkh hy ckikhl, xkwlt w xyilt,
w yi ctki gkiqahkh hy haiytlm; hy qlhl nl gbkn ubyhó yn xlel myñlt
hymlnbql, w yi vythkh uby qlhl nl xytygík, uby ytk xbw fbyi glxdkñytl w
gktaqkqavl w kxacl hy nlm fbyilm, w qyiík bik gktk glxl bik fyihagaói.
hymdbém my vail k yiqyihyt uby yn rkfytmy xbhkhl hy qtkoy il rkfík mahl dlt
lqtk glmk uby dlt kihktmy dlt ymqlm hymdlfnkhlm yi dlm hy kubynnk dkmqltk
xktgynk uby ibymqtl ekckn ilxftó hyikiqym, hy nk gbkn my rkfík yikxltkhl yn
dlfty hapbiql hy ctamómqlxl.» w ubaétllm hygat kcltk, dltuby ym fayi uby nl
mydáam, ubaéi ym ymqk tkdkek; ubaeá, w kbi mai ubaeá, il rkftéam líhl
myxyokiqy glmk yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy vbymqtk vahk, kbiuby vaváam xám kñlm
uby mktik.

-hygah mkttk -tydnagó hli ubaolqy, il dbhayihl mbptat yn qtlgkt hy nlm
vlgkfnlm hyn gkftytl.

-rktql vavy nk mktik -tymdlihaó dyhtl-; w ma ym, myñlt, uby xy rkféam hy
kihkt ekrytayihl k gkhk dkml nlm vlgkfnlm, il kgkfktyxlm yi bi kñl.

-dythlikh, kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby dlt rkfyt qkiqk hapytyigak hy
mktik k mkttk lm nl haoy; dytl vlm tymdlihamqym xbw fayi, dltuby vavy xám
mktik uby mkttk; w dtlmycbah vbymqtk ramqltak, uby il lm tydnagkté xám yi
ikhk.

-«hacl, dbym, myñlt xíl hy xa knxk -haol yn gkftytl-, uby yi ibymqtk knhyk
rbfl bi nkftkhlt kúi xám tagl uby yn dkhty hy ctamómqlxl, yn gbkn my
nnkxkfk cbannytxl, w kn gbkn hal halm, kxéi hy nkm xbgrkm w ctkihym
taubyekm, bik raok, hy gbwl dktql xbtaó mb xkhty, uby pby nk xám rlitkhk
xboyt uby rbfl yi qlhlm ymqlm gliqltilm. il dktygy mail uby krltk nk vyl,
gli kubynnk gktk uby hyn bi gkfl qyiík yn mln w hyn lqtl nk nbik; w, mlfty
qlhl, rkgyihlmk w kxack hy nlm dlftym, dlt nl uby gtyl uby hyfy hy ymqkt mb
áiaxk k nk rltk hy krltk clekihl hy halm yi yn lqtl xbihl. hy dymkt hy nk
xbytqy hy qki fbyik xboyt xbtaó mb xktahl cbannytxl, hyokihl k mb raok
xktgynk, xbgrkgrk w tagk, yi dlhyt hy bi qíl mbwl mkgythlqy w fyiypagakhl
yi ibymqtl nbckt. gtygaó nk iañk gli qkiqk fynnyek, uby ilm rkgík kglthkt
hy nk hy mb xkhty, uby nk qbvl xbw ctkihy; w, gli qlhl ymql, my obeckfk uby
ny rkfík hy dkmkt nk hy nk raok. w kmí pby, uby, gbkihl nnycó k yhkh hy
gkqltgy k ubaigy kñlm, ikhay nk xatkfk uby il fyihygík k halm, uby qki
rytxlmk nk rkfík gtakhl, w nlm xám ubyhkfki yikxltkhlm w dythahlm dlt ynnk.
cbktháfknk mb qíl gli xbgrl tygkql w gli xbgrl yigyttkxayiql; dytl, gli
qlhl ymql, nk pkxk hy mb xbgrk rytxlmbtk my ymqyihaó hy xkiytk uby, kmí dlt
ynnk glxl dlt mbm xbgrkm taubyekm, il mlnkxyiqy hy nlm hy ibymqtl dbyfnl,
mail hy nlm hy xbgrkm nycbkm k nk tyhlihk, w hy nlm xyoltym hynnlm, ytk
tlckhl, mlnagaqkhl y axdltqbikhl mb qíl my nk haymy dlt xboyt. xkm én, uby
k nkm hytygrkm ym fbyi gtamqakil, kbiuby ubamaytk gkmktnk nbycl, kmí glxl
nk vík hy yhkh, il ubaml rkgytnl mai mb glimyiqaxayiql, mai qyiyt lol k nk
ckikigak w ctkioytík uby ny lptygík yn qyiyt nk rkgayihk hy nk xlek,
hankqkihl mb gkmkxayiql. w k py uby my haol ymql yi xám hy bi glttannl yi
yn dbyfnl, yi knkfkiek hyn fbyi mkgythlqy.» uby ubaytl uby mydk, myñlt
kihkiqy, uby yi ymqlm nbcktym gltqlm hy qlhl my qtkqk w hy qlhl my xbtxbtk;
w qyiyh dktk vlm, glxl wl qyicl dktk xí, uby hyfík hy myt hyxkmakhkxyiqy
fbyil yn gnétacl uby lfnack k mbm pynactymym k uby hacki fayi hén,
ymdygaknxyiqy yi nkm knhykm.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol hli ubaolqy-, w dtlmycbah khynkiqy, uby yn gbyiql
ym xbw fbyil, w vlm, fbyi dyhtl, ny gliqáam gli xbw fbyik ctkgak.

-nk hyn myñlt il xy pknqy, uby ym nk uby rkgy kn gkml. «w yi nl hyxám
mkftéam uby, kbiuby yn qíl dtldliík k nk mlftaik w ny hygík nkm gknahkhym
hy gkhk bil yi dktqagbnkt, hy nlm xbgrlm uby dlt xboyt nk dyhíki, tlcáihlny
uby my gkmkmy w ymglcaymy k mb cbmql, okxám ynnk tymdlihaó lqtk glmk mail
uby dlt yiqligym il ubytík gkmktmy, w uby, dlt myt qki xbgrkgrk, il my
myiqík ráfan dktk dlhyt nnyvkt nk gktck hyn xkqtaxlial. gli ymqkm uby hkfk,
kn dktygyt obmqkm ymgbmkm, hyokfk yn qíl hy axdltqbiktnk, w ymdytkfk k uby
yiqtkmy kncl xám yi yhkh w ynnk mbdaymy ymglcyt glxdkñík k mb cbmql. dltuby
hygík én, w hygík xbw fayi, uby il rkfíki hy hkt nlm dkhtym k mbm raolm
ymqkhl gliqtk mb vlnbiqkh. dytl réqynl kubí, gbkihl il xy gkql, uby
tyxkiygy bi hík nk xynaihtlmk xktgynk rygrk dkmqltk; w, mai myt dktqy mb
qíl ia qlhlm nlm hyn dbyfnl, uby my nl hymkglimyokfki, hal yi atmy kn gkxdl
gli nkm hyxám ekcknkm hyn nbckt, w hal yi cbkthkt mb xymxl ckikhl. w, kmí
glxl ynnk mknaó yi dúfnagl w mb rytxlmbtk my val kn hymgbfaytql, il lm
mkfté fbyikxyiqy hygat gbáiqlm taglm xkigyflm, rahknclm w nkftkhltym rki
qlxkhl yn qtkoy hy ctamómqlxl w nk kihki tyubyftkihl dlt ymlm gkxdlm. bil
hy nlm gbknym, glxl wk ymqá hagrl, pby ibymqtl hapbiql, hyn gbkn hygíki uby
nk hyokfk hy ubytyt, w nk khltkfk. w il my dayimy uby dltuby xktgynk my
dbml yi kubynnk nafytqkh w vahk qki mbynqk w hy qki dlgl l hy iaicúi
tyglcaxayiql, uby dlt yml rk hkhl aihagal, ia dlt myxyokm, uby vyick yi
xyilmgkfl hy mb rliymqahkh w tygkql; kiqym ym qkiqk w qkn nk vacankigak gli
uby xatk dlt mb rlitk, uby hy gbkiqlm nk matvyi w mlnagaqki iaicbil my rk
knkfkhl, ia gli vythkh my dlhtá knkfkt, uby ny rkwk hkhl kncbik dyubyñk
ymdytkiek hy kngkiekt mb hymyl. uby, dbymql uby il rbwy ia my ymubavk hy nk
glxdkñík w glivytmkgaói hy nlm dkmqltym, w nlm qtkqk gltqém w
kxackfnyxyiqy, yi nnyckihl k hymgbftatny mb aiqyigaói gbknubaytk hynnlm,
kbiuby myk qki obmqk w mkiqk glxl nk hyn xkqtaxlial, nlm kttlok hy mí glxl
gli bi qtkfbgl. w gli ymqk xkiytk hy glihagaói rkgy xám hkñl yi ymqk qayttk
uby ma dlt ynnk yiqtktk nk dymqanyigak; dltuby mb kpkfanahkh w rytxlmbtk
kqtky nlm gltkeliym hy nlm uby nk qtkqki k mytvatnk w k kxktnk, dytl mb
hymhéi w hymyickñl nlm glihbgy k qétxailm hy hymymdytktmy; w kmí, il mkfyi
ubé hygatny, mail nnkxktnk k vlgym gtbyn w hymkctkhygahk, gli lqtlm qíqbnlm
k émqy myxyokiqym, uby fayi nk gknahkh hy mb glihagaói xkiapaymqki. w ma
kubí ymqbvaémyhym, myñlt, kncúi hík, vytíkhym tymlikt ymqkm mayttkm w ymqlm
vknnym gli nlm nkxyiqlm hy nlm hymyickñkhlm uby nk macbyi. il ymqá xbw
nyolm hy kubí bi maqal hlihy rkw gkma hlm hlgyikm hy knqkm rkwkm, w il rkw
iaicbik uby yi mb namk gltqyek il qyick ctkfkhl w ymgtaql yn ilxfty hy
xktgynk; w yigaxk hy kncbik, bik gltlik ctkfkhk yi yn xymxl átfln, glxl ma
xám gnktkxyiqy haoytk mb kxkiqy uby xktgynk nk nnyvk w nk xytygy hy qlhk nk
rytxlmbtk rbxkik. kubí mlmdatk bi dkmqlt, knní my ubyok lqtl; kgbnná my
lwyi kxltlmkm gkigaliym, kgá hymymdytkhkm yihygrkm. gbán rkw uby dkmk qlhkm
nkm rltkm hy nk ilgry myiqkhl kn day hy kncbik yigaik l dyñkmgl, w knní,
mai dnyckt nlm nnltlmlm lolm, yxfyfygahl w qtkimdltqkhl yi mbm
dyimkxayiqlm, ny rknnó yn mln k nk xkñkik; w gbán rkw uby, mai hkt vkhl ia
qtycbk k mbm mbmdatlm, yi xaqkh hyn kthlt hy nk xám yipkhlmk maymqk hyn
vytkil, qyihahl mlfty nk kthayiqy ktyik, yivík mbm ubyokm kn dakhlml gaynl.
w hémqy w hy kubén, w hy kubénnlm w hy émqlm, nafty w hymyipkhkhkxyiqy
qtabipk nk rytxlmk xktgynk; w qlhlm nlm uby nk glilgyxlm ymqkxlm ymdytkihl
yi ubé rk hy dktkt mb knqavye w ubaéi rk hy myt yn hagrlml uby rk hy vyiat
k hlxyñkt glihagaói qki qyttafny w clekt hy rytxlmbtk qki ymqtyxkhk.» dlt
myt qlhl nl uby ry gliqkhl qki kvytacbkhk vythkh, xy hlw k yiqyihyt uby
qkxfaéi nl ym nk uby ibymqtl ekckn haol uby my hygík hy nk gkbmk hy nk
xbytqy hy ctamómqlxl. w kmí, lm kglimyol, myñlt, uby il hyoéam hy rknnktlm
xkñkik k mb yiqayttl, uby mytá xbw hy vyt, dltuby ctamómqlxl qayiy xbgrlm
kxaclm, w il ymqá hy ymqy nbckt k kubén hlihy xkihk yiqyttktmy xyhak nycbk.

-yi gbahkhl xy nl qyicl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w kctkhéegllm yn cbmql uby xy
rkféam hkhl gli nk ikttkgaói hy qki mkftlml gbyiql.

-¡lr! -tydnagó yn gkftytl-, kúi il mé wl nk xaqkh hy nlm gkmlm mbgyhahlm k
nlm kxkiqym hy xktgynk, xkm dlhtík myt uby xkñkik qldámyxlm yi yn gkxail
kncúi dkmqlt uby ilm nlm haoymy. w, dlt krltk, fayi mytá uby lm vkam k
hltxat hyfkol hy qygrkhl, dltuby yn mytyil lm dlhtík hkñkt nk rytahk,
dbymql uby ym qkn nk xyhagaik uby my lm rk dbymql, uby il rkw uby qyxyt hy
gliqtktal kgahyiqy.

mkigrl dkiek, uby wk hkfk kn hakfnl yn qkiql rkfnkt hyn gkftytl, mlnagaqó,
dlt mb dktqy, uby mb kxl my yiqtkmy k hltxat yi nk grlek hy dyhtl. ríelnl
kmí, w qlhl nl xám hy nk ilgry my ny dkmó yi xyxltakm hy mb myñltk
hbngaiyk, k axaqkgaói hy nlm kxkiqym hy xktgynk. mkigrl dkiek my kglxlhó
yiqty tlgaikiqy w mb obxyiql, w hbtxaó, il glxl yikxltkhl hympkvltygahl,
mail glxl rlxfty xlnahl k glgym.





gkdíqbnl zaaa. hlihy my hk pai kn gbyiql hy nk dkmqltk xktgynk, gli lqtlm
mbgymlm


xkm, kdyikm glxyieó k hymgbftatmy yn hík dlt nlm fkngliym hyn ltayiqy,
gbkihl nlm gaigl hy nlm myam gkftytlm my nyvkiqktli w pbytli k hymdytqkt k
hli ubaolqy, w k hyganny ma ymqkfk qlhkvík gli dtldómaql hy at k vyt yn
pkxlml yiqayttl hy ctamómqlxl, w uby ynnlm ny rktíki glxdkñík. hli ubaolqy,
uby lqtk glmk il hymykfk, my nyvkiqó w xkihó k mkigrl uby yimannkmy w
yiknfkthkmy kn xlxyiql, nl gbkn én rael gli xbgrk hanacyigak, w gli nk
xymxk my dbmaytli nbycl qlhlm yi gkxail. w il rbfaytli kihkhl bi gbktql hy
nycbk, gbkihl, kn gtbekt hy bik myihk, vaytli vyiat rkgak ynnlm rkmqk myam
dkmqltym, vymqahlm gli dynnaglm iyctlm w gltlikhkm nkm gkfyekm gli
cbatiknhkm hy gadtém w hy kxktck khynpk. qtkík gkhk bil bi ctbyml fkmqói hy
kgyfl yi nk xkil. vyiíki gli ynnlm, kmaxymxl, hlm cyiqanym rlxftym hy k
gkfknnl, xbw fayi khytyekhlm hy gkxail, gli lqtlm qtym xlelm hy k day uby
nlm kglxdkñkfki. yi nnycáihlmy k obiqkt, my mknbhktli gltqémxyiqy, w,
dtycbiqáihlmy nlm bilm k nlm lqtlm hóihy afki, mbdaytli uby qlhlm my
yigkxaikfki kn nbckt hyn yiqayttl; w kmí, glxyiektli k gkxaikt qlhlm
obiqlm.

bil hy nlm hy k gkfknnl, rkfnkihl gli mb glxdkñytl, ny haol:

-dktégyxy, myñlt vavknhl, uby rkfyxlm hy hkt dlt fayi yxdnykhk nk qkthkiek
uby ragaétyxlm yi vyt ymqy pkxlml yiqayttl, uby il dlhtá hyokt hy myt
pkxlml, mycúi ymqlm dkmqltym ilm rki gliqkhl ymqtkñyekm, kimí hyn xbytql
dkmqlt glxl hy nk dkmqltk rlxagahk.

-kmí xy nl dktygy k xí -tymdlihaó vavknhl-; w il hacl wl rkgyt qkthkiek hy
bi hík, dytl hy gbkqtl nk ragaytk k qtbygl hy vytny.

dtycbiqónym hli ubaolqy ubé ytk nl uby rkfíki líhl hy xktgynk w hy
ctamómqlxl. yn gkxaikiqy haol uby kubynnk xkhtbckhk rkfíki yigliqtkhl gli
kubynnlm dkmqltym, w uby, dlt rkfytnym vamql yi kubyn qki qtamqy qtkoy, nym
rkfíki dtycbiqkhl nk lgkmaói dlt uby afki hy kubynnk xkiytk; uby bil hynnlm
my nl gliqó, gliqkihl nk ymqtkñyek w rytxlmbtk hy bik dkmqltk nnkxkhk
xktgynk, w nlm kxltym hy xbgrlm uby nk tygbymqkfki, gli nk xbytqy hy kubyn
ctamómqlxl k gbwl yiqayttl afki. paiknxyiqy, én gliqó qlhl nl uby dyhtl k
hli ubaolqy rkfík gliqkhl.

gymó ymqk dnáqagk w glxyieómy lqtk, dtycbiqkihl yn uby my nnkxkfk vavknhl k
hli ubaolqy ubé ytk nk lgkmaói uby ny xlvík k kihkt ktxkhl hy kubynnk
xkiytk dlt qayttk qki dkgípagk. k nl gbkn tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-nk dtlpymaói hy xa yoytgagal il glimayiqy ia dytxaqy uby wl kihy hy lqtk
xkiytk. yn fbyi dkml, yn tycknl w yn tydlml, knná my aivyiqó dktk nlm
fnkihlm gltqymkilm; xkm yn qtkfkol, nk aiubayqbh w nkm ktxkm mónl my
aivyiqktli y ragaytli dktk kubynnlm uby yn xbihl nnkxk gkfknnytlm kihkiqym,
hy nlm gbknym wl, kbiuby aihacil, mlw yn xyilt hy qlhlm.

kdyikm ny lwytli ymql, gbkihl qlhlm ny qbvaytli dlt nlgl; w, dlt
kvytacbktnl xám w vyt ubé céiytl hy nlgbtk ytk yn mbwl, ny qltió k
dtycbiqkt vavknhl uby ubé ubytík hygat "gkfknnytlm kihkiqym".

-¿il rki vbymqtkm xytgyhym nyíhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- nlm kiknym y
ramqltakm hy aicknkqyttk, hlihy my qtkqki nkm pkxlmkm pkekñkm hyn tyw
ktqbtl, uby gliqaibkxyiqy yi ibymqtl tlxkigy gkmqynnkil nnkxkxlm yn tyw
ktqúm, hy ubayi ym qtkhagaói kiqacbk w glxúi yi qlhl kubyn tyail hy nk ctki
ftyqkñk uby ymqy tyw il xbtaó, mail uby, dlt ktqy hy yigkiqkxyiql, my
glivatqaó yi gbytvl, w uby, kihkihl nlm qayxdlm, rk hy vlnvyt k tyaikt w k
glftkt mb tyail w gyqtl; k gbwk gkbmk il my dtlfktá uby hymhy kubyn qayxdl
k émqy rkwk iaicúi aicném xbytql gbytvl kncbil? dbym yi qayxdl hy ymqy fbyi
tyw pby aimqaqbahk kubynnk pkxlmk lthyi hy gkfknnytík hy nlm gkfknnytlm hy
nk qkfnk tyhlihk, w dkmktli, mai pknqkt bi dbiql, nlm kxltym uby knní my
gbyiqki hy hli nkiektlqy hyn nkcl gli nk tyaik caiyftk, mayihl xyhakiytk
hynnlm w mkfahltk kubynnk qki rlitkhk hbyñk ubaiqkñlik, hy hlihy ikgaó
kubyn qki mkfahl tlxkigy, w qki hygkiqkhl yi ibymqtk ymdkñk, hy:

   ibigk pbytk gkfknnytl
   hy hkxkm qki fayi mytvahl
   glxl pbytk nkiektlqy
   gbkihl hy ftyqkñk vail;

gli kubyn dtlctyml qki hbngy w qki mbkvy hy mbm kxltlmlm w pbytqym pygrlm.
dbym hymhy yiqligym, hy xkil yi xkil, pby kubynnk lthyi hy gkfknnytík
ymqyihaéihlmy w hankqáihlmy dlt xbgrkm w havytmkm dktqym hyn xbihl; w yi
ynnk pbytli pkxlmlm w glilgahlm dlt mbm pygrlm yn vknayiqy kxkhím hy ckbnk,
gli qlhlm mbm raolm w iayqlm, rkmqk nk ubaiqk cyiytkgaói, w yn vknytlml
pynazxktqy hy ratgkiak, w yn ibigk glxl my hyfy knkfkhl qatkiqy yn fnkigl,
w gkma uby yi ibymqtlm híkm vaxlm w glxbiagkxlm w líxlm kn aivyigafny w
vknytlml gkfknnytl hli fynakiím hy ctygak. ymql, dbym, myñltym, ym myt
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, w nk uby ry hagrl ym nk lthyi hy mb gkfknnytík; yi nk
gbkn, glxl lqtk vye ry hagrl, wl, kbiuby dygkhlt, ry rygrl dtlpymaói, w nl
xymxl uby dtlpymktli nlm gkfknnytlm typytahlm dtlpyml wl. w kmí, xy vlw dlt
ymqkm mlnyhkhym w hymdlfnkhlm fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm, gli áiaxl hynafytkhl
hy lptygyt xa ftkel w xa dytmlik k nk xám dynactlmk uby nk mbytqy xy
hydktkty, yi kwbhk hy nlm pnkglm w xyiymqytlmlm.

dlt ymqkm tkeliym uby haol, kgkfktli hy yiqytktmy nlm gkxaikiqym uby ytk
hli ubaolqy pknql hy obagal, w hyn céiytl hy nlgbtk uby nl myñltykfk, hy nl
gbkn tygafaytli nk xymxk khxatkgaói uby tygafíki qlhlm kubynnlm uby hy
ibyvl vyiíki yi glilgaxayiql hynnk. w vavknhl, uby ytk dytmlik xbw hamgtyqk
w hy knycty glihagaói, dlt dkmkt mai dymkhbxfty yn dlgl gkxail uby hygíki
uby nym pknqkfk, kn nnyckt k nk mayttk hyn yiqayttl, ubaml hktny lgkmaói k
uby dkmkmy xám khynkiqy gli mbm hamdktkqym. w kmí, ny haol:

-dktégyxy, myñlt gkfknnytl kihkiqy, uby vbymqtk xytgyh rk dtlpymkhl bik hy
nkm xám ymqtygrkm dtlpymaliym uby rkw yi nk qayttk, w qyicl dktk xí uby kbi
nk hy nlm ptkanym gktqbolm il ym qki ymqtygrk.

-qki ymqtygrk fayi dlhík myt -tymdlihaó ibymqtl hli ubaolqy-, dytl qki
iygymktak yi yn xbihl il ymqlw yi hlm hyhlm hy dliynnl yi hbhk. dltuby, ma
vk k hygat vythkh, il rkgy xyilm yn mlnhkhl uby dliy yi yoygbgaói nl uby mb
gkdaqái ny xkihk uby yn xymxl gkdaqái uby my nl lthyik. ubaytl hygat uby
nlm tynacalmlm, gli qlhk dke w mlmaycl, dahyi kn gaynl yn fayi hy nk
qayttk; dytl nlm mlnhkhlm w gkfknnytlm dliyxlm yi yoygbgaói nl uby ynnlm
dahyi, hypyihaéihlnk gli yn vknlt hy ibymqtlm ftkelm w panlm hy ibymqtkm
ymdkhkm; il hyfkol hy gbfaytqk, mail kn gaynl kfaytql, dbymqlm dlt fnkigl
hy nlm aimbptafnym tkwlm hyn mln yi vytkil w hy nlm ytaekhlm wynlm hyn
aivaytil. kmí uby, mlxlm xaiamqtlm hy halm yi nk qayttk, w ftkelm dlt ubayi
my yoygbqk yi ynnk mb obmqagak. w, glxl nkm glmkm hy nk cbyttk w nkm k
ynnkm qlgkiqym w gligytiayiqym il my dbyhyi dliyt yi yoygbgaói mail
mbhkihl, kpkikihl w qtkfkokihl, mícbymy uby kubynnlm uby nk dtlpymki
qayiyi, mai hbhk, xkwlt qtkfkol uby kubynnlm uby yi mlmyckhk dke w tydlml
ymqái tlckihl k halm pkvltyegk k nlm uby dlgl dbyhyi. il ubaytl wl hygat,
ia xy dkmk dlt dyimkxayiql, uby ym qki fbyi ymqkhl yn hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy
glxl yn hyn yigyttkhl tynacalml; mónl ubaytl aipytat, dlt nl uby wl
dkhyegl, uby, mai hbhk, ym xám qtkfkolml w xám kdlttykhl, w xám rkxftayiql
w myhayiql, xamytkfny, tlql w dalolml; dltuby il rkw hbhk mail uby nlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym dkmkhlm dkmktli xbgrk xknkvyiqbtk yi yn hamgbtml hy mb
vahk. w ma kncbilm mbfaytli k myt yxdytkhltym dlt yn vknlt hy mb ftkel, k
py uby nym glmqó fbyi dltubé hy mb mkicty w hy mb mbhlt; w uby ma k nlm uby
k qkn ctkhl mbfaytli nym pknqktki yigkiqkhltym w mkfalm uby nlm kwbhktki,
uby ynnlm ubyhktki fayi hyptkbhkhlm hy mbm hymylm w fayi yickñkhlm hy mbm
ymdytkiekm.

-hy ymy dktygyt ymqlw wl -tydnagó yn gkxaikiqy-; dytl bik glmk, yiqty lqtkm
xbgrkm, xy dktygy xbw xkn hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, w ym uby, gbkihl my
vyi yi lgkmaói hy kglxyqyt bik ctkihy w dynactlmk kvyiqbtk, yi uby my vyy
xkiapaymql dynactl hy dythyt nk vahk, ibigk yi kubyn aimqkiqy hy kglxyqynnk
my kgbythki hy yiglxyihktmy k halm, glxl gkhk gtamqakil ymqá lfnackhl k
rkgyt yi dynactlm myxyokiqym; kiqym, my yiglxayihki k mbm hkxkm, gli qkiqk
ckik w hyvlgaói glxl ma ynnkm pbytki mb halm: glmk uby xy dktygy uby rbyny
kncl k cyiqanahkh.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, yml il dbyhy myt xyilm yi iaicbik xkiytk, w
gkytík yi xkn gkml yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy uby lqtk glmk ragaymy; uby wk ymqá
yi bml w glmqbxfty yi nk gkfknnytík kihkiqymgk uby yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy
uby, kn kglxyqyt kncúi ctki pygrl hy ktxkm, qbvaymy mb myñltk
hynkiqy,vbynvk k ynnk nlm lolm fnkihk w kxltlmkxyiqy, glxl uby ny dahy gli
ynnlm ny pkvltyegk w kxdkty yi yn hbhlml qtkigy uby kglxyqy; w kbi ma ikhay
ny lwy, ymqá lfnackhl k hygat kncbikm dknkftkm yiqty hayiqym, yi uby hy
qlhl gltkeói my ny yiglxayihy; w hymql qyiyxlm aiibxytkfnym yoyxdnlm yi nkm
ramqltakm. w il my rk hy yiqyihyt dlt ymql uby rki hy hyokt hy yiglxyihktmy
k halm; uby qayxdl w nbckt nym ubyhk dktk rkgytnl yi yn hamgbtml hy nk
lftk.

-gli qlhl yml -tydnagó yn gkxaikiqy-, xy ubyhk bi ymgtúdbnl, w ym uby
xbgrkm vygym ry nyíhl uby my qtkfki dknkftkm yiqty hlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm,
w, hy bik yi lqtk, my nym vayiy k yigyihyt nk gónytk, w k vlnvyt nlm
gkfknnlm w qlxkt bik fbyik dayek hyn gkxdl, w nbycl, mai xám ia xám, k qlhl
yn glttyt hynnlm, my vbynvyi k yigliqtkt; w, yi xaqkh hy nk glttahk, my
yiglxayihki k mbm hkxkm; w nl uby mbyny mbgyhyt hyn yigbyiqtl ym uby yn bil
gky dlt nkm kigkm hyn gkfknnl, dkmkhl gli nk nkiek hyn gliqtktal hy dktqy k
dktqy, w kn lqtl ny vayiy qkxfaéi uby, k il qyiytmy k nkm gtaiym hyn mbwl,
il dbhaytk hyokt hy vyiat kn mbynl. w il mé wl góxl yn xbytql qbvl nbckt
dktk yiglxyihktmy k halm yi yn hamgbtml hy ymqk qki kgynytkhk lftk. xyolt
pbytk uby nkm dknkftkm uby yi nk gkttytk ckmqó yiglxyiháihlmy k mb hkxk nkm
ckmqktk yi nl uby hyfík w ymqkfk lfnackhl glxl gtamqakil. gbkiql xám, uby
wl qyicl dktk xí uby il qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym qayiyi hkxkm k ubayi
yiglxyihktmy, dltuby il qlhlm mli yikxltkhlm.

-yml il dbyhy myt -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: hacl uby il dbyhy myt uby rkwk
gkfknnytl kihkiqy mai hkxk, dltuby qki dtldtal w qki ikqbtkn nym ym k nlm
qknym myt yikxltkhlm glxl kn gaynl qyiyt ymqtynnkm, w k fbyi mycbtl uby il
my rkwk vamql ramqltak hlihy my rknny gkfknnytl kihkiqy mai kxltym; w dlt
yn xymxl gkml uby ymqbvaymy mai ynnlm, il mytík qyiahl dlt nycíqaxl
gkfknnytl, mail dlt fkmqkthl, w uby yiqtó yi nk pltqknyek hy nk gkfknnytík
hagrk, il dlt nk dbytqk, mail dlt nkm fkthkm, glxl mknqykhlt w nkhtói.

-gli qlhl yml -haol yn gkxaikiqy-, xy dktygy, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, rkfyt
nyíhl uby hli cknklt, rytxkil hyn vknytlml kxkhím hy ckbnk, ibigk qbvl hkxk
myñknkhk k ubayi dbhaymy yiglxyihktmy; w, gli qlhl ymql, il pby qyiahl yi
xyilm, w pby bi xbw vknayiqy w pkxlml gkfknnytl.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó ibymqtl hli ubaolqy:

-myñlt, bik clnlihtaik mlnk il rkgy vytkil. gbkiql xám, uby wl mé uby hy
mygtyql ymqkfk ymy gkfknnytl xbw fayi yikxltkhl; pbytk uby, kubynnl hy
ubytyt k qlhkm fayi gbkiqkm fayi ny dktygíki ytk glihagaói ikqbtkn, k ubayi
il dlhík at k nk xkil. dytl, yi tymlnbgaói, kvytacbkhl ymqá xbw fayi uby én
qyiík bik mlnk k ubayi én rkfík rygrl myñltk hy mb vlnbiqkh, k nk gbkn my
yiglxyihkfk xbw k xyibhl w xbw mygtyqkxyiqy, dltuby my dtygaó hy mygtyql
gkfknnytl.

-nbycl, ma ym hy ymyigak uby qlhl gkfknnytl kihkiqy rkwk hy myt yikxltkhl
-haol yn gkxaikiqy-, fayi my dbyhy gtyyt uby vbymqtk xytgyh nl ym, dbym ym
hy nk dtlpymaói. w ma ym uby vbymqtk xytgyh il my dtygak hy myt qki mygtyql
glxl hli cknklt, gli nkm vytkm uby dbyhl ny mbdnagl, yi ilxfty hy qlhk ymqk
glxdkñík w yi yn xíl, ilm hack yn ilxfty, dkqtak, gknahkh w rytxlmbtk hy mb
hkxk; uby ynnk my qyihtík dlt hagrlmk hy uby qlhl yn xbihl mydk uby ym
ubytahk w mytvahk hy bi qkn gkfknnytl glxl vbymqtk xytgyh dktygy.

kubí hal bi ctki mbmdatl hli ubaolqy, w haol:

-wl il dlhté kpatxkt ma nk hbngy xa yiyxack cbmqk, l il, hy uby yn xbihl
mydk uby wl nk matvl; mónl mé hygat, tymdlihayihl k nl uby gli qkiql
glxyhaxayiql my xy dahy, uby mb ilxfty ym hbngaiyk; mb dkqtak, yn qlflml,
bi nbckt hy nk xkigrk; mb gknahkh, dlt nl xyilm, rk hy myt hy dtaigymk,
dbym ym tyaik w myñltk xík; mb rytxlmbtk, mlftyrbxkik, dbym yi ynnk my
vayiyi k rkgyt vythkhytlm qlhlm nlm axdlmafnym w ubaxétaglm kqtafbqlm hy
fynnyek uby nlm dlyqkm hki k mbm hkxkm: uby mbm gkfynnlm mli ltl, mb ptyiqy
gkxdlm ynímylm, mbm gyokm ktglm hyn gaynl, mbm lolm mlnym, mbm xyoannkm
tlmkm, mbm nkfalm gltknym, dytnkm mbm hayiqym, knkfkmqtl mb gbynnl, xátxln
mb dygrl, xktpan mbm xkilm, mb fnkigbtk iayvy, w nkm dktqym uby k nk vamqk
rbxkik yigbftaó nk rliymqahkh mli qknym, mycúi wl dayiml w yiqayihl, uby
mónl nk hamgtyqk glimahytkgaói dbyhy yigktygytnkm, w il glxdktktnkm.

-yn naikoy, dtlmkdak w kngbtiak ubyttíkxlm mkfyt -tydnagó vavknhl.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-il ym hy nlm kiqacblm gbtgalm, ckwlm w gadaliym tlxkilm, ia hy nlm
xlhytilm glnlikm w btmailm; ia hy nlm xligkhkm w tyubymyiym hy gkqknbñk, ia
xyilm hy nlm tyfynnkm w vannkilvkm hy vknyigak; dknkplzym, ibekm,
tlgkfytqam, gltynnkm, nbikm, knkcliym, bttykm, plgym w cbttykm hy ktkcói;
gythkm, xkitaubym, xyihlekm w cbexkiym hy gkmqannk; knyigkmqtlm, dknnkm w
xyiymym hy dltqlckn; dytl ym hy nlm hyn qlflml hy nk xkigrk, naikoy, kbiuby
xlhytil, qkn, uby dbyhy hkt cyiytlml dtaigadal k nkm xám anbmqtym pkxanakm
hy nlm vyiahytlm macnlm. w il my xy tydnauby yi ymql, ma il pbyty gli nkm
glihagaliym uby dbml gytvail kn day hyn qtlpyl hy nkm ktxkm hy ltnkihl, uby
hygík:

   ikhay nkm xbyvk
   uby ymqkt il dbyhk gli tlnhái k dtbyfk.

-kbiuby yn xíl ym hy nlm gkgrldaiym hy nktyhl -tymdlihaó yn gkxaikiqy-, il
ny lmkté wl dliyt gli yn hyn qlflml hy nk xkigrk, dbymql uby, dktk hygat
vythkh, myxyokiqy kdynnahl rkmqk krltk il rk nnyckhl k xam líhlm.

-¡glxl yml il rkftá nnyckhl! -tydnagó hli ubaolqy.

gli ctki kqyigaói afki ymgbgrkihl qlhlm nlm hyxám nk dnáqagk hy nlm hlm, w
kbi rkmqk nlm xymxlm gkftytlm w dkmqltym glilgaytli nk hyxkmakhk pknqk hy
obagal hy ibymqtl hli ubaolqy. mónl mkigrl dkiek dyimkfk uby gbkiql mb kxl
hygík ytk vythkh, mkfayihl én ubaéi ytk w rkfaéihlny glilgahl hymhy mb
ikgaxayiql; w yi nl uby hbhkfk kncl ytk yi gtyyt kubynnl hy nk naihk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, dltuby ibigk qkn ilxfty ia qkn dtaigymk rkfík nnyckhl
okxám k mb ilqagak, kbiuby vavík qki gytgk hyn qlflml.

yi ymqkm dnáqagkm afki, gbkihl vaytli uby, dlt nk ubayftk uby hlm knqkm
xliqkñkm rkgíki, fkokfki rkmqk vyaiqy dkmqltym, qlhlm gli dynnaglm hy iyctk
nkik vymqahlm w gltlikhlm gli cbatiknhkm, uby, k nl uby hymdbém dktygaó,
ytki gbán hy qyol w gbán hy gadtém. yiqty myam hynnlm qtkíki bikm kihkm,
gbfaytqkm hy xbgrk havytmahkh hy pnltym w hy tkxlm. nl gbkn vamql dlt bil
hy nlm gkftytlm, haol:

-kubynnlm uby knní vayiyi mli nlm uby qtkyi yn gbytdl hy ctamómqlxl, w yn
day hy kubynnk xliqkñk ym yn nbckt hlihy én xkihó uby ny yiqyttkmyi.
dlt ymql my haytli dtaymk k nnyckt, w pby k qayxdl uby wk nlm uby vyiíki
rkfíki dbymql nkm kihkm yi yn mbynl; w gbkqtl hynnlm gli kcbhlm daglm
ymqkfki gkvkihl nk mydbnqbtk k bi nkhl hy bik hbtk dyñk.

tygafaétlimy nlm bilm w nlm lqtlm gltqémxyiqy; w nbycl hli ubaolqy w nlm
uby gli én vyiíki my dbmaytli k xatkt nkm kihkm, w yi ynnkm vaytli gbfaytql
hy pnltym bi gbytdl xbytql, vymqahl glxl dkmqlt, hy yhkh, kn dktygyt, hy
qtyaiqk kñlm; w, kbiuby xbytql, xlmqtkfk uby vavl rkfík mahl hy tlmqtl
rytxlml w hy hamdlmagaói cknnkthk. kntyhyhlt hén qyiík yi nkm xymxkm
kihkm kncbilm naftlm w xbgrlm dkdynym, kfaytqlm w gyttkhlm. w kmí nlm uby
ymql xatkfki, glxl nlm uby kftíki nk mydbnqbtk, w qlhlm nlm hyxám uby knní
rkfík, cbkthkfki bi xktkvannlml manyigal, rkmqk uby bil hy nlm uby kn
xbytql qtboytli haol k lqtl:

-xatá fayi, kxftlmal, ma ym émqy yn nbckt uby ctamómqlxl haol, wk uby
ubytéam uby qki dbiqbknxyiqy my gbxdnk nl uby hyoó xkihkhl yi mb
qymqkxyiql.

-Émqy ym -tymdlihaó kxftlmal-; uby xbgrkm vygym yi én xy gliqó xa
hymhagrkhl kxacl nk ramqltak hy mb hymvyiqbtk. knní xy haol én uby val nk
vye dtaxytk k kubynnk yiyxack xltqkn hyn naikoy rbxkil, w knní pby qkxfaéi
hlihy nk dtaxytk vye ny hygnktó mb dyimkxayiql, qki rliymql glxl yikxltkhl,
w knní pby nk únqaxk vye hlihy xktgynk ny kgkfó hy hymyickñkt w hymhyñkt,
hy mbytqy uby dbml pai k nk qtkcyhak hy mb xamytkfny vahk. w kubí, yi
xyxltak hy qkiqkm hymhagrkm, ubaml én uby ny hydlmaqkmyi yi nkm yiqtkñkm
hyn yqytil lnvahl.

w, vlnvaéihlmy k hli ubaolqy w k nlm gkxaikiqym, dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-ymy gbytdl, myñltym, uby gli dakhlmlm lolm ymqáam xatkihl, pby hydlmaqktal
hy bi knxk yi ubayi yn gaynl dbml aipaiaqk dktqy hy mbm taubyekm. Émy ym yn
gbytdl hy ctamómqlxl, uby pby úiagl yi yn aicyial, mlnl yi nk gltqymík,
ymqtyxl yi nk cyiqanyek, péiaz yi nk kxamqkh, xkciípagl mai qkmk, ctkvy mai
dtymbigaói, knycty mai fkoyek, w, paiknxyiqy, dtaxytl yi qlhl nl uby ym myt
fbyil, w mai mycbihl yi qlhl nl uby pby myt hymhagrkhl. ubaml fayi, pby
kflttygahl; khltó, pby hymhyñkhl; tlcó k bik paytk, axdltqbió k bi xátxln,
glttaó qtkm yn vayiql, hal vlgym k nk mlnyhkh, matvaó k nk aictkqaqbh, hy
ubayi kngkieó dlt dtyxal myt hymdlolm hy nk xbytqy yi nk xaqkh hy nk
gkttytk hy mb vahk, k nk gbkn hal pai bik dkmqltk k ubayi én dtlgbtkfk
yqytiaekt dktk uby vavaytk yi nk xyxltak hy nkm cyiqym, gbkn nl dbhaytki
xlmqtkt fayi ymlm dkdynym uby ymqáam xatkihl, ma én il xy rbfaytk xkihkhl
uby nlm yiqtycktk kn pbycl yi rkfayihl yiqtyckhl mb gbytdl k nk qayttk.
-hy xkwlt taclt w gtbynhkh bmktéam vlm gli ynnlm -haol vavknhl- uby mb
xymxl hbyñl, dbym il ym obmql ia kgytqkhl uby my gbxdnk nk vlnbiqkh hy
ubayi nl uby lthyik vk pbytk hy qlhl tkelikfny hamgbtml. w il ny qbvaytk
fbyil kbcbmql gémkt ma glimaiqaytk uby my dbmaytk yi yoygbgaói nl uby yn
havail xkiqbkil hyoó yi mb qymqkxyiql xkihkhl. kimí uby, myñlt kxftlmal, wk
uby hyam yn gbytdl hy vbymqtl kxacl k nk qayttk, il ubytáam hkt mbm
ymgtaqlm kn lnvahl; uby ma én lthyió glxl kctkvakhl, il ym fayi uby vlm
gbxdnáam glxl aihamgtyql. kiqym rkgyh, hkihl nk vahk k ymqlm dkdynym, uby
nk qyick mayxdty nk gtbynhkh hy xktgynk, dktk uby matvk hy yoyxdnl, yi nlm
qayxdlm uby ymqái dlt vyiat, k nlm vavayiqym, dktk uby my kdktqyi w rbwki
hy gkyt yi myxyokiqym hymdyñkhytlm; uby wk mé wl, w nlm uby kubí vyiaxlm,
nk ramqltak hymqy vbymqtl yikxltkhl w hymymdytkhl kxacl, w mkfyxlm nk
kxamqkh vbymqtk, w nk lgkmaói hy mb xbytqy, w nl uby hyoó xkihkhl kn kgkfkt
hy nk vahk; hy nk gbkn nkxyiqkfny ramqltak my dbyhy mkgkt gbáiql rkwk mahl
nk gtbynhkh hy xktgynk, yn kxlt hy ctamómqlxl, nk py hy nk kxamqkh vbymqtk,
gli yn dktkhytl uby qayiyi nlm uby k tayihk mbynqk glttyi dlt nk myihk uby
yn hymvktakhl kxlt hynkiqy hy nlm lolm nym dliy. kilgry mbdaxlm nk xbytqy
hy ctamómqlxl, w uby yi ymqy nbckt rkfík hy myt yiqyttkhl; w kmí, hy
gbtalmahkh w hy námqaxk, hyokxlm ibymqtl hytygrl vakoy, w kglthkxlm hy
vyiat k vyt gli nlm lolm nl uby qkiql ilm rkfík nkmqaxkhl yi línnl. w, yi
dkcl hymqk námqaxk w hyn hymyl uby yi ilmlqtlm ikgaó hy tyxyhaknnk ma
dbhaétkxlm, qy tlckxlm, ¡lr hamgtyql kxftlmal! (k nl xyilm, wl qy nl
mbdnagl hy xa dktqy), uby, hyokihl hy kftkmkt ymqlm dkdynym, xy hyoym
nnyvkt kncbilm hynnlm.

w, mai kcbkthkt uby yn dkmqlt tymdlihaymy, knktcó nk xkil w qlxó kncbilm hy
nlm uby xám gytgk ymqkfki; vayihl nl gbkn kxftlmal, haol:

-dlt gltqymík glimyiqaté uby lm ubyhéam, myñlt, gli nlm uby wk rkféam
qlxkhl; dytl dyimkt uby hyokté hy kftkmkt nlm uby ubyhki ym dyimkxayiql
vkil.

vavknhl, uby hymykfk vyt nl uby nlm dkdynym hygíki, kftaó nbycl yn bil
hynnlm w val uby qyiík dlt qíqbnl: gkigaói hymymdytkhk. lwónl kxftlmal w
haol:

-Émy ym yn únqaxl dkdyn uby ymgtafaó yn hymhagrkhl; w, dltuby vyáam, myñlt,
yi yn qétxail uby ny qyiíki mbm hymvyiqbtkm, nyynhy hy xlhl uby myáam líhl;
uby fayi lm hktá nbckt k ynnl yn uby my qkthkty yi kftat nk mydbnqbtk.

-yml rkté wl hy xbw fbyik ckik -haol vavknhl.

w, glxl qlhlm nlm gatgbimqkiqym qyiíki yn xymxl hymyl, my ny dbmaytli k nk
tyhlihk; w én, nywyihl yi vle gnktk, val uby kmí hygík:





gkdíqbnl zav. hlihy my dliyi nlm vytmlm hymymdytkhlm hyn hapbiql dkmqlt,
gli lqtlm il ymdytkhlm mbgymlm


gkigaói hy ctamómqlxl

   wk uby ubaytym, gtbyn, uby my dbfnauby,
   hy nyicbk yi nyicbk w hy bik yi lqtk cyiqy,
   hyn ámdytl taclt qbwl nk pbytek,
   rkté uby yn xymxl aipaytil glxbiauby
   kn qtamqy dygrl xíl bi mli hlnayiqy,
   gli uby yn bml glxúi hy xa vle qbytek.
   w kn dkt hy xa hymyl, uby my ympbytek
   k hygat xa hlnlt w qbm rkekñkm,
   hy nk ymdkiqkfny vle atá yn kgyiql,
   w yi én xyegnkhkm, dlt xkwlt qltxyiql,
   dyhkelm hy nkm xímytkm yiqtkñkm.
   ymgbgrk, dbym, w dtymqk kqyiql líhl,
   il kn gligytqkhl mli, mail kn tüahl
   uby hy nl rlihl hy xa kxktcl dygrl,
   nnyvkhl hy bi pltelml hymvktíl,
   dlt cbmql xíl mkny w qb hymdygrl.

   yn tbcat hyn nyói, hyn nlfl paytl
   yn qyxytlml kbnnahl, yn manfl rlttyihl
   hy ymgkxlmk mytdayiqy, yn ymdkiqkfny
   fknkhtl hy kncúi xlimqtbl, yn kcltytl
   ctkeikt hy nk gltiyok, w yn ymqtbyihl
   hyn vayiql gliqtkmqkhl yi xkt aimqkfny;
   hyn wk vyigahl qltl yn axdnkgkfny
   ftkxahl, w hy nk vabhk qltqlnannk
   yn myiqafny kttbnnkt; yn qtamqy gkiql
   hyn yivahakhl fúrl, gli yn nnkiql
   hy qlhk nk aipytikn iyctk gbkhtannk,
   mkncki gli nk hlnayiqy áiaxk pbytk,
   xyegnkhlm yi bi mli, hy qkn xkiytk
   uby my glipbihki nlm myiqahlm qlhlm,
   dbym nk dyik gtbyn uby yi xí my rknnk
   dktk gliqknnk dahy ibyvlm xlhlm.

   hy qkiqk glipbmaói il nkm ktyikm
   hyn dkhty qkol latái nlm qtamqym yglm,
   ia hyn pkxlml fyqam nkm lnavkm:
   uby knní my ymdktgatái xam hbtkm dyikm
   yi knqlm tamglm w yi dtlpbihlm rbyglm,
   gli xbytqk nyicbk w gli dknkftkm vavkm;
   l wk yi ymgbtlm vknnym, l yi ymubavkm
   dnkwkm, hymibhkm hy gliqtkql rbxkil,
   l khlihy yn mln okxám xlmqtó mb nbxfty,
   l yiqty nk vyiyilmk xbgryhbxfty
   hy paytkm uby knaxyiqk yn nafal nnkil;
   uby, dbymql uby yi nlm dátkxlm hymaytqlm
   nlm yglm tliglm hy xa xkn, aigaytqlm,
   mbyiyi gli qb taclt qki mai mycbihl,
   dlt dtavanycal hy xam gltqlm rkhlm,
   mytái nnyvkhlm dlt yn kigrl xbihl.

   xkqk bi hymhéi, kqayttk nk dkgayigak,
   l vythkhytk l pknmk, bik mlmdygrk;
   xkqki nlm gynlm gli taclt xám pbytqy;
   hymgligaytqk nk vahk nktck kbmyigak;
   gliqtk bi qyxlt hy lnvahl il kdtlvygrk
   patxy ymdytkiek hy hagrlmk mbytqy.
   yi qlhl rkw gaytqk, aiyvaqkfny xbytqy;
   xkm wl, ¡xankctl ibigk vamql!, vavl
   gynlml, kbmyiqy, hymhyñkhl w gaytql
   hy nkm mlmdygrkm uby xy qayiyi xbytql;
   w yi yn lnvahl yi ubayi xa pbycl kvavl,
   w, yiqty qkiqlm qltxyiqlm, ibigk kngkiek
   xa vamqk k vyt yi mlxftk k nk ymdytkiek,
   ia wl, hymymdytkhl, nk dtlgbtl;
   kiqym, dlt ymqtyxktxy yi xa ubytynnk,
   ymqkt mai ynnk yqytikxyiqy obtl.

   ¿dbéhymy, dlt vyiqbtk, yi bi aimqkiqy
   ymdytkt w qyxyt, l ym fayi rkgynnl,
   mayihl nkm gkbmkm hyn qyxlt xám gaytqkm?
   ¿qyicl, ma yn hbtl gynl ymqá hynkiqy,
   hy gyttkt ymqlm lolm, ma ry hy vynnl
   dlt xan rytahkm yi yn knxk kfaytqkm?
   ¿ubaéi il kftatá hy dkt yi dkt nkm dbytqkm
   k nk hymglipakiek, gbkihl xatk
   hymgbfaytql yn hymhéi, w nkm mlmdygrkm,
   ¡lr kxktck glivytmaói!, vythkhym rygrkm,
   w nk naxdak vythkh vbynqk yi xyiqatk?
   ¡lr, yi yn tyail hy kxlt paytlm qatkilm
   gynlm, dliyhxy bi rayttl yi ymqkm xkilm!
   hkxy, hymhéi, bik qltgahk mlck.
   xkm, ¡kw hy xí!, uby, gli gtbyn vaqltak,
   vbymqtk xyxltak yn mbptaxayiql krlck.

   wl xbytl, yi pai; w, dltuby ibigk ymdyty
   fbyi mbgyml yi nk xbytqy ia yi nk vahk,
   dytqaike ymqkté yi xa pkiqkmík.
   haté uby vk kgytqkhl yn uby fayi ubayty,
   w uby ym xám nafty yn knxk xám tyihahk
   k nk hy kxlt kiqacbk qatkiík.
   haté uby nk yiyxack mayxdty xík
   rytxlmk yn knxk glxl yn gbytdl qayiy,
   w uby mb lnvahl hy xa gbndk ikgy,
   w uby, yi py hy nlm xknym uby ilm rkgy,
   kxlt mb axdytal yi obmqk dke xkiqayiy.
   w, gli ymqk ldaiaói w bi hbtl nkel,
   kgynytkihl yn xamytkfny dnkel
   k uby xy rki glihbgahl mbm hymhyiym,
   lptygyté k nlm vayiqlm gbytdl w knxk,
   mai nkbtl l dknxk hy pbqbtlm fayiym.

   qú, uby gli qkiqkm maitkeliym xbymqtkm
   nk tkeói uby xy pbytek k uby nk rkck
   k nk gkimkhk vahk uby kflttyegl,
   dbym wk vym uby qy hk ilqltakm xbymqtkm
   ymqk hyn gltkeói dtlpbihk nnkck,
   hy góxl, knycty, k qb taclt xy lptyegl,
   ma, dlt hagrk, glilgym uby xytyegl
   uby yn gaynl gnktl hy qbm fynnlm lolm
   yi xa xbytqy my qbtfy, il nl rkckm;
   uby il ubaytl uby yi ikhk mkqampkckm,
   kn hktqy hy xa knxk nlm hymdlolm.
   kiqym, gli tamk yi nk lgkmaói pbiymqk,
   hymgbfty uby yn pai xíl pby qb paymqk;
   xkm ctki maxdnyek ym kvamktqy hymql,
   dbym mé uby ymqá qb cnltak glilgahk
   yi uby xa vahk nnycby kn pai qki dtymql.

   vyick, uby ym qayxdl wk, hyn rlihl kfamxl
   qáiqknl gli mb myh; mímapl vyick
   gli yn dyml qyttafny hy mb gkiql;
   qagal qtkwk mb fbaqty, w kimaxamxl
   gli mb tbyhk ycïói il my hyqyick,
   ia nkm rytxkikm uby qtkfkoki qkiql;
   w qlhlm obiqlm mb xltqkn ubyftkiql
   qtkmnkhyi yi xa dygrl, w yi vle fkok
   -ma wk k bi hymymdytkhl mli hyfahkm-
   gkiqyi lfmyubakm qtamqym, hlnltahkm,
   kn gbytdl k ubayi my iaycby kbi nk xltqkok.
   w yn dltqytl aipytikn hy nlm qtym tlmqtlm,
   gli lqtkm xan ubaxytkm w xan xlimqtlm,
   nnyvyi yn hlnltlml gliqtkdbiql;
   uby lqtk dlxdk xyolt il xy dktygy
   uby nk xytygy bi kxkhlt hapbiql.

   gkigaói hymymdytkhk, il qy ubyoym
   gbkihl xa qtamqy glxdkñík hyoym;
   kiqym, dbym uby nk gkbmk hl ikgamqy
   gli xa hymhagrk kbcxyiqk mb vyiqbtk,
   kbi yi nk mydbnqbtk il ymqém qtamqy.

fayi nym dktygaó, k nlm uby ymgbgrkhl rkfíki, nk gkigaói hy ctamómqlxl,
dbymql uby yn uby nk nywó haol uby il ny dktygík uby glipltxkfk gli nk
tynkgaói uby én rkfík líhl hyn tygkql w flihkh hy xktgynk, dltuby yi ynnk
my ubyokfk ctamómqlxl hy gynlm, mlmdygrkm w hy kbmyigak, qlhl yi dytobagal
hyn fbyi gtéhaql w fbyik pkxk hy xktgynk. k nl gbkn tymdlihaó kxftlmal,
glxl kubyn uby mkfík fayi nlm xám ymglihahlm dyimkxayiqlm hy mb kxacl:
-dktk uby, myñlt, lm mkqampkcáam hymk hbhk, ym fayi uby mydáam uby gbkihl
ymqy hymhagrkhl ymgtafaó ymqk gkigaói ymqkfk kbmyiqy hy xktgynk, hy ubayi
én my rkfík kbmyiqkhl dlt mb vlnbiqkh, dlt vyt ma bmkfk gli én nk kbmyigak
hy mbm lthaiktalm pbytlm. w, glxl kn yikxltkhl kbmyiqy il rkw glmk uby il
ny pkqacby ia qyxlt uby il ny hé kngkigy, kmí ny pkqackfki k ctamómqlxl nlm
gynlm axkcaikhlm w nkm mlmdygrkm qyxahkm glxl ma pbytki vythkhytkm. w gli
ymql ubyhk yi mb dbiql nk vythkh uby nk pkxk dtyclik hy nk flihkh hy
xktgynk; nk gbkn, pbytk hy myt gtbyn, w bi dlgl kttlckiqy w bi xbgrl
hymhyñlmk, nk xymxk yivahak ia hyfy ia dbyhy dliytny pknqk kncbik.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó vavknhl.

w, ubytayihl nyyt lqtl dkdyn hy nlm uby rkfík tymytvkhl hyn pbycl, nl
ymqltfó bik xktkvannlmk vamaói -uby qkn dktygík ynnk- uby axdtlvamkxyiqy my
nym lptygaó k nlm lolm; w pby uby, dlt gaxk hy nk dyñk hlihy my gkvkfk nk
mydbnqbtk, dktygaó nk dkmqltk xktgynk, qki rytxlmk uby dkmkfk k mb pkxk mb
rytxlmbtk. nlm uby rkmqk yiqligym il nk rkfíki vamql nk xatkfki gli
khxatkgaói w manyigal, w nlm uby wk ymqkfki kglmqbxftkhlm k vytnk il
ubyhktli xyilm mbmdyimlm uby nlm uby ibigk nk rkfíki vamql. xkm, kdyikm nk
rbfl vamql kxftlmal, gbkihl, gli xbymqtkm hy áiaxl aihacikhl, ny haol:

-¿vayiym k vyt, dlt vyiqbtk, ¡lr paytl fkmanamgl hymqkm xliqkñkm!, ma gli
qb dtymyigak vaytqyi mkicty nkm rytahkm hymqy xamytkfny k ubayi qb gtbynhkh
ubaqó nk vahk? ¿l vayiym k bpkiktqy yi nkm gtbynym rkekñkm hy qb glihagaói,
l k vyt hymhy ymk knqbtk, glxl lqtl hymdakhkhl iytl, yn aigyihal hy mb
kftkmkhk tlxk, l k damkt, kttlckiqy, ymqy hymhagrkhl gkhávyt, glxl nk
aictkqk raok kn hy mb dkhty qktubail? hailm dtymql k nl uby vayiym, l ubé
ym kubynnl hy uby xám cbmqkm; uby, dlt mkfyt wl uby nlm dyimkxayiqlm hy
ctamómqlxl okxám hyoktli hy lfyhygytqy yi vahk, rkté uby, kbi én xbytql, qy
lfyhyegki nlm hy qlhlm kubynnlm uby my nnkxktli mbm kxaclm.

-il vyicl, ¡lr kxftlmal!, k iaicbik glmk hy nkm uby rkm hagrl -tymdlihaó
xktgynk-, mail k vlnvyt dlt xí xamxk, w k hkt k yiqyihyt gbái pbytk hy
tkeói vki qlhlm kubynnlm uby hy mbm dyikm w hy nk xbytqy hy ctamómqlxl xy
gbndki; w kmí, tbycl k qlhlm nlm uby kubí ymqáam xy ymqéam kqyiqlm, uby il
mytá xyiymqyt xbgrl qayxdl ia ckmqkt xbgrkm dknkftkm dktk dytmbkhat bik
vythkh k nlm hamgtyqlm.

»ríelxy yn gaynl, mycúi vlmlqtlm hygím, rytxlmk, w hy qkn xkiytk uby, mai
myt dlhytlmlm k lqtk glmk, k uby xy kxéam lm xbyvy xa rytxlmbtk; w, dlt yn
kxlt uby xy xlmqtáam, hygím, w kbi ubytéam, uby ymqé wl lfnackhk k kxktlm.
wl glilegl, gli yn ikqbtkn yiqyihaxayiql uby halm xy rk hkhl, uby qlhl nl
rytxlml ym kxkfny; xkm il kngkiel uby, dlt tkeói hy myt kxkhl, ymqé
lfnackhl nl uby ym kxkhl dlt rytxlml k kxkt k ubayi ny kxk. w xám, uby
dlhtík kgliqygyt uby yn kxkhlt hy nl rytxlml pbymy pyl, w, mayihl nl pyl
hacil hy myt kflttygahl, gky xbw xkn yn hygat ''ubaétlqy dlt rytxlmk; rkmxy
hy kxkt kbiuby myk pyl''. dytl, dbymql gkml uby glttki acbknxyiqy nkm
rytxlmbtkm, il dlt yml rki hy glttyt acbknym nlm hymylm, uby il qlhkm
rytxlmbtkm yikxltki; uby kncbikm knyctki nk vamqk w il taihyi nk vlnbiqkh;
uby ma qlhkm nkm fynnyekm yikxltkmyi w taihaymyi, mytík bi kihkt nkm
vlnbiqkhym glipbmkm w hymgkxaikhkm, mai mkfyt yi gbán rkfíki hy dktkt;
dltuby, mayihl aipaiaqlm nlm mboyqlm rytxlmlm, aipaiaqlm rkfíki hy myt nlm
hymylm. w, mycúi wl ry líhl hygat, yn vythkhytl kxlt il my havahy, w rk hy
myt vlnbiqktal, w il pltelml. mayihl ymql kmí, glxl wl gtyl uby nl ym, ¿dlt
ubé ubytéam uby taihk xa vlnbiqkh dlt pbytek, lfnackhk il xám hy uby hygím
uby xy ubytéam fayi? ma il, hygahxy: ma glxl yn gaynl xy rael rytxlmk xy
ragaytk pyk, ¿pbytk obmql uby xy ubyoktk hy vlmlqtlm dltuby il xy kxáfkhym?
gbkiql xám, uby rkféam hy glimahytkt uby wl il ymglcí nk rytxlmbtk uby
qyicl; uby, qkn gbkn ym, yn gaynl xy nk hal hy ctkgak, mai wl dyhannk ia
ymglcynnk. w, kmí glxl nk vífltk il xytygy myt gbndkhk dlt nk dlielñk uby
qayiy, dbymql uby gli ynnk xkqk, dlt rkfétmynk hkhl ikqbtknyek, qkxdlgl wl
xytyegl myt tydtyryihahk dlt myt rytxlmk; uby nk rytxlmbtk yi nk xboyt
rliymqk ym glxl yn pbycl kdktqkhl l glxl nk ymdkhk kcbhk, uby ia én ubyxk
ia ynnk gltqk k ubayi k ynnlm il my kgytgk. nk rlitk w nkm vatqbhym mli
khltilm hyn knxk, mai nkm gbknym yn gbytdl, kbiuby nl myk, il hyfy hy
dktygyt rytxlml. dbym ma nk rliymqahkh ym bik hy nkm vatqbhym uby kn gbytdl
w kn knxk xám khltiki w rytxlmyki, ¿dlt ubé nk rk hy dythyt nk uby ym kxkhk
dlt rytxlmk, dlt glttymdlihyt k nk aiqyigaói hy kubyn uby, dlt mónl mb
cbmql, gli qlhkm mbm pbytekm y aihbmqtakm dtlgbtk uby nk daythk?

»wl ikgí nafty, w dktk dlhyt vavat nafty ymglcí nk mlnyhkh hy nlm gkxdlm.
nlm átflnym hymqkm xliqkñkm mli xa glxdkñík, nkm gnktkm kcbkm hymqlm
kttlwlm xam ymdyolm; gli nlm átflnym w gli nkm kcbkm glxbiagl xam
dyimkxayiqlm w rytxlmbtk. pbycl mlw kdktqkhl w ymdkhk dbymqk nyolm. k nlm
uby ry yikxltkhl gli nk vamqk ry hymyickñkhl gli nkm dknkftkm. w ma nlm
hymylm my mbmqyiqki gli ymdytkiekm, il rkfayihl wl hkhl kncbik k ctamómqlxl
ia k lqtl kncbil, yn pai hy iaicbil hynnlm fayi my dbyhy hygat uby kiqym ny
xkqó mb dltpík uby xa gtbynhkh. w ma my xy rkgy gktcl uby ytki rliymqlm mbm
dyimkxayiqlm, w uby dlt ymql ymqkfk lfnackhk k glttymdlihyt k ynnlm, hacl
uby, gbkihl yi ymy xamxl nbckt hlihy krltk my gkvk mb mydbnqbtk xy
hymgbftaó nk flihkh hy mb aiqyigaói, ny haoy wl uby nk xík ytk vavat yi
dytdyqbk mlnyhkh, w hy uby mlnk nk qayttk clekmy yn ptbql hy xa
tyglcaxayiql w nlm hymdlolm hy xa rytxlmbtk; w ma én, gli qlhl ymqy
hymyickñl, ubaml dltpakt gliqtk nk ymdytkiek w ikvyckt gliqtk yn vayiql,
¿ubé xbgrl uby my kiyckmy yi nk xaqkh hyn clnpl hy mb hymkqail? ma wl ny
yiqtyqbvaytk, pbytk pknmk; ma ny gliqyiqktk, ragaytk gliqtk xa xyolt
aiqyigaói w dtlmbdbymql. dltpaó hymyickñkhl, hymymdytó mai myt kflttygahl:
¡xatkh krltk ma mytá tkeói uby hy mb dyik my xy hé k xí nk gbndk! ubéoymy
yn yickñkhl, hymymdétymy kubyn k ubayi ny pknqktli nkm dtlxyqahkm
ymdytkiekm, glipíymy yn uby wl nnkxkty, bpáiymy yn uby wl khxaqayty; dytl
il xy nnkxy gtbyn ia rlxagahk kubyn k ubayi wl il dtlxyql, yickñl, nnkxl ia
khxaql.

»yn gaynl kúi rkmqk krltk il rk ubytahl uby wl kxy dlt hymqail, w yn dyimkt
uby qyicl hy kxkt dlt ynyggaói ym ymgbmkhl. ymqy cyiytkn hymyickñl matvk k
gkhk bil hy nlm uby xy mlnagaqki hy mb dktqagbnkt dtlvygrl; w yiqaéihkmy,
hy kubí khynkiqy, uby ma kncbil dlt xí xbtayty, il xbyty hy gynlml ia
hymhagrkhl, dltuby ubayi k ikhay ubayty, k iaicbil hyfy hkt gynlm; uby nlm
hymyickñlm il my rki hy qlxkt yi gbyiqk hy hymhyiym. yn uby xy nnkxk paytk
w fkmanamgl, héoyxy glxl glmk dytobhagakn w xknk; yn uby xy nnkxk aictkqk,
il xy matvk; yn uby hymglilgahk, il xy glilegk; ubayi gtbyn, il xy mack;
uby ymqk paytk, ymqy fkmanamgl, ymqk aictkqk, ymqk gtbyn w ymqk
hymglilgahk, ia nlm fbmgktá, mytvatá, glilgytá ia mycbatá yi iaicbik
xkiytk. uby ma k ctamómqlxl xkqó mb axdkgayigak w kttlokhl hymyl, ¿dlt ubé
my rk hy gbndkt xa rliymql dtlgyhyt w tygkql? ma wl glimytvl xa naxdayek
gli nk glxdkñík hy nlm átflnym, ¿dlt ubé rk hy ubytyt uby nk daythk yn uby
ubayty uby nk qyick gli nlm rlxftym? wl, glxl mkféam, qyicl taubyekm
dtldakm w il glhagal nkm koyikm; qyicl nafty glihagaói w il cbmql hy
mboyqktxy: ia ubaytl ia kflttyegl k ikhay. il yickñl k émqy ia mlnagaql
kubén, ia fbtnl gli bil ia xy yiqtyqyicl gli yn lqtl. nk glivytmkgaói
rliymqk hy nkm ekcknkm hymqkm knhykm w yn gbahkhl hy xam gkftkm xy
yiqtyqayiy. qayiyi xam hymylm dlt qétxail ymqkm xliqkñkm, w ma hy kubí
mknyi, ym k gliqyxdnkt nk rytxlmbtk hyn gaynl, dkmlm gli uby gkxaik yn knxk
k mb xltkhk dtaxytk.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, mai ubytyt lít tymdbymqk kncbik, vlnvaó nkm ymdknhkm w
my yiqtó dlt nl xám gyttkhl hy bi xliqy uby knní gytgk ymqkfk, hyokihl
khxatkhlm, qkiql hy mb hamgtygaói glxl hy mb rytxlmbtk, k qlhlm nlm uby
knní ymqkfki. w kncbilm haytli xbymqtkm -hy kubynnlm uby hy nk dlhytlmk
pnygrk hy nlm tkwlm hy mbm fynnlm lolm ymqkfki rytahlm- hy ubytytnk mycbat,
mai kdtlvygrktmy hyn xkiapaymql hymyickñl uby rkfíki líhl. nl gbkn vamql
dlt hli ubaolqy, dktygaéihlny uby knní vyiík fayi bmkt hy mb gkfknnytík,
mlglttayihl k nkm hligynnkm xyiymqytlmkm, dbymqk nk xkil yi yn dbñl hy mb
ymdkhk, yi knqkm y aiqynacafnym vlgym, haol:

-iaicbik dytmlik, hy gbknubayt ymqkhl w glihagaói uby myk, my kqtyvk k
mycbat k nk rytxlmk xktgynk, ml dyik hy gkyt yi nk pbtalmk aihacikgaói xík.
ynnk rk xlmqtkhl gli gnktkm w mbpagayiqym tkeliym nk dlgk l iaicbik gbndk
uby rk qyiahl yi nk xbytqy hy ctamómqlxl, w gbái koyik vavy hy glihymgyihyt
gli nlm hymylm hy iaicbil hy mbm kxkiqym, k gbwk gkbmk ym obmql uby, yi
nbckt hy myt mycbahk w dytmycbahk, myk rlitkhk w ymqaxkhk hy qlhlm nlm
fbyilm hyn xbihl, dbym xbymqtk uby yi én ynnk ym mlnk nk uby gli qki
rliymqk aiqyigaói vavy.

l wk uby pbymy dlt nkm kxyikekm hy hli ubaolqy, l dltuby kxftlmal nym haol
uby glignbwymyi gli nl uby k mb fbyi kxacl hyfíki, iaicbil hy nlm dkmqltym
my xlvaó ia kdktqó hy knní rkmqk uby, kgkfkhk nk mydbnqbtk w kftkmkhlm nlm
dkdynym hy ctamómqlxl, dbmaytli mb gbytdl yi ynnk, il mai xbgrkm náctaxkm
hy nlm gatgbimqkiqym. gyttktli nk mydbnqbtk gli bik ctbymk dyñk, yi qkiql
uby my kgkfkfk bik nlmk uby, mycúi kxftlmal haol, dyimkfk xkihkt rkgyt, gli
bi ydaqkpal uby rkfík hy hygat hymqk xkiytk:

   wkgy kubí hy bi kxkhlt
   yn xímytl gbytdl rynkhl,
   uby pby dkmqlt hy ckikhl,
   dythahl dlt hymkxlt.
   xbtaó k xkilm hyn taclt
   hy bik ymubavk rytxlmk aictkqk,
   gli ubayi mb axdytal hankqk
   nk qatkiík hy mb kxlt.

nbycl ymdktgaytli dlt gaxk hy nk mydbnqbtk xbgrkm pnltym w tkxlm, w, hkihl
qlhlm yn démkxy k mb kxacl kxftlmal, my hymdahaytli hén. nl xymxl ragaytli
vavknhl w mb glxdkñytl, w hli ubaolqy my hymdahaó hy mbm rbémdyhym w hy nlm
gkxaikiqym, nlm gbknym ny tlcktli my vaiaymy gli ynnlm k myvannk, dlt myt
nbckt qki kglxlhkhl k rknnkt kvyiqbtkm, uby yi gkhk gknny w qtkm gkhk
ymubaik my lptygyi xám uby yi lqtl kncbil. hli ubaolqy nym kctkhygaó yn
kvaml w yn áiaxl uby xlmqtkfki hy rkgytny xytgyh, w haol uby dlt yiqligym
il ubytík ia hyfík at k myvannk, rkmqk uby rbfaymy hymdlokhl qlhkm kubynnkm
mayttkm hy nkhtliym xknkihtaiym, hy ubayi ytk pkxk uby qlhkm ymqkfki
nnyikm. vayihl mb fbyik hyqytxaikgaói, il ubamaytli nlm gkxaikiqym
axdltqbiktny xám, mail, qltiáihlmy k hymdyhat hy ibyvl, ny hyoktli w
dtlmacbaytli mb gkxail, yi yn gbkn il nym pknqó hy ubé qtkqkt, kmí hy nk
ramqltak hy xktgynk w ctamómqlxl glxl hy nkm nlgbtkm hy hli ubaolqy. yn
gbkn hyqytxaió hy at k fbmgkt k nk dkmqltk xktgynk w lptygytny qlhl nl uby
én dlhík yi mb mytvagal. xkm il ny kvail glxl én dyimkfk, mycúi my gbyiqk
yi yn hamgbtml hymqk vythkhytk ramqltak, hkihl kubí pai nk mycbihk dktqy.

qytgytk dktqy hyn aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk





gkdíqbnl zv. hlihy my gbyiqk nk hymctkgakhk kvyiqbtk uby my qldó hli
ubaolqy yi qldkt gli bilm hymknxkhlm wkicüymym


gbyiqk yn mkfal gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna uby, kmí glxl hli ubaolqy my hymdahaó
hy mbm rbémdyhym w hy qlhlm nlm uby my rknnktli kn yiqayttl hyn dkmqlt
ctamómqlxl, én w mb ymgbhytl my yiqtktli dlt yn xymxl flmuby hlihy vaytli
uby my rkfík yiqtkhl nk dkmqltk xktgynk; w, rkfayihl kihkhl xám hy hlm
rltkm dlt én, fbmgáihlnk dlt qlhkm dktqym mai dlhyt rknnktnk, vaiaytli k
dktkt k bi dtkhl nnyil hy ptymgk wytfk, obiql hyn gbkn glttík bi kttlwl
kdkgafny w ptymgl; qkiql, uby glivahó w plteó k dkmkt knní nkm rltkm hy nk
maymqk, uby tacbtlmkxyiqy glxyiekfk wk k yiqtkt.

kdyátlimy hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, w, hyokihl kn obxyiql w k tlgaikiqy k mbm
kigrbtkm dkgyt hy nk xbgrk wytfk uby knní rkfík, haytli mkgl k nkm
knpltokm, w, mai gytaxliak kncbik, yi fbyik dke w glxdkñík, kxl w xlel
glxaytli nl uby yi ynnkm rknnktli.

il my rkfík gbtkhl mkigrl hy ygrkt mbynqkm k tlgaikiqy, mycbtl hy uby ny
glilgík dlt qki xkiml w qki dlgl taolml uby qlhkm nkm wycbkm hy nk hyrymk
hy góthlfk il ny ragaytki qlxkt xkn maiaymqtl. lthyió, dbym, nk mbytqy, w
yn hakfnl, uby il qlhkm vygym hbytxy, uby kihkfki dlt kubyn vknny dkgayihl
bik xkikhk hy rkgkm cknagakikm hy bilm kttaytlm cknnyclm, hy nlm gbknym ym
glmqbxfty mymqykt gli mb tygbk yi nbcktym w maqalm hy wytfk w kcbk; w kubyn
hlihy kgytqó k rknnktmy hli ubaolqy ytk xbw k dtldómaql hy nlm cknnyclm.
mbgyhaó, dbym, uby k tlgaikiqy ny vail yi hymyl hy typlganktmy gli nkm
myñltkm pkgkm; w mknayihl, kmí glxl nkm lnaó, hy mb ikqbtkn dkml w
glmqbxfty, mai dyhat nagyigak k mb hbyñl, qlxó bi qtlqagl kncl dagkhannl
w my pby k glxbiagkt mb iygymahkh gli ynnkm. xkm ynnkm, uby, k nl uby
dktygaó, hyfíki hy qyiyt xám ckik hy dkgyt uby hy án, tygafaétliny gli nkm
ryttkhbtkm w gli nlm hayiqym, hy qkn xkiytk uby, k dlgl ymdkgal, my ny
tlxdaytli nkm gaigrkm w ubyhó, mai mannk, yi dynlqk. dytl nl uby én hyfaó
xám hy myiqat pby uby, vayihl nlm kttaytlm nk pbytek uby k mbm wycbkm my
nym rkgík, kgbhaytli gli ymqkgkm, w qkiqlm dknlm ny haytli uby ny
hyttafktli xkndktkhl yi yn mbynl.

wk yi ymql hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, uby nk dknaek hy tlgaikiqy rkfíki vamql,
nnyckfki aokhykihl; w haol hli ubaolqy k mkigrl:

-k nl uby wl vyl, kxacl mkigrl, émqlm il mli gkfknnytlm, mail cyiqy mlye w
hy fkok tknyk. híclnl dltuby fayi xy dbyhym kwbhkt k qlxkt nk hyfahk
vyickiek hyn kctkval uby hynkiqy hy ibymqtlm lolm my ny rk rygrl k
tlgaikiqy.

-¿ubé hakfnlm hy vyickiek ryxlm hy qlxkt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma émqlm mli
xám hy vyaiqy w ilmlqtlm il xám hy hlm, w kbi, ubaeá, ilmlqtlm mail bil w
xyhal?

-wl vkncl dlt gayiql -tydnagó hli ubaolqy.

w, mai rkgyt xám hamgbtmlm, ygró xkil k mb ymdkhk w kttyxyqaó k nlm
cknnyclm, w nl xymxl rael mkigrl dkiek, aigaqkhl w xlvahl hyn yoyxdnl hy mb
kxl. w, k nkm dtaxytkm, hal hli ubaolqy bik gbgrannkhk k bil, uby ny kftaó
bi mkwl hy gbytl hy uby vyiík vymqahl, gli ctki dktqy hy nk ymdknhk.
nlm cknnyclm, uby my vaytli xknqtkqkt hy kubynnlm hlm rlxftym mlnlm, mayihl
ynnlm qkiqlm, kgbhaytli k mbm ymqkgkm, w, glcayihl k nlm hlm yi xyhal,
glxyiektli k xyibhykt mlfty ynnlm gli ctkihy kríigl w vyryxyigak. vythkh ym
uby kn mycbihl qluby haytli gli mkigrl yi yn mbynl, w nl xymxl ny kvail k
hli ubaolqy, mai uby ny vknaymy mb hymqtyek w fbyi áiaxl; w ubaml mb
vyiqbtk uby vaiaymy k gkyt k nlm daym hy tlgaikiqy, uby kúi il my rkfík
nyvkiqkhl; hlihy my ygrk hy vyt nk pbtak gli uby xkgrkgki ymqkgkm dbymqkm
yi xkilm túmqagkm w yilokhkm.

vayihl, dbym, nlm cknnyclm yn xkn tygkhl uby rkfíki rygrl, gli nk xkwlt
dtymqyek uby dbhaytli, gktcktli mb tygbk w macbaytli mb gkxail, hyokihl k
nlm hlm kvyiqbtytlm hy xknk qtkek w hy dylt qknkiqy.

yn dtaxytl uby my tymaiqaó pby mkigrl dkiek; w, rknnáihlmy obiql k mb
myñlt, gli vle yipytxk w nkmqaxkhk, haol:

-¡myñlt hli ubaolqy! ¡kr, myñlt hli ubaolqy!

-¿ubé ubaytym, mkigrl rytxkil? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy gli yn xymxl qlil
kpyxaikhl w hlnayiqy uby mkigrl.

-ubyttík, ma pbymy dlmafny -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek-, uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy
haymy hlm qtkclm hy kubynnk fyfahk hyn pyl fnkm, ma ym uby nk qayiy vbymqtk
xytgyh krí k xkil. ubaeá mytá hy dtlvygrl dktk nlm ubyftkiqkxayiqlm hy
rbymlm glxl nl ym dktk nkm pytahkm.

-dbym, k qyiytnk wl kubí, hymctkgakhl wl, ¿ubé ilm pknqkfk? -tymdlihaó hli
ubaolqy-. xkm wl qy obtl, mkigrl dkiek, k py hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy, uby
kiqym uby dkmyi hlm híkm, ma nk pltqbik il lthyik lqtk glmk, nk qyicl hy
qyiyt yi xa dlhyt, l xkn xy rki hy kihkt nkm xkilm.

-dbym, ¿yi gbáiqlm ny dktygy k vbymqtk xytgyh uby dlhtyxlm xlvyt nlm daym?
-tydnagó mkigrl dkiek.

-hy xí mé hygat -haol yn xlnahl gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy- uby il mkfté dliyt
qétxail k ymlm híkm. xkm wl xy qyicl nk gbndk hy qlhl, uby il rkfík hy
dliyt xkil k nk ymdkhk gliqtk rlxftym uby il pbymyi ktxkhlm gkfknnytlm glxl
wl; w kmí, gtyl uby, yi dyik hy rkfyt dkmkhl nkm nywym hy nk gkfknnytík, rk
dytxaqahl yn halm hy nkm fkqknnkm uby my xy haymy ymqy gkmqacl. dlt nl
gbkn, mkigrl dkiek, glivayiy uby ymqém khvytqahl yi ymql uby krltk qy haté,
dltuby axdltqk xbgrl k nk mknbh hy yiqtkxflm; w ym uby, gbkihl vykm uby
myxyokiqy gkiknnk ilm rkgy kncúi kctkval, il kcbkthym k uby wl dlick xkil
kn ymdkhk dktk ynnlm, dltuby il nl rkté yi iaicbik xkiytk, mail dli qú xkil
k qb ymdkhk w gkmqícknlm xbw k qb mkflt; uby ma yi mb kwbhk w hypyimk
kgbhaytyi gkfknnytlm, wl qy mkfté hypyihyt w lpyihynnlm gli qlhl xa dlhyt;
uby wk rkftám vamql dlt xan myñknym w yzdytayigakm rkmqk khóihy my ymqayihy
yn vknlt hy ymqy xa pbytqy ftkel.

qkn ubyhó hy kttlckiqy yn dlfty myñlt gli yn vyigaxayiql hyn vknayiqy
vaegkíil. xkm il ny dktygaó qki fayi k mkigrl dkiek yn kvaml hy mb kxl uby
hyokmy hy tymdlihyt, hagayihl:

-myñlt, wl mlw rlxfty dkgípagl, xkiml, mlmyckhl, w mé hamaxankt gbknubaytk
aiobtak, dltuby qyicl xboyt w raolm uby mbmqyiqkt w gtakt. kmí uby, mékny k
vbymqtk xytgyh qkxfaéi kvaml, dbym il dbyhy myt xkihkql, uby yi iaicbik
xkiytk dlihté xkil k nk ymdkhk, ia gliqtk vannkil ia gliqtk gkfknnytl; w
uby, hymhy kubí dktk hynkiqy hy halm, dythlil gbkiqlm kctkvalm xy rki rygrl
w rki hy rkgyt: ltk xy nlm rkwk rygrl, l rkck l rkwk hy rkgyt, dytmlik knqk
l fkok, tagl l dlfty, rahkncl l dygrytl, mai ygydqkt ymqkhl ia glihagaói
kncbik.

nl gbkn líhl dlt mb kxl, ny tymdlihaó:

-ubamaytk qyiyt knayiql dktk dlhyt rkfnkt bi dlgl hymgkimkhl, w uby yn
hlnlt uby qyicl yi ymqk glmqannk my kdnkgktk qkiql gbkiql, dktk hktqy k
yiqyihyt, dkiek, yi yn yttlt yi uby ymqám. vyi kgá, dygkhlt; ma yn vayiql
hy nk pltqbik, rkmqk krltk qki gliqtktal, yi ibymqtl pkvlt my vbynvy,
nnyváihlilm nkm vynkm hyn hymyl dktk uby mycbtkxyiqy w mai gliqtkmqy kncbil
qlxyxlm dbytql yi kncbik hy nkm íimbnkm uby qy qyicl dtlxyqahk, ¿ubé mytík
hy qa ma, ckiáihlnk wl, qy ragaymy myñlt hynnk? dbym ¿nl vyihtám k
axdlmafanaqkt dlt il myt gkfknnytl, ia ubytytnl myt, ia qyiyt vknlt ia
aiqyigaói hy vyickt qbm aiobtakm w hypyihyt qb myñltíl? dltuby rkm hy mkfyt
uby yi nlm tyailm w dtlvaigakm ibyvkxyiqy gliubamqkhlm ibigk ymqái qki
ubayqlm nlm áiaxlm hy mbm ikqbtknym, ia qki hy dktqy hyn ibyvl myñlt uby il
my qyicki qyxlt hy uby rki hy rkgyt kncbik ilvyhkh dktk knqytkt hy ibyvl
nkm glmkm, w vlnvyt, glxl hagyi, k dtlfkt vyiqbtk; w kmí, ym xyiymqyt uby
yn ibyvl dlmymlt qyick yiqyihaxayiql dktk mkfytmy clfytikt, w vknlt dktk
lpyihyt w hypyihytmy yi gbknubaytk kgliqygaxayiql.

-yi ymqy uby krltk ilm rk kgliqygahl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ubamaytk wl qyiyt
ymy yiqyihaxayiql w ymy vknlt uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy; xkm wl ny obtl, k py
hy dlfty rlxfty, uby xám ymqlw dktk faexkm uby dktk dnáqagkm. xaty vbymqtk
xytgyh ma my dbyhy nyvkiqkt, w kwbhktyxlm k tlgaikiqy, kbiuby il nl xytygy,
dltuby én pby nk gkbmk dtaigadkn hy qlhl ymqy xlnaxayiql. okxám qkn gtyí hy
tlgaikiqy, uby ny qyiík dlt dytmlik gkmqk w qki dkgípagk glxl wl. yi pai,
fayi hagyi uby ym xyiymqyt xbgrl qayxdl dktk vyiat k glilgyt nkm dytmlikm,
w uby il rkw glmk mycbtk yi ymqk vahk. ¿ubaéi haoytk uby qtkm hy kubynnkm
qki ctkihym gbgrannkhkm glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hal k kubyn hymhagrkhl
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, rkfík hy vyiat, dlt nk dlmqk w yi mycbaxayiql mbwl, ymqk
qki ctkihy qyxdymqkh hy dknlm uby rk hymgktckhl mlfty ibymqtkm ymdknhkm?
-kbi nkm qbwkm, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, hyfyi hy ymqkt rygrkm k
myxyokiqym ibfnkhlm; dytl nkm xíkm, gtakhkm yiqty maikfkpkm w rlnkihkm,
gnktl ymqá uby myiqatái xám yn hlnlt hymqk hymctkgak. w ma il pbymy dltuby
axkcail..., ¿ubé hacl axkcail?, mé xbw gaytql, uby qlhkm ymqkm
aiglxlhahkhym mli xbw kiyokm kn yoytgagal hy nkm ktxkm, kubí xy hyoktík
xltat hy dbtl yilol.

k ymql tydnagó yn ymgbhytl:

-myñlt, wk uby ymqkm hymctkgakm mli hy nk glmygrk hy nk gkfknnytík, híckxy
vbymqtk xytgyh ma mbgyhyi xbw k xyibhl, l ma qayiyi mbm qayxdlm naxaqkhlm
yi uby kgkygyi; dltuby xy dktygy k xí uby k hlm glmygrkm ubyhktyxlm
aiúqanym dktk nk qytgytk, ma halm, dlt mb aipaiaqk xamytaglthak, il ilm
mlgltty.

-máfyqy, kxacl mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby nk vahk hy nlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym ymqá mboyqk k xan dynactlm w hymvyiqbtkm; w, ia xám ia
xyilm, ymqá yi dlqyigak dtldaigbk hy myt nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym tywym w
yxdytkhltym, glxl nl rk xlmqtkhl nk yzdytayigak yi xbgrlm w havytmlm
gkfknnytlm, hy gbwkm ramqltakm wl qyicl yiqytk ilqagak. w dbhaétkqy gliqkt
kcltk, ma yn hlnlt xy haytk nbckt, hy kncbilm uby, mónl dlt yn vknlt hy mb
ftkel, rki mbfahl k nlm knqlm ctkhlm uby ry gliqkhl; w ymqlm xymxlm my
vaytli kiqym w hymdbém yi havytmkm gknkxahkhym w xamytakm. dltuby yn
vknytlml kxkhím hy ckbnk my val yi dlhyt hy mb xltqkn yiyxacl ktgknábm yn
yigkiqkhlt, hy ubayi my qayiy dlt kvytacbkhl uby ny hal, qyiaéihlny
dtyml, xám hy hlgayiqlm kelqym gli nkm tayihkm hy mb gkfknnl, kqkhl k bik
glnbik hy bi dkqal. w kbi rkw bi kbqlt mygtyql, w hy il dlgl gtéhaql, uby
hagy uby, rkfayihl glcahl kn gkfknnytl hyn pyfl gli bik gaytqk qtkxdk uby
my ny rbihaó hyfkol hy nlm daym, yi bi gaytql gkmqannl, w kn gkyt, my rknnó
yi bik rlihk maxk hyfkol hy qayttk, kqkhl hy daym w xkilm, w knní ny
ygrktli bik hymqkm uby nnkxki xynygaikm, hy kcbk hy iayvy w ktyik, hy nl
uby nnycó xbw kn gkfl; w ma il pbytk mlglttahl yi kubynnk ctki gbaqk hy bi
mkfal ctkihy kxacl mbwl, nl dkmktk xbw xkn yn dlfty gkfknnytl. kimí uby,
fayi dbyhl wl dkmkt yiqty qkiqk fbyik cyiqy; uby xkwltym kptyiqkm mli nkm
uby émqlm dkmktli, uby il nkm uby krltk ilmlqtlm dkmkxlm. dltuby ubaytl
rkgytqy mkfahlt, mkigrl, uby il kptyiqki nkm rytahkm uby my hki gli nlm
aimqtbxyiqlm uby kgkml my rknnki yi nkm xkilm; w ymql ymqá yi nk nyw hyn
hbynl, ymgtaql dlt dknkftkm yzdtymkm: uby ma yn ekdkqytl hk k lqtl gli nk
rltxk uby qayiy yi nk xkil, dbymql uby vythkhytkxyiqy ym hy dknl, il dlt
yml my hatá uby ubyhk kdknykhl kubyn k ubayi hal gli ynnk. hacl ymql dltuby
il dayimym uby, dbymql uby ubyhkxlm hymqk dyihyigak xlnahlm, ubyhkxlm
kptyiqkhlm; dltuby nkm ktxkm uby kubynnlm rlxftym qtkíki, gli uby ilm
xkgrkgktli, il ytki lqtkm uby mbm ymqkgkm, w iaicbil hynnlm, k nl uby my xy
kgbythk, qyiík ymqluby, ymdkhk ia dbñkn.

-il xy haytli k xí nbckt -tymdlihaó mkigrl- k uby xatkmy yi qkiql; dltuby,
kdyikm dbmy xkil k xa qaelik, gbkihl xy mkiqacbktli nlm rlxftlm gli mbm
dailm, hy xkiytk uby xy ubaqktli nk vamqk hy nlm lolm w nk pbytek hy nlm
daym, hkihl glixacl khlihy krltk wkcl, w khlihy il xy hk dyik kncbik yn
dyimkt ma pby kptyiqk l il nl hy nlm ymqkgkelm, glxl xy nk hk yn hlnlt hy
nlm clndym, uby xy rki hy ubyhkt qki axdtymlm yi nk xyxltak glxl yi nkm
ymdknhkm.

-gli qlhl yml, qy rkcl mkfyt, rytxkil dkiek -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby il
rkw xyxltak k ubayi yn qayxdl il kgkfy, ia hlnlt uby xbytqy il ny glimbxk.

-dbym, ¿ubé xkwlt hymhagrk dbyhy myt -tydnagó dkiek- hy kubynnk uby kcbkthk
kn qayxdl uby nk glimbxk w k nk xbytqy uby nk kgkfy? ma ymqk ibymqtk
hymctkgak pbytk hy kubynnkm uby gli bi dkt hy faexkm my gbtki, kbi il qki
xknl; dytl vlw vayihl uby il rki hy fkmqkt qlhlm nlm yxdnkmqlm hy bi
rlmdaqkn dktk dliytnkm yi fbyi qétxail maubaytk.

-héokqy hyml w mkgk pbytekm hy pnkubyek, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-,
uby kmí rkté wl, w vykxlm góxl ymqá tlgaikiqy; uby, k nl uby xy dktygy, il
ny rk gkfahl kn dlfty nk xyilt dktqy hymqk hymctkgak.

-il rkw hy ubé xktkvannktmy hyml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mayihl én qki fbyi
gkfknnytl kihkiqy; hy nl uby wl xy xktkvannl ym hy uby xa obxyiql rkwk
ubyhkhl nafty w mai glmqkm hlihy ilmlqtlm mknaxlm mai glmqannkm.

-mayxdty hyok nk vyiqbtk bik dbytqk kfaytqk yi nkm hymhagrkm, dktk hkt
tyxyhal k ynnkm -haol hli ubaolqy-. híclnl dltuby ymk fymqyebynk dlhtá
mbdnat krltk nk pknqk hy tlgaikiqy, nnyváihlxy k xí hymhy kubí k kncúi
gkmqannl hlihy myk gbtkhl hy xam pytahkm. w xám, uby il qyihté k hymrlitk
nk qkn gkfknnytík, dltuby xy kgbythl rkfyt nyíhl uby kubyn fbyi vayol
manyil, kwl w dyhkclcl hyn knycty halm hy nk tamk, gbkihl yiqtó yi nk
gabhkh hy nkm gayi dbytqkm afk, xbw k mb dnkgyt, gkfknnytl mlfty bi xbw
rytxlml kmil.

-vythkh mytá uby én hyfík hy at gkfknnytl, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hagy
-tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl rkw ctkihy hapytyigak hyn at gkfknnytl kn at
kqtkvymkhl glxl glmqkn hy fkmbtk.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-nkm pytahkm uby my tygafyi yi nkm fkqknnkm, kiqym hki rlitk uby nk ubaqki.
kmí uby, dkiek kxacl, il xy tydnaubym xám, mail, glxl wk qy ry hagrl,
nyváiqkqy nl xyolt uby dbhaytym w dlixy hy nk xkiytk uby xám qy kctkhkty
yigaxk hy qb obxyiql, w vkxlm hy kubí kiqym uby nk ilgry vyick w ilm mknqyy
yi ymqy hymdlfnkhl.

-dbym wl ry líhl hygat k vbymqtk xytgyh -haol dkiek- uby ym xbw hy
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yn hltxat yi nlm dátkxlm w hymaytqlm nl xám hyn kñl, w
uby nl qayiyi k xbgrk vyiqbtk.

-yml ym -haol hli ubaolqy- gbkihl il dbyhyi xám, l gbkihl ymqái yikxltkhlm;
w ym qki vythkh ymql, uby rk rkfahl gkfknnytl uby my rk ymqkhl mlfty bik
dyñk, kn mln w k nk mlxftk, w k nkm aignyxyigakm hyn gaynl, hlm kñlm, mai
uby nl mbdaymy mb myñltk. w bil hémqlm pby kxkhím, gbkihl, nnkxáihlmy
fynqyiyftlm, my knloó yi nk dyñk dlfty, ia mé ma lgrl kñlm l lgrl xymym,
uby il ymqlw xbw fayi yi nk gbyiqk: fkmqk uby én ymqbvl knní rkgayihl
dyiaqyigak, dlt il mé ubé maimkflt uby ny rael nk myñltk ltakik. dytl
hyoyxlm wk ymql, mkigrl, w kgkfk, kiqym uby mbgyhk lqtk hymctkgak kn
obxyiql, glxl k tlgaikiqy.

-kbi krí mytík yn hakfnl -haol mkigrl.

w, hymdahayihl qtyaiqk kwym, w mymyiqk mlmdatlm, w gayiql w vyaiqy démyqym
w tyiayclm hy ubayi knní ny rkfík qtkíhl, my nyvkiqó, ubyháihlmy kclfakhl
yi nk xaqkh hyn gkxail, glxl ktgl qbtubymgl, mai dlhyt kgkfkt hy
yihytyektmy; w gli qlhl ymqy qtkfkol kdktyoó mb kmil, uby qkxfaéi rkfík
kihkhl kncl hymqtkíhl gli nk hyxkmakhk nafytqkh hy kubyn hík. nyvkiqó nbycl
k tlgaikiqy, yn gbkn, ma qbvaytk nyicbk gli uby ubyoktmy, k fbyi mycbtl uby
mkigrl ia mb kxl il ny pbytki yi ekck.

yi tymlnbgaói, mkigrl kglxlhó k hli ubaolqy mlfty yn kmil w dbml hy tykqk k
tlgaikiqy; w, nnyvkihl kn kmil hy gkfymqtl, my yigkxaió, dlgl xám k xyilm,
rkgak hlihy ny dktygaó uby dlhík ymqkt yn gkxail tykn. w nk mbytqy, uby mbm
glmkm hy fayi yi xyolt afk cbakihl, kúi il rbfl kihkhl bik dyubyñk nycbk,
gbkihl ny hydktó yn gkxail, yi yn gbkn hymgbftaó bik vyiqk uby, k dymkt
mbwl w cbmql hy hli ubaolqy, rkfík hy myt gkmqannl. dltpakfk mkigrl uby ytk
vyiqk, w mb kxl uby il, mail gkmqannl; w qkiql hbtó nk dltpík, uby qbvaytli
nbckt, mai kgkfktnk, hy nnyckt k ynnk, yi nk gbkn mkigrl my yiqtó, mai xám
kvytacbkgaói, gli qlhk mb tygbk.





gkdíqbnl zva. hy nl uby ny mbgyhaó kn aicyialml rahkncl yi nk vyiqk uby én
axkcaikfk myt gkmqannl


yn vyiqytl, uby val k hli ubaolqy kqtkvymkhl yi yn kmil, dtycbiqó k mkigrl
ubé xkn qtkík. mkigrl ny tymdlihaó uby il ytk ikhk, mail uby rkfík hkhl bik
gkíhk hy bik dyñk kfkol, w uby vyiík kncl ftbxkhkm nkm glmqannkm. qyiík yn
vyiqytl dlt xboyt k bik, il hy nk glihagaói uby mbynyi qyiyt nkm hy
myxyokiqy qtkql, dltuby ikqbtknxyiqy ytk gktaqkqavk w my hlník hy nkm
gknkxahkhym hy mbm dtóoaxlm; w kmí, kgbhaó nbycl k gbtkt k hli ubaolqy w
rael uby bik raok mbwk, hligynnk, xbgrkgrk w hy xbw fbyi dktygyt, nk
kwbhkmy k gbtkt k mb rbémdyh. mytvík yi nk vyiqk, kmaxymxl, bik xlek
kmqbtakik, kigrk hy gktk, nnkik hy glclqy, hy iktae tlxk, hyn bi lol qbytqk
w hyn lqtl il xbw mkik. vythkh ym uby nk cknnkthík hyn gbytdl mbdník nkm
hyxám pknqkm: il qyiík mayqy dknxlm hy nlm daym k nk gkfyek, w nkm
ymdknhkm, uby kncúi qkiql ny gktckfki, nk rkgíki xatkt kn mbynl xám hy nl
uby ynnk ubamaytk. ymqk cyiqan xlek, dbym, kwbhó k nk hligynnk, w nkm hlm
ragaytli bik xbw xknk gkxk k hli ubaolqy yi bi gkxktkigrói uby, yi lqtlm
qayxdlm, hkfk xkiapaymqlm aihagalm uby rkfík mytvahl hy dkokt xbgrlm kñlm.
yi nk gbkn qkxfaéi knlokfk bi kttaytl, uby qyiík mb gkxk rygrk bi dlgl xám
knná hy nk hy ibymqtl hli ubaolqy. w, kbiuby ytk hy nkm yioknxkm w xkiqkm
hy mbm xkgrlm, rkgík xbgrk vyiqkok k nk hy hli ubaolqy, uby mónl gliqyiík
gbkqtl xkn namkm qkfnkm, mlfty hlm il xbw acbknym fkiglm, w bi glngrói uby
yi nl mbqan dktygík glngrk, nnyil hy flhlubym, uby, k il xlmqtkt uby ytki
hy nkik dlt kncbikm tlqbtkm, kn qayiql, yi nk hbtyek, myxyokfki hy
cbaokttl, w hlm máfkikm rygrkm hy gbytl hy khktck, w bik ptkekhk, gbwlm
ranlm, ma my ubamaytki gliqkt, il my dythaytk bil mlnl hy nk gbyiqk.
yi ymqk xknhaqk gkxk my kglmqó hli ubaolqy, w nbycl nk vyiqytk w mb raok ny
yxdnkmqktli hy kttafk kfkol, knbxftáihlnym xktaqltiym, uby kmí my nnkxkfk
nk kmqbtakik; w, glxl kn faexknny vaymy nk vyiqytk qki kgkthyiknkhl k
dktqym k hli ubaolqy, haol uby kubynnl xám dktygíki clndym uby gkíhk.

-il pbytli clndym -haol mkigrl-, mail uby nk dyñk qyiík xbgrlm daglm w
qtldyeliym.

w uby gkhk bil rkfík rygrl mb gkthyikn. w qkxfaéi ny haol:

-rkck vbymqtk xytgyh, myñltk, hy xkiytk uby ubyhyi kncbikm ymqldkm, uby il
pknqktá ubayi nkm rkwk xyiymqyt; uby qkxfaéi xy hbynyi k xí bi dlgl nlm
nlxlm.

-hymk xkiytk -tymdlihaó nk vyiqytk-, qkxfaéi hyfamqym vlm hy gkyt.

-il gkí -haol mkigrl dkiek-, mail uby hyn mlftymknql uby qlxé hy vyt gkyt k
xa kxl, hy qkn xkiytk xy hbyny k xí yn gbytdl uby xy dktygy uby xy rki hkhl
xan dknlm.

-fayi dlhtá myt yml -haol nk hligynnk-; uby k xí xy rk kgliqygahl xbgrkm
vygym mlñkt uby gkík hy bik qltty kfkol w uby ibigk kgkfkfk hy nnyckt kn
mbynl, w, gbkihl hymdytqkfk hyn mbyñl, rknnktxy qki xlnahk w ubyftkiqkhk
glxl ma vythkhytkxyiqy rbfaytk gkíhl.

-krí ymqá yn qluby, myñltk -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek-: uby wl, mai mlñkt
ikhk, mail ymqkihl xám hymdaytql uby krltk ymqlw, xy rknnl gli dlglm xyilm
gkthyiknym uby xa myñlt hli ubaolqy.

-¿góxl my nnkxk ymqy gkfknnytl? -dtycbiqó nk kmqbtakik xktaqltiym.

-hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek-, w ym gkfknnytl
kvyiqbtytl, w hy nlm xyoltym w xám pbytqym uby hy nbyiclm qayxdlm kgá my
rki vamql yi yn xbihl.

-¿ubé ym gkfknnytl kvyiqbtytl? -tydnagó nk xlek.

-¿qki ibyvk mlam yi yn xbihl uby il nl mkféam vlm? -tymdlihaó mkigrl
dkiek-. dbym mkfyh, rytxkik xík, uby gkfknnytl kvyiqbtytl ym bik glmk uby
yi hlm dknkftkm my vy kdknykhl w yxdytkhlt. rlw ymqá nk xám hymhagrkhk
gtakqbtk hyn xbihl w nk xám xyiymqytlmk, w xkñkik qyihtík hlm l qtym
gltlikm hy tyailm uby hkt k mb ymgbhytl.

-dbym, ¿góxl vlm, maéihlnl hymqy qki fbyi myñlt -haol nk vyiqytk-, il
qyiéam, k nl uby dktygy, maubaytk kncúi glihkhl?

-kúi ym qyxdtkil -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby il rk mail bi xym uby kihkxlm
fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm, w rkmqk krltk il ryxlm qldkhl gli iaicbik uby nl
myk. w qkn vye rkw uby my fbmgk bik glmk w my rknnk lqtk. vythkh ym uby, ma
xa myñlt hli ubaolqy mkik hymqk rytahk l gkíhk w wl il ubyhl gliqtygrl
hynnk, il qtlgktík xam ymdytkiekm gli yn xyolt qíqbnl hy ymdkñk.

qlhkm ymqkm dnáqagkm ymqkfk ymgbgrkihl, xbw kqyiql, hli ubaolqy, w,
myiqáihlmy yi yn nygrl glxl dbhl, qlxkihl hy nk xkil k nk vyiqytk, ny haol:

-gtyyhxy, pytxlmk myñltk, uby lm dlhéam nnkxkt vyiqbtlmk dlt rkfyt knlokhl
yi ymqy vbymqtl gkmqannl k xa dytmlik, uby ym qkn, uby ma wl il nk knkfl,
ym dlt nl uby mbyny hygatmy uby nk knkfkiek dtldtak yivanygy; dytl xa
ymgbhytl lm hatá ubaéi mlw. mónl lm hacl uby qyihté yqytikxyiqy ymgtaql yi
xa xyxltak yn mytvagal uby xy rkfyhym pygrl, dktk kctkhygétlmnl xayiqtkm nk
vahk xy hbtkty; w dnbcbaytk k nlm knqlm gaynlm uby yn kxlt il xy qbvaytk
qki tyihahl w qki mboyql k mbm nywym, w nlm lolm hy kubynnk rytxlmk aictkqk
uby hacl yiqty xam hayiqym; uby nlm hymqk pytxlmk hligynnk pbytki myñltym
hy xa nafytqkh.

glipbmkm ymqkfki nk vyiqytk w mb raok w nk fbyik hy xktaqltiym lwyihl nkm
tkeliym hyn kihkiqy gkfknnytl, uby kmí nkm yiqyihíki glxl ma rkfnktk yi
ctaycl, kbiuby fayi kngkiektli uby qlhkm my yigkxaikfki k lptygaxayiql w
tyubayftlm; w, glxl il bmkhkm k myxyokiqy nyicbkoy, xatáfkiny w
khxatáfkimy, w dktygíknym lqtl rlxfty hy nlm uby my bmkfki; w,
kctkhygaéihlny gli vyiqytanym tkeliym mbm lptygaxayiqlm, ny hyoktli; w nk
kmqbtakik xktaqltiym gbtó k mkigrl, uby il xyilm nl rkfík xyiymqyt uby mb
kxl.

rkfík yn kttaytl gligytqkhl gli ynnk uby kubynnk ilgry my typlganktíki
obiqlm, w ynnk ny rkfík hkhl mb dknkftk hy uby, yi ymqkihl mlmyckhlm nlm
rbémdyhym w hbtxayihl mbm kxlm, ny atík k fbmgkt w mkqampkgytny yn cbmql yi
gbkiql ny xkihkmy. w gbéiqkmy hymqk fbyik xlek uby okxám hal myxyokiqym
dknkftkm uby il nkm gbxdnaymy, kbiuby nkm haymy yi bi xliqy w mai qymqacl
kncbil; dltuby dtymbxík xbw hy rahknck, w il qyiík dlt kptyiqk ymqkt yi
kubyn yoytgagal hy mytvat yi nk vyiqk, dltuby hygík ynnk uby hymctkgakm w
xknlm mbgymlm nk rkfíki qtkíhl k kubyn ymqkhl.

yn hbtl, ymqtygrl, kdlgkhl w pyxyiqahl nygrl hy hli ubaolqy ymqkfk dtaxytl
yi xaqkh hy kubyn ymqtynnkhl ymqkfnl, w nbycl, obiql k én, rael yn mbwl
mkigrl, uby mónl gliqyiík bik ymqytk hy yiyk w bik xkiqk, uby kiqym
xlmqtkfk myt hy kioyl qbihahl uby hy nkik. mbgyhík k ymqlm hlm nygrlm yn
hyn kttaytl, pkftagkhl, glxl my rk hagrl, hy nkm yioknxkm w qlhl yn khltil
hy nlm hlm xyoltym xbnlm uby qtkík, kbiuby ytki hlgy, nbgalm, clthlm w
pkxlmlm, dltuby ytk bil hy nlm taglm kttaytlm hy ktévknl, mycúi nl hagy yn
kbqlt hymqk ramqltak, uby hymqy kttaytl rkgy dktqagbnkt xyigaói, dltuby ny
glilgík xbw fayi, w kbi ubaytyi hygat uby ytk kncl dktayiqy mbwl. pbytk hy
uby gahy xkrkxkqy fyiyicyna pby ramqltakhlt xbw gbtalml w xbw dbiqbkn yi
qlhkm nkm glmkm; w égrkmy fayi hy vyt, dbym nkm uby ubyhki typytahkm, gli
myt qki xíiaxkm w qki tkqytkm, il nkm ubaml dkmkt yi manyigal; hy hlihy
dlhtái qlxkt yoyxdnl nlm ramqltakhltym ctkvym, uby ilm gbyiqki nkm kggaliym
qki gltqk w mbgaiqkxyiqy uby kdyikm ilm nnycki k nlm nkfalm, hyoáihlmy yi
yn qaiqytl, wk dlt hymgbahl, dlt xknagak l aciltkigak, nl xám mbmqkigakn hy
nk lftk. ¡fayi rkwk xan vygym yn kbqlt hy qkfnkiqy hy tagkxliqy, w kubyn
hyn lqtl naftl hlihy my gbyiqk nlm rygrlm hyn glihy qlxannkm; w gli ubé
dbiqbknahkh nl hymgtafyi qlhl!

hacl, dbym, uby hymdbém hy rkfyt vamaqkhl yn kttaytl k mb tygbk w háhlny yn
mycbihl dayiml, my qyihaó yi mbm yioknxkm w my hal k ymdytkt k mb
dbiqbknímaxk xktaqltiym. wk ymqkfk mkigrl faexkhl w kglmqkhl, w, kbiuby
dtlgbtkfk hltxat, il nl glimyiqík yn hlnlt hy mbm glmqannkm; w hli ubaolqy,
gli yn hlnlt hy nkm mbwkm, qyiík nlm lolm kfaytqlm glxl nayfty. qlhk nk
vyiqk ymqkfk yi manyigal, w yi qlhk ynnk il rkfík lqtk nbe uby nk uby hkfk
bik náxdktk uby glnckhk yi xyhal hyn dltqkn kthík.

ymqk xktkvannlmk ubayqbh, w nlm dyimkxayiqlm uby mayxdty ibymqtl gkfknnytl
qtkík hy nlm mbgymlm uby k gkhk dkml my gbyiqki yi nlm naftlm kbqltym hy mb
hymctkgak, ny qtbol k nk axkcaikgaói bik hy nkm ymqtkñkm nlgbtkm uby
fbyikxyiqy axkcaiktmy dbyhyi. w pby uby én my axkcaió rkfyt nnyckhl k bi
pkxlml gkmqannl -uby, glxl my rk hagrl, gkmqannlm ytki k mb dktygyt qlhkm
nkm vyiqkm hlihy knlokfk-, w uby nk raok hyn vyiqytl nl ytk hyn myñlt hyn
gkmqannl, nk gbkn, vyigahk hy mb cyiqanyek, my rkfík yikxltkhl hén w
dtlxyqahl uby kubynnk ilgry, k pbtql hy mbm dkhtym, vyihtík k wkgyt gli én
bik fbyik dayek; w, qyiayihl qlhk ymqk ubaxytk, uby én my rkfík pkftagkhl,
dlt patxy w vknyhytk, my glxyieó k kgbaqkt w k dyimkt yi yn dynactlml
qtkigy yi uby mb rliymqahkh my rkfík hy vyt, w dtldbml yi mb gltkeói hy il
glxyqyt knyvlmík k mb myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, kbiuby nk xymxk tyaik
caiyftk gli mb hkxk ubaiqkñlik my ny dbmaymyi hynkiqy.

dyimkihl, dbym, yi ymqlm hamdktkqym, my nnycó yn qayxdl w nk rltk -uby dktk
én pby xyicbkhk- hy nk vyiahk hy nk kmqbtakik, nk gbkn, yi gkxamk w
hymgknek, glcahlm nlm gkfynnlm yi bik knfkiyck hy pbmqái, gli qágaqlm w
kqyiqkhlm dkmlm, yiqtó yi yn kdlmyiql hlihy nlm qtym knlokfki yi fbmgk hyn
kttaytl. dytl, kdyikm nnycó k nk dbytqk, gbkihl hli ubaolqy nk maiqaó, w,
myiqáihlmy yi nk gkxk, k dymkt hy mbm faexkm w gli hlnlt hy mbm glmqannkm,
qyihaó nlm ftkelm dktk tygyfat k mb pytxlmk hligynnk. nk kmqbtakik, uby,
qlhk tyglcahk w gknnkihl, afk gli nkm xkilm hynkiqy fbmgkihl k mb ubytahl,
qldó gli nlm ftkelm hy hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn nk kmaó pbytqyxyiqy hy bik
xbñygk w, qatáihlnk rkgík mí, mai uby ynnk lmkmy rkfnkt dknkftk, nk rael
myiqkt mlfty nk gkxk. qyiqóny nbycl nk gkxamk, w, kbiuby ynnk ytk hy
rktdannytk, k én ny dktygaó myt hy paiímaxl w hynckhl gyihkn. qtkík yi nkm
xbñygkm bikm gbyiqkm hy vahtl, dytl k én ny haytli vamnbxftym hy dtygalmkm
dytnkm ltayiqknym. nlm gkfynnlm, uby yi kncbik xkiytk qatkfki k gtaiym, én
nlm xktgó dlt ryftkm hy nbgahímaxl ltl hy ktkfak, gbwl tymdnkihlt kn hyn
xymxl mln ymgbtygík. w yn knayiql, uby, mai hbhk kncbik, lník k yimknkhk
pakxfty w qtkmilgrkhk, k én ny dktygaó uby kttlokfk hy mb flgk bi lnlt
mbkvy w ktlxáqagl; w, paiknxyiqy, én nk daiqó yi mb axkcaikgaói hy nk xamxk
qtkek w xlhl uby nl rkfík nyíhl yi mbm naftlm hy nk lqtk dtaigymk uby vail
k vyt yn xkn pytahl gkfknnytl, vyigahk hy mbm kxltym, gli qlhlm nlm khltilm
uby kubí vki dbymqlm. w ytk qkiqk nk gycbyhkh hyn dlfty rahkncl, uby yn
qkgql, ia yn knayiql, ia lqtkm glmkm uby qtkík yi mí nk fbyik hligynnk, il
ny hymyickñkfki, nkm gbknym dbhaytki rkgyt vlxaqkt k lqtl uby il pbytk
kttaytl; kiqym, ny dktygík uby qyiík yiqty mbm ftkelm k nk halmk hy nk
rytxlmbtk. w, qyiaéihlnk fayi kmahk, gli vle kxltlmk w fkok ny glxyieó k
hygat:

-ubamaytk rknnktxy yi qétxailm, pytxlmk w knqk myñltk, hy dlhyt dkckt
qkxkñk xytgyh glxl nk uby gli nk vamqk hy vbymqtk ctki pytxlmbtk xy rkfyhym
pygrl, dytl rk ubytahl nk pltqbik, uby il my gkimk hy dytmycbat k nlm
fbyilm, dliytxy yi ymqy nygrl, hlihy wkcl qki xlnahl w ubyftkiqkhl uby,
kbiuby hy xa vlnbiqkh ubamaytk mkqampkgyt k nk vbymqtk, pbytk axdlmafny. w
xám, uby my kñkhy k ymqk axdlmafanahkh lqtk xkwlt, uby ym nk dtlxyqahk py
uby qyicl hkhk k nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, úiagk myñltk hy xam xám
ymglihahlm dyimkxayiqlm; uby ma ymql il rbfaytk hy dlt xyhal, il pbytk wl
qki mkihal gkfknnytl uby hyoktk dkmkt yi fnkigl nk vyiqbtlmk lgkmaói yi uby
vbymqtk ctki flihkh xy rk dbymql.

xktaqltiym ymqkfk gliclokhímaxk w qtkmbhkihl, hy vytmy qki kmahk hy hli
ubaolqy, w, mai yiqyihyt ia ymqkt kqyiqk k nkm tkeliym uby ny hygík,
dtlgbtkfk, mai rkfnkt dknkftk, hymkmatmy. yn fbyil hyn kttaytl, k ubayi
qyiíki hymdaytql mbm xknlm hymylm, hymhy yn dbiql uby yiqtó mb glaxk dlt nk
dbytqk, nk maiqaó; ymqbvl kqyiqkxyiqy ymgbgrkihl qlhl nl uby hli ubaolqy
hygík, w, gynlml hy uby nk kmqbtakik ny rbfaymy pknqkhl nk dknkftk dlt
lqtl, my pby nnyckihl xám kn nygrl hy hli ubaolqy, w ymqúvlmy ubyhl rkmqk
vyt yi ubé dktkfki kubynnkm tkeliym, uby én il dlhík yiqyihyt. dytl, glxl
val uby nk xlek pltgyokfk dlt hymkmatmy w hli ubaolqy qtkfkokfk dlt
qyiynnk, dktygaéihlny xkn nk fbtnk, yiktflnó yn ftkel yi knql w hymgktcó
qki qyttafny dbñkhk mlfty nkm ymqtygrkm ubaokhkm hyn yikxltkhl gkfknnytl,
uby ny fkñó qlhk nk flgk yi mkicty; w, il gliqyiql gli ymql, my ny mbfaó
yigaxk hy nkm glmqannkm, w gli nlm daym xám uby hy qtlqy, my nkm dkmyó
qlhkm hy gkfl k gkfl.

yn nygrl, uby ytk bi dlgl yihyfny w hy il patxym pbihkxyiqlm, il dbhayihl
mbptat nk kñkhahbtk hyn kttaytl, hal glimacl yi yn mbynl, k gbwl ctki tbahl
hymdytqó yn vyiqytl, w nbycl axkcaió uby hyfíki hy myt dyihyigakm hy
xktaqltiym, dltuby, rkfaéihlnk nnkxkhl k vlgym, il tymdlihík. gli ymqk
mlmdygrk my nyvkiqó, w, yigyihayihl bi gkihan, my pby rkgak hlihy rkfík
myiqahl nk dynkek. nk xlek, vayihl uby mb kxl vyiík, w uby ytk hy glihagaói
qyttafny, qlhk xyhtlmagk w knfltlqkhk, my kglcaó k nk gkxk hy mkigrl dkiek,
uby kúi hltxík, w knní my kglttbgó w my rael bi lvannl. yn vyiqytl yiqtó
hagayihl:

-¿khóihy ymqám, dbqk? k fbyi mycbtl uby mli qbm glmkm émqkm.

yi ymql, hymdytqó mkigrl, w, maiqayihl kubyn fbnql gkma yigaxk hy mí, dyimó
uby qyiík nk dymkhannk, w glxyieó k hkt dbñkhkm k bik w lqtk dktqy, w yiqty
lqtkm kngkieó gli il mé gbáiqkm k xktaqltiym, nk gbkn, myiqahk hyn hlnlt,
ygrkihl k tlhkt nk rliymqahkh, hal yn tyqltil k mkigrl gli qkiqkm uby, k mb
hymdygrl, ny ubaqó yn mbyñl; yn gbkn, vaéihlmy qtkqkt hy kubynnk xkiytk w
mai mkfyt hy ubaéi, kneáihlmy glxl dbhl, my kftkeó gli xktaqltiym, w
glxyiektli yiqty nlm hlm nk xám tyñahk w ctkgalmk ymgktkxbek hyn xbihl.
vayihl, dbym, yn kttaytl, k nk nbxfty hyn gkihan hyn vyiqytl, gbán kihkfk
mb hkxk, hyokihl k hli ubaolqy, kgbhaó k hknny yn mlglttl iygymktal. nl
xamxl rael yn vyiqytl, dytl gli aiqyigaói hapytyiqy, dltuby pby k gkmqackt
k nk xlek, gtywyihl mai hbhk uby ynnk mlnk ytk nk lgkmaói hy qlhk kubynnk
ktxliík. w kmí glxl mbyny hygatmy: yn ckql kn tkql, yn tkql k nk gbythk, nk
gbythk kn dknl, hkfk yn kttaytl k mkigrl, mkigrl k nk xlek, nk xlek k én,
yn vyiqytl k nk xlek, w qlhlm xyibhykfki gli qkiqk dtaymk uby il my hkfki
dbiql hy tydlml; w pby nl fbyil uby kn vyiqytl my ny kdkcó yn gkihan, w,
glxl ubyhktli kmgbtkm, háfkimy qki mai glxdkmaói qlhlm k fbnql uby, k
hlubaytk uby dliíki nk xkil, il hyokfki glmk mkik.

knlokfk kgkml kubynnk ilgry yi nk vyiqk bi gbkhtannytl hy nlm uby nnkxki hy
nk mkiqk rytxkihkh vayok hy qlnyhl, yn gbkn, lwyihl kimaxymxl yn ymqtkñl
ymqtbyihl hy nk dynyk, kmaó hy mb xyhak vktk w hy nk gkok hy nkqk hy mbm
qíqbnlm, w yiqtó kmgbtkm yi yn kdlmyiql, hagayihl:

-¡qéickimy k nk obmqagak! ¡qéickimy k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh!

w yn dtaxytl gli ubayi qldó pby gli yn kdbñykhl hy hli ubaolqy, uby ymqkfk
yi mb hyttafkhl nygrl, qyihahl flgk kttafk, mai myiqahl kncbil, w,
ygráihlny k qayiql xkil k nkm fktfkm, il gymkfk hy hygat:

-¡pkvlt k nk obmqagak!

dytl, vayihl uby yn uby qyiík kmahl il my fbnník ia xyiykfk, my hal k
yiqyihyt uby ymqkfk xbytql, w uby nlm uby knní hyiqtl ymqkfki ytki mbm
xkqkhltym; w gli ymqk mlmdygrk typlteó nk vle, hagayihl:

-¡gaéttymy nk dbytqk hy nk vyiqk! ¡xatyi il my vkwk ikhay, uby rki xbytql
kubí k bi rlxfty!

ymqk vle mlftymknqó k qlhlm, w gkhk gbkn hyoó nk dyihyigak yi yn ctkhl uby
ny qlxó nk vle. tyqatómy yn vyiqytl k mb kdlmyiql, yn kttaytl k mbm
yioknxkm, nk xlek k mb tkigrl; mlnlm nlm hymvyiqbtkhlm hli ubaolqy w mkigrl
il my dbhaytli xlvyt hy hlihy ymqkfki. mlnqó yi ymql yn gbkhtannytl nk
fktfk hy hli ubaolqy, w mknaó k fbmgkt nbe dktk fbmgkt w dtyihyt nlm
hynaigbyiqym; xkm il nk rknnó, dltuby yn vyiqytl, hy aihbmqtak, rkfík
xbytql nk náxdktk gbkihl my tyqató k mb ymqkigak, w pbyny pltelml kgbhat k
nk graxyiyk, hlihy, gli xbgrl qtkfkol w qayxdl, yigyihaó yn gbkhtannytl
lqtl gkihan.





gkdíqbnl zvaa. hlihy my dtlmacbyi nlm aiibxytkfnym qtkfkolm uby yn ftkvl
hli ubaolqy w mb fbyi ymgbhytl mkigrl dkiek dkmktli yi nk vyiqk uby, dlt mb
xkn, dyimó uby ytk gkmqannl


rkfík wk vbynql yi ymqy qayxdl hy mb dktkmamxl hli ubaolqy, w, gli yn xymxl
qlil hy vle gli uby yn hík kiqym rkfík nnkxkhl k mb ymgbhytl, gbkihl ymqkfk
qyihahl yi yn vkn hy nkm ymqkgkm, ny glxyieó k nnkxkt, hagayihl:

-mkigrl kxacl, ¿hbytxym? ¿hbytxym, kxacl mkigrl?

-¿ubé qyicl hy hltxat, dymak k xí -tymdlihaó mkigrl, nnyil hy dymkhbxfty w
hy hymdygrl-; uby il dktygy mail uby qlhlm nlm hakfnlm rki kihkhl glixacl
ymqk ilgry?

-dbéhymnl gtyyt kimí, mai hbhk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby, l wl mé
dlgl, l ymqy gkmqannl ym yigkiqkhl. dltuby rkm hy mkfyt... xkm, ymql uby
krltk ubaytl hygatqy rkmxy hy obtkt uby nl qyihtám mygtyql rkmqk hymdbém hy
xa xbytqy.

-mí obtl -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-híclnl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby mlw yiyxacl hy uby my ubaqy nk rlitk
k ikhay.

-hacl uby mí obtl -qltió k hygat mkigrl- uby nl gknnkté rkmqk hymdbém hy
nlm híkm hy vbymqtk xytgyh, w dnyck k halm uby nl dbyhk hymgbftat xkñkik.
-¿qki xknkm lftkm qy rkcl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby xy ubyttíkm
vyt xbytql gli qkiqk ftyvyhkh?

-il ym dlt yml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mail dltuby mlw yiyxacl hy cbkthkt xbgrl
nkm glmkm, w il ubyttík uby my xy dbhtaymyi hy cbkthkhkm.

-myk dlt nl uby pbyty -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby xám píl hy qb kxlt w hy qb
gltqymík; w kmí, rkm hy mkfyt uby ymqk ilgry xy rk mbgyhahl bik hy nkm xám
ymqtkñkm kvyiqbtkm uby wl mkfté yigktygyt; w, dlt gliqátqynk yi ftyvy,
mkftám uby dlgl rk uby k xí vail nk raok hyn myñlt hymqy gkmqannl, uby ym
nk xám kdbymqk w pytxlmk hligynnk uby yi ctki dktqy hy nk qayttk my dbyhy
rknnkt. ¿ubé qy dlhtík hygat hyn khltil hy mb dytmlik? ¿ubé hy mb cknnkthl
yiqyihaxayiql? ¿ubé hy lqtkm glmkm lgbnqkm, uby, dlt cbkthkt nk py uby hyfl
k xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, hyokté dkmkt aiqkgqkm w yi manyigal? mónl
qy ubaytl hygat uby, yivahalml yn gaynl hy qkiql fayi glxl nk vyiqbtk xy
rkfík dbymql yi nkm xkilm, l ubaeá, w ymql ym nl xám gaytql, uby, glxl
qyicl hagrl, ym yigkiqkhl ymqy gkmqannl, kn qayxdl uby wl ymqkfk gli ynnk
yi hbngímaxlm w kxltlmímaxlm glnlubalm, mai uby wl nk vaymy ia mbdaymy dlt
hóihy vyiík, vail bik xkil dyckhk k kncúi ftkel hy kncúi hymglxbikn cackiqy
w kmyiqóxy bik dbñkhk yi nkm ubaokhkm, qkn, uby nkm qyicl qlhkm fkñkhkm yi
mkicty; w hymdbém xy xlnaó hy qkn mbytqy uby ymqlw dylt uby kwyt gbkihl nlm
cknnyclm, uby, dlt hyxkmíkm hy tlgaikiqy, ilm ragaytli yn kctkval uby
mkfym. dlt hlihy glioyqbtl uby yn qymltl hy nk pytxlmbtk hymqk hligynnk ny
hyfy hy cbkthkt kncúi yigkiqkhl xltl, w il hyfy hy myt dktk xí.

-ia dktk xí qkxdlgl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby xám hy gbkqtlgayiqlm xltlm
xy rki kdlttykhl k xí, hy xkiytk uby yn xlnaxayiql hy nkm ymqkgkm pby
qltqkm w dki daiqkhl. dytl híckxy, myñlt, ¿góxl nnkxk k émqk fbyik w tktk
kvyiqbtk, rkfayihl ubyhkhl hynnk gbkn ubyhkxlm? kbi vbymqtk xytgyh xyilm
xkn, dbym qbvl yi mbm xkilm kubynnk aiglxdktkfny pytxlmbtk uby rk hagrl,
dytl wl, ¿ubé qbvy mail nlm xkwltym dlttkelm uby dayiml tygyfat yi qlhk xa
vahk? ¡hymhagrkhl hy xí w hy nk xkhty uby xy dktaó, uby ia mlw gkfknnytl
kihkiqy, ia nl dayiml myt okxám, w hy qlhkm nkm xknkihkiekm xy gkfy nk
xkwlt dktqy!

-nbycl, ¿qkxfaéi ymqám qú kdlttykhl? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-¿il ny ry hagrl uby mí, dymak k xa naikoy? -haol mkigrl.

-il qyickm dyik, kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby wl rkté kcltk yn fánmkxl
dtygalml gli uby mkiktyxlm yi bi kftat w gyttkt hy lolm.

kgkfó yi ymql hy yigyihyt yn gkihan yn gbkhtannytl, w yiqtó k vyt yn uby
dyimkfk uby ytk xbytql; w, kmí glxl ny val yiqtkt mkigrl, vaéihlny vyiat yi
gkxamk w gli mb dkñl hy gkfyek w gkihan yi nk xkil, w gli bik xbw xknk
gktk, dtycbiqó k mb kxl:

-myñlt, ¿ma mytá émqy, k hagrk, yn xltl yigkiqkhl, uby ilm vbynvy k
gkmqackt, ma my hyoó kncl yi yn qaiqytl?

-il dbyhy myt yn xltl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby nlm yigkiqkhlm il my
hyoki vyt hy ikhay.

-ma il my hyoki vyt, héokimy myiqat -haol mkigrl-; ma il, híckinl xam
ymdknhkm.

-qkxfaéi nl dlhtíki hygat nkm xíkm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dytl il ym
fkmqkiqy aihagal émy dktk gtyyt uby ymqy uby my vyy myk yn yigkiqkhl xltl.
nnycó yn gbkhtannytl, w, glxl nlm rknnó rkfnkihl yi qki mlmyckhk
glivytmkgaói, ubyhó mbmdyiml. fayi ym vythkh uby kúi hli ubaolqy my ymqkfk
flgk kttafk, mai dlhytmy xyiykt, hy dbtl xlnahl w yxdnkmqkhl. nnycómy k én
yn gbkhtannytl w híolny:

-dbym, ¿góxl vk, fbyi rlxfty?

-rkfnktk wl xám fayi gtakhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ma pbytk uby vlm.
¿Úmkmy yi ymqk qayttk rkfnkt hymk mbytqy k nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym,
xkokhytl?

yn gbkhtannytl, uby my val qtkqkt qki xkn hy bi rlxfty hy qki xkn dktygyt,
il nl dbhl mbptat, w, knekihl yn gkihan gli qlhl mb kgyaqy, hal k hli
ubaolqy gli én yi nk gkfyek, hy mbytqy uby ny hyoó xbw fayi hymgknkftkhl;
w, glxl qlhl ubyhó kmgbtkm, mknaómy nbycl; w mkigrl dkiek haol:

-mai hbhk, myñlt, uby émqy ym yn xltl yigkiqkhl, w hyfy hy cbkthkt yn
qymltl dktk lqtlm, w dktk ilmlqtlm mónl cbkthk nkm dbñkhkm w nlm
gkihankelm.

-kmí ym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w il rkw uby rkgyt gkml hymqkm glmkm hy
yigkiqkxyiqlm, ia rkw dktk ubé qlxkt gónytk ia yilol gli ynnkm; uby, glxl
mli aivamafnym w pkiqámqagkm, il rknnktyxlm hy ubaéi vyicktilm, kbiuby xám
nl dtlgbtyxlm. nyváiqkqy, mkigrl, ma dbyhym, w nnkxk kn kngkahy hymqk
pltqknyek, w dtlgbtk uby my xy hé bi dlgl hy kgyaqy, vail, mkn w tlxytl
dktk rkgyt yn mknbqípytl fánmkxl; uby yi vythkh uby gtyl uby nl ry fayi
xyiymqyt krltk, dltuby my xy vk xbgrk mkicty hy nk rytahk uby ymqk pkiqkmxk
xy rk hkhl.

nyváiqlmy mkigrl gli rktql hlnlt hy mbm rbymlm, w pby kmgbtkm hlihy ymqkfk
yn vyiqytl; w, yigliqtáihlmy gli yn gbkhtannytl, uby ymqkfk ymgbgrkihl yi
ubé dktkfk mb yiyxacl, ny haol:

-myñlt, ubayi ubaytk uby myáam, rkgyhilm xytgyh w fyiypagal hy hktilm bi
dlgl hy tlxytl, kgyaqy, mkn w vail, uby ym xyiymqyt dktk gbtkt bil hy nlm
xyoltym gkfknnytlm kihkiqym uby rkw yi nk qayttk, yn gbkn wkgy yi kubynnk
gkxk, xknpytahl dlt nkm xkilm hyn yigkiqkhl xltl uby ymqá yi ymqk vyiqk.
gbkihl yn gbkhtannytl qkn lwó, qúvlny dlt rlxfty pknql hy myml; w, dltuby
wk glxyiekfk k kxkiygyt, kftaó nk dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, w, nnkxkihl kn
vyiqytl, ny haol nl uby kubyn fbyi rlxfty ubytík. yn vyiqytl ny dtlvywó hy
gbkiql ubaml, w mkigrl my nl nnyvó k hli ubaolqy, uby ymqkfk gli nkm xkilm
yi nk gkfyek, ubyoáihlmy hyn hlnlt hyn gkihankel, uby il ny rkfík rygrl xám
xkn uby nyvkiqktny hlm gragrliym kncl gtygahlm, w nl uby én dyimkfk uby ytk
mkicty il ytk mail mbhlt uby mbhkfk gli nk gliclok hy nk dkmkhk qltxyiqk.
yi tymlnbgaói, én qlxó mbm maxdnym, hy nlm gbknym rael bi glxdbymql,
xyegnáihlnlm qlhlm w glgaéihlnlm bi fbyi ymdkgal, rkmqk uby ny dktygaó uby
ymqkfki yi mb dbiql. dahaó nbycl kncbik tyhlxk dktk ygrknnl, w, glxl il nk
rbfl yi nk vyiqk, my tymlnvaó hy dliynnl yi bik kngbek l kgyaqytk hy rlok
hy nkqk, hy ubayi yn vyiqytl ny rael ctkqk hlikgaói. w nbycl haol mlfty nk
kngbek xám hy lgryiqk dkqytilmqtym w lqtkm qkiqkm kvyxktíkm, mknvym w
gtyhlm, w k gkhk dknkftk kglxdkñkfk bik gtbe, k xlhl hy fyihagaói; k qlhl
nl gbkn my rknnktli dtymyiqym mkigrl, yn vyiqytl w gbkhtannytl; uby wk yn
kttaytl mlmyckhkxyiqy kihkfk yiqyihayihl yi yn fyiypagal hy mbm xkgrlm.
rygrl ymql, ubaml én xymxl rkgyt nbycl nk ymdytayigak hy nk vatqbh hy kubyn
dtygalml fánmkxl uby én my axkcaikfk; w kmí, my fyfaó, hy nl uby il dbhl
gkfyt yi nk kngbek w ubyhkfk yi nk lnnk hlihy my rkfík glgahl, gkma xyhak
kebxfty; w kdyikm nl kgkfó hy fyfyt, gbkihl glxyieó k vlxaqkt hy xkiytk uby
il ny ubyhó glmk yi yn ymqóxkcl; w gli nkm kimakm w kcaqkgaói hyn vóxaql ny
hal bi mbhlt gldalmímaxl, dlt nl gbkn xkihó uby ny kttldkmyi w ny hyokmyi
mlnl. ragaétlinl kimí, w ubyhómy hltxahl xám hy qtym rltkm, kn gkfl hy nkm
gbknym hymdytqó w my maiqaó knavakhímaxl hyn gbytdl, w yi qkn xkiytk xyolt
hy mb ubyftkiqkxayiql uby my qbvl dlt mkil; w vythkhytkxyiqy gtywó uby
rkfík kgytqkhl gli yn fánmkxl hy paytkftám, w uby gli kubyn tyxyhal dlhík
kglxyqyt hymhy knní khynkiqy, mai qyxlt kncbil, gbknymubaytk tbaikm,
fkqknnkm w dyihyigakm, dlt dynactlmkm uby pbymyi.

mkigrl dkiek, uby qkxfaéi qbvl k xankctl nk xyoltík hy mb kxl, ny tlcó uby
ny haymy k én nl uby ubyhkfk yi nk lnnk, uby il ytk dlgk gkiqahkh.
gligyhaómynl hli ubaolqy, w én, qlxáihlnk k hlm xkilm, gli fbyik py w xyolt
qknkiqy, my nk ygró k dygrlm, w yivkmó fayi dlgl xyilm uby mb kxl. ym,
dbym, yn gkml uby yn ymqóxkcl hyn dlfty mkigrl il hyfík hy myt qki hynagkhl
glxl yn hy mb kxl, w kmí, dtaxytl uby vlxaqkmy, ny haytli qkiqkm kimakm w
fkmgkm, gli qkiqlm qtkmbhltym w hymxkwlm uby én dyimó fayi w vythkhytkxyiqy
uby ytk nnyckhk mb únqaxk rltk; w, vaéihlmy qki kpnacahl w gliclokhl,
xknhygík yn fánmkxl w kn nkhtói uby my nl rkfík hkhl. vaéihlny kmí hli
ubaolqy, ny haol:

-wl gtyl, mkigrl, uby qlhl ymqy xkn qy vayiy hy il myt ktxkhl gkfknnytl,
dltuby qyicl dktk xí uby ymqy naglt il hyfy hy kdtlvygrkt k nlm uby il nl
mli.

-ma yml mkfík vbymqtk xytgyh -tydnagó mkigrl-, ¡xkn rkwk wl w qlhk xa
dktyiqynk!, ¿dktk ubé glimaiqaó uby nl cbmqkmy?

yi ymql, rael mb ldytkgaói yn ftyfkoy, w glxyieó yn dlfty ymgbhytl k
hymkcbktmy dlt yiqtkxfkm gkiknym, gli qkiqk dtaymk uby nk ymqytk hy yiyk,
mlfty ubayi my rkfík vbynql k ygrkt, ia nk xkiqk hy kioyl gli uby my
gbftík, pbytli xám hy dtlvygrl. mbhkfk w qtkmbhkfk gli qknym dktkmamxlm w
kggahyiqym, uby il mlnkxyiqy én, mail qlhlm dyimktli uby my ny kgkfkfk nk
vahk. hbtóny ymqk flttkmgk w xknk kihkiek gkma hlm rltkm, kn gkfl hy nkm
gbknym il ubyhó glxl mb kxl, mail qki xlnahl w ubyftkiqkhl uby il my dlhík
qyiyt.

dytl hli ubaolqy, uby, glxl my rk hagrl, my maiqaó knavakhl w mkil, ubaml
dktqatmy nbycl k fbmgkt kvyiqbtkm, dktygaéihlny uby qlhl yn qayxdl uby knní
my qkthkfk ytk ubaqátmyny kn xbihl w k nlm yi én xyiymqytlmlm hy mb pkvlt w
kxdktl; w xám gli nk mycbtahkh w glipakiek uby nnyvkfk yi mb fánmkxl. w
kmí, pltekhl hymqy hymyl, én xamxl yimannó k tlgaikiqy w yiknfkthó kn
obxyiql hy mb ymgbhytl, k ubayi qkxfaéi kwbhó k vymqat w k mbfat yi yn
kmil. dúmlmy nbycl k gkfknnl, w, nnycáihlmy k bi taigói hy nk vyiqk, kmaó
hy bi nkieói uby knní ymqkfk, dktk uby ny matvaymy hy nkiek.

ymqáfkiny xatkihl qlhlm gbkiqlm rkfík yi nk vyiqk, uby dkmkfki hy xám hy
vyaiqy dytmlikm; xatáfkny qkxfaéi nk raok hyn vyiqytl, w én qkxfaéi il
ubaqkfk nlm lolm hynnk, w hy gbkihl yi gbkihl kttlokfk bi mlmdatl uby
dktygík uby ny kttkigkfk hy nl dtlpbihl hy mbm yiqtkñkm, w qlhlm dyimkfki
uby hyfík hy myt hyn hlnlt uby myiqík yi nkm glmqannkm; k nl xyilm,
dyimáfkinl kubynnlm uby nk ilgry kiqym ny rkfíki vamql faexkt.

wk uby ymqbvaytli nlm hlm k gkfknnl, dbymql k nk dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, nnkxó
kn vyiqytl, w gli vle xbw tydlmkhk w ctkvy ny haol:

-xbgrkm w xbw ctkihym mli nkm xytgyhym, myñlt kngkahy, uby yi ymqy vbymqtl
gkmqannl ry tygyfahl, w ubyhl lfnackhímaxl k kctkhygétlmnkm qlhlm nlm híkm
hy xa vahk. ma lm nkm dbyhl dkckt yi rkgytlm vyickhl hy kncúi mlfytfal uby
lm rkwk pygrl kncúi kctkval, mkfyh uby xa lpagal il ym lqtl mail vknyt k
nlm uby dlgl dbyhyi, w vyickt k nlm uby tygafyi qbytqlm, w gkmqackt
knyvlmíkm. tyglttyh vbymqtk xyxltak, w ma rknnáam kncbik glmk hymqy okye
uby yiglxyihktxy, il rkw mail hygannk; uby wl lm dtlxyql, dlt nk lthyi hy
gkfknnytl uby tygyfí, hy pkgytlm mkqampygrl w dkckhl k qlhk vbymqtk
vlnbiqkh.

yn vyiqytl ny tymdlihaó gli yn xymxl mlmaycl:

-myñlt gkfknnytl, wl il qyicl iygymahkh hy uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy vyicby
iaicúi kctkval, dltuby wl mé qlxkt nk vyickiek uby xy dktygy, gbkihl my xy
rkgyi. mónl ry xyiymqyt uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy dkcby yn ckmql uby ymqk ilgry
rk rygrl yi nk vyiqk, kmí hy nk dkok w gyfkhk hy mbm hlm fymqakm, glxl hy
nk gyik w gkxkm.

-nbycl, ¿vyiqk ym émqk? -tydnagó hli ubaolqy.

-w xbw rlitkhk -tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl.

-yickñkhl ry vavahl rkmqk kubí -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby yi vythkh uby
dyimé uby ytk gkmqannl, w il xknl; dytl, dbym ym kimí uby il ym gkmqannl
mail vyiqk, nl uby my dlhtá rkgyt dlt kcltk ym uby dythliéam dlt nk dkck,
uby wl il dbyhl gliqtkvyiat k nk lthyi hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, hy nlm
gbknym mé gaytql, mai uby rkmqk krltk rkwk nyíhl glmk yi gliqtktal, uby
okxám dkcktli dlmkhk ia lqtk glmk yi vyiqk hlihy ymqbvaymyi, dltuby my nym
hyfy hy pbytl w hy hytygrl gbknubayt fbyi kglcaxayiql uby my nym ragayty,
yi dkcl hyn aimbptafny qtkfkol uby dkhygyi fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm hy ilgry
w hy hík, yi aivaytil w yi vytkil, k day w k gkfknnl, gli myh w gli rkxfty,
gli gknlt w gli ptíl, mboyqlm k qlhkm nkm aignyxyigakm hyn gaynl w k qlhlm
nlm aigóxlhlm hy nk qayttk.

-dlgl qyicl wl uby vyt yi yml -tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl-; dácbymyxy nl uby my
xy hyfy, w hyoéxlilm hy gbyiqlm ia hy gkfknnytíkm, uby wl il qyicl gbyiqk
gli lqtk glmk uby gli glftkt xa rkgayihk.

-vlm mlam bi mkihal w xkn rlmqknytl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

w, dliayihl daytikm kn tlgaikiqy w qytgakihl mb nkieói, my mknaó hy nk
vyiqk mai uby ikhay ny hyqbvaymy, w én, mai xatkt ma ny mycbík mb ymgbhytl,
my knlicó bi fbyi qtygrl.

yn vyiqytl, uby ny val at w uby il ny dkckfk, kgbhaó k glftkt hy mkigrl
dkiek, yn gbkn haol uby, dbym mb myñlt il rkfík ubytahl dkckt, uby qkxdlgl
én dkcktík; dltuby, mayihl én ymgbhytl hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy, glxl ytk, nk
xymxk tycnk w tkeói glttík dlt én glxl dlt mb kxl yi il dkckt glmk kncbik
yi nlm xymliym w vyiqkm. kxlraiómy xbgrl hymql yn vyiqytl, w kxyikeóny uby
ma il ny dkckfk, uby nl glftktík hy xlhl uby ny dymkmy. k nl gbkn mkigrl
tymdlihaó uby, dlt nk nyw hy gkfknnytík uby mb kxl rkfík tygyfahl, il
dkcktík bi mlnl gltikhl, kbiuby ny glmqkmy nk vahk; dltuby il rkfík hy
dythyt dlt én nk fbyik w kiqacbk bmkiek hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, ia my
rkfíki hy ubyokt hén nlm ymgbhytlm hy nlm qknym uby ymqkfki dlt vyiat kn
xbihl, tydtlgráihlny yn ubyftkiqkxayiql hy qki obmql pbytl.

ubaml nk xknk mbytqy hyn hymhagrkhl mkigrl uby, yiqty nk cyiqy uby ymqkfk
yi nk vyiqk, my rknnkmyi gbkqtl dytkanym hy myclvak, qtym kcboytlm hyn
dlqtl hy góthlfk w hlm vygailm hy nk rytak hy myvannk, cyiqy knycty, fayi
aiqyigalikhk, xknykiqy w obcbyqlik, nlm gbknym, gkma glxl aimqackhlm w
xlvahlm hy bi xymxl ymdítaqb, my nnycktli k mkigrl, w, kdyáihlny hyn kmil,
bil hynnlm yiqtó dlt nk xkiqk hy nk gkxk hyn rbémdyh, w, ygráihlny yi ynnk,
knektli nlm lolm w vaytli uby yn qygrl ytk kncl xám fkol hy nl uby rkfíki
xyiymqyt dktk mb lftk, w hyqytxaiktli mknatmy kn glttkn, uby qyiík dlt
níxaqy yn gaynl. w knní, dbymql mkigrl yi xaqkh hy nk xkiqk, glxyiektli k
nyvkiqktny yi knql w k rlncktmy gli én glxl gli dyttl dlt gktiymqlnyihkm.
nkm vlgym uby yn xímytl xkiqykhl hkfk pbytli qkiqkm, uby nnycktli k nlm
líhlm hy mb kxl; yn gbkn, hyqytxaiáihlmy k ymgbgrkt kqyiqkxyiqy, gtywó uby
kncbik ibyvk kvyiqbtk ny vyiík, rkmqk uby gnktkxyiqy glilgaó uby yn uby
ctaqkfk ytk mb ymgbhytl; w, vlnvayihl nkm tayihkm, gli bi dyikhl cknldy
nnycó k nk vyiqk, w, rknnáihlnk gyttkhk, nk tlhyó dlt vyt ma rknnkfk dlt
hlihy yiqtkt; dytl il rbfl nnyckhl k nkm dktyhym hyn glttkn, uby il ytki
xbw knqkm, gbkihl val yn xkn obycl uby my ny rkgík k mb ymgbhytl. valny
fkokt w mbfat dlt yn katy, gli qkiqk ctkgak w dtymqyek uby, ma nk gónytk ny
hyoktk, qyicl dktk xí uby my taytk. dtlfó k mbfat hymhy yn gkfknnl k nkm
fkthkm, dytl ymqkfk qki xlnahl w ubyftkiqkhl uby kbi kdyktmy il dbhl; w
kmí, hymhy yigaxk hyn gkfknnl, glxyieó k hygat qkiqlm hyibymqlm w fknhliym
k nlm uby k mkigrl xkiqykfki, uby il ym dlmafny kgytqkt k ymgtafannlm; xkm
il dlt ymql gymkfki ynnlm hy mb tamk w hy mb lftk, ia yn vlnkhlt mkigrl
hyokfk mbm ubyokm, xyegnkhkm wk gli kxyikekm, wk gli tbyclm; xkm qlhl
kdtlvygrkfk dlgl, ia kdtlvygró, rkmqk uby hy dbtl gkimkhlm ny hyoktli.
qtboétliny knní mb kmil, w, mbfaéihlny yigaxk, ny kttldktli gli mb ckfái. w
nk glxdkmavk hy xktaqltiym, vaéihlny qki pkqackhl, ny dktygaó myt fayi
mlglttynny gli bi okttl hy kcbk, w kmí, my ny qtbol hyn dlel, dlt myt xám
ptíl. qlxóny mkigrl, w nnyváihlny k nk flgk, my dktó k nkm vlgym uby mb kxl
ny hkfk, hagayihl:

-¡raol mkigrl, il fyfkm kcbk! ¡raol, il nk fyfkm, uby qy xkqktá! ¿vym? kubí
qyicl yn mkiqímaxl fánmkxl -w yimyñáfkny nk kngbek hyn ftyfkoy-, uby gli
hlm clqkm uby hén fyfkm mkiktám mai hbhk.

k ymqkm vlgym vlnvaó mkigrl nlm lolm, glxl hy qtkvém, w haol gli lqtkm
xkwltym:

-¿dlt hagrk rámyny lnvahkhl k vbymqtk xytgyh glxl wl il mlw gkfknnytl, l
ubayty uby kgkfy hy vlxaqkt nkm yiqtkñkm uby xy ubyhktli hy kilgry?
cbáthymy mb naglt gli qlhlm nlm hakfnlm w héoyxy k xí.

w yn kgkfkt hy hygat ymql w yn glxyiekt k fyfyt qlhl pby bil; xkm, glxl kn
dtaxyt qtkcl val uby ytk kcbk, il ubaml dkmkt khynkiqy, w tlcó k xktaqltiym
uby my ny qtboymy hy vail, w kmí nl rael ynnk hy xbw fbyik vlnbiqkh, w nl
dkcó hy mb xymxl haiytl; dltuby, yi ypygql, my hagy hynnk uby, kbiuby
ymqkfk yi kubyn qtkql, qyiík bikm mlxftkm w nyolm hy gtamqakik.

kmí glxl fyfaó mkigrl, hal hy nlm gktgkñlm k mb kmil, w, kftaéihlny nk
dbytqk hy nk vyiqk hy dkt yi dkt, my mknaó hynnk, xbw gliqyiql hy il rkfyt
dkckhl ikhk w hy rkfyt mknahl gli mb aiqyigaói, kbiuby rkfík mahl k glmqk
hy mbm kglmqbxftkhlm pakhltym, uby ytki mbm ymdknhkm. vythkh ym uby yn
vyiqytl my ubyhó gli mbm knpltokm yi dkcl hy nl uby my ny hyfík; xkm mkigrl
il nkm ygró xyilm, mycúi mknaó qbtfkhl. ubaml yn vyiqytl kqtkigkt fayi nk
dbytqk kmí glxl ny val pbytk, xkm il nl glimaiqaytli nlm xkiqykhltym, uby
ytki cyiqy uby, kbiuby hli ubaolqy pbytk vythkhytkxyiqy hy nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym hy nk qkfnk tyhlihk, il ny ymqaxktki yi hlm kthaqym.





gkdíqbnl zvaaa. hlihy my gbyiqki nkm tkeliym uby dkmó mkigrl dkiek gli mb
myñlt hli ubaolqy, gli lqtkm kvyiqbtkm hacikm hy myt gliqkhkm


nnycó mkigrl k mb kxl xktgraql w hymxkwkhl; qkiql, uby il dlhík kttykt k mb
obxyiql. gbkihl kmí ny val hli ubaolqy, ny haol:

-krltk kgkfl hy gtyyt, mkigrl fbyil, uby kubyn gkmqannl l vyiqk, hy uby ym
yigkiqkhl mai hbhk; dltuby kubynnlm uby qki kqtlexyiqy qlxktli dkmkqayxdl
gliqacl, ¿ubé dlhíki myt mail pkiqkmxkm w cyiqy hyn lqtl xbihl? w glipatxl
ymql dlt rkfyt vamql uby, gbkihl ymqkfk dlt nkm fkthkm hyn glttkn xatkihl
nlm kgqlm hy qb qtamqy qtkcyhak, il xy pby dlmafny mbfat dlt ynnkm, ia
xyilm dbhy kdyktxy hy tlgaikiqy, dltuby xy hyfíki hy qyiyt yigkiqkhl; uby
qy obtl, dlt nk py hy ubayi mlw, uby ma dbhaytk mbfat l kdyktxy, uby wl qy
ragaytk vyickhl hy xkiytk uby kubynnlm plnnliym w xknkihtaiym my kglthktki
hy nk fbtnk dktk mayxdty, kbiuby yi ynnl mbdaytk gliqtkvyiat k nkm nywym hy
nk gkfknnytík, uby, glxl wk xbgrkm vygym qy ry hagrl, il glimayiqyi uby
gkfknnytl dlick xkil gliqtk ubayi il nl myk, ma il pbyty yi hypyimk hy mb
dtldtak vahk w dytmlik, yi gkml hy btcyiqy w ctki iygymahkh.

-qkxfaéi xy vyicktk wl ma dbhaytk, pbytk l il pbytk ktxkhl gkfknnytl, dytl
il dbhy; kbiuby qyicl dktk xí uby kubynnlm uby my rlncktli glixacl il ytki
pkiqkmxkm ia rlxftym yigkiqkhlm, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, mail rlxftym hy
gktiy w rbyml glxl ilmlqtlm; w qlhlm, mycúi nlm lí ilxftkt gbkihl xy
vlnqykfki, qyiíki mbm ilxftym: uby yn bil my nnkxkfk dyhtl xktqíiye, w yn
lqtl qyiltal rytiáihye, w yn vyiqytl lí uby my nnkxkfk obki dknlxyuby yn
ebthl. kmí uby, myñlt, yn il dlhyt mknqkt nkm fkthkm hyn glttkn, ia kdyktmy
hyn gkfknnl, yi án ymqbvl uby yi yigkiqkxyiqlm. w nl uby wl mkgl yi naxdal
hy qlhl ymql ym uby ymqkm kvyiqbtkm uby kihkxlm fbmgkihl, kn gkfl kn gkfl,
ilm rki hy qtkyt k qkiqkm hymvyiqbtkm uby il mydkxlm gbán ym ibymqtl day
hytygrl. w nl uby mytík xyolt w xám kgytqkhl, mycúi xa dlgl yiqyihaxayiql,
pbytk yn vlnvytilm k ibymqtl nbckt, krltk uby ym qayxdl hy nk mayck w hy
yiqyihyt yi nk rkgayihk, hyoáihlilm hy kihkt hy gygk yi xygk w hy elgk yi
glnlhtk, glxl hagyi.

-¡ubé dlgl mkfym, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, hy kgrkuby hy gkfknnytík!
gknnk w qyi dkgayigak, uby hík vyihtá hlihy vykm dlt vamqk hy lolm gbái
rlitlmk glmk ym kihkt yi ymqy yoytgagal. ma il, haxy: ¿ubé xkwlt gliqyiql
dbyhy rkfyt yi yn xbihl, l ubé cbmql dbyhy acbknktmy kn hy vyigyt bik
fkqknnk w kn hy qtabipkt hy mb yiyxacl? iaicbil, mai hbhk kncbik.

-kmí hyfy hy myt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dbymql uby wl il nl mé; mónl mé uby,
hymdbém uby mlxlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, l vbymqtk xytgyh nl ym (uby wl il
rkw dktk ubé xy gbyiqy yi qki rlitlml iúxytl), okxám ryxlm vyigahl fkqknnk
kncbik, ma il pby nk hyn vaegkíil, w kbi hy kubénnk mknaó vbymqtk xytgyh
gli xyhak ltyok w xyhak gynkhk xyilm; uby, hymdbém kgá, qlhl rk mahl dknlm
w xám dknlm, dbñkhkm w xám dbñkhkm, nnyvkihl wl hy vyiqkok yn xkiqykxayiql
w rkfytxy mbgyhahl dlt dytmlikm yigkiqkhkm, hy ubayi il dbyhl vyicktxy,
dktk mkfyt rkmqk hóihy nnyck yn cbmql hyn vyigaxayiql hyn yiyxacl, glxl
vbymqtk xytgyh hagy.

-Émk ym nk dyik uby wl qyicl w nk uby qú hyfym qyiyt, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli
ubaolqy-; dytl, hy kubí khynkiqy, wl dtlgbtkté rkfyt k nkm xkilm kncbik
ymdkhk rygrk dlt qkn xkymqtík, uby kn uby nk qtboyty glimacl il ny dbyhki
rkgyt iaicúi céiytl hy yigkiqkxyiqlm; w kbi dlhtík myt uby xy hydktkmy nk
vyiqbtk kubynnk hy kxkhím, gbkihl my nnkxkfk yn gkfknnytl hy nk kthayiqy
ymdkhk, uby pby bik hy nkm xyoltym ymdkhkm uby qbvl gkfknnytl yi yn xbihl,
dltuby, pbytk uby qyiík nk vatqbh hagrk, gltqkfk glxl bik ikvkok, w il
rkfík ktxkhbtk, dlt pbytqy w yigkiqkhk uby pbymy, uby my ny dktkmy hynkiqy.
-wl mlw qki vyiqbtlml -haol mkigrl- uby, gbkihl yml pbymy w vbymqtk xytgyh
vaiaymy k rknnkt ymdkhk myxyokiqy, mónl vyihtík k mytvat w kdtlvygrkt k nlm
ktxkhlm gkfknnytlm, glxl yn fánmkxl; w nlm ymgbhytlm, uby my nlm dkdyi
hbynlm.

-il qyxkm yml, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby xyolt nl rktá yn gaynl
gliqacl.

ym ymqlm glnlubalm afki hli ubaolqy w mb ymgbhytl, gbkihl val hli ubaolqy
uby dlt yn gkxail uby afki vyiík rkgak ynnlm bik ctkihy w ymdymk dlnvktyhk;
w, yi vaéihlnk, my vlnvaó k mkigrl w ny haol:

-Émqy ym yn hík, ¡lr mkigrl!, yi yn gbkn my rk hy vyt yn fayi uby xy qayiy
cbkthkhl xa mbytqy; émqy ym yn hík, hacl, yi uby my rk hy xlmqtkt, qkiql
glxl yi lqtl kncbil, yn vknlt hy xa ftkel, w yi yn uby qyicl hy rkgyt lftkm
uby ubyhyi ymgtaqkm yi yn naftl hy nk pkxk dlt qlhlm nlm vyiahytlm macnlm.
¿vym kubynnk dlnvktyhk uby knní my nyvkiqk, mkigrl? dbym qlhk ym gbkokhk hy
bi gldalmímaxl yoétgaql uby hy havytmkm y aiibxytkfnym cyiqym dlt knní
vayiy xktgrkihl.

-k ymk gbyiqk, hlm hyfyi hy myt -haol mkigrl-, dltuby hymqk dktqy gliqtktak
my nyvkiqk kmaxymxl lqtk myxyokiqy dlnvktyhk.

vlnvaó k xatktnl hli ubaolqy, w val uby kmí ytk nk vythkh; w, knyctáihlmy
mlftyxkiytk, dyimó, mai hbhk kncbik, uby ytki hlm yoétgaqlm uby vyiíki k
yxfymqatmy w k yigliqtktmy yi xaqkh hy kubynnk ymdkgalmk nnkibtk; dltuby
qyiík k qlhkm rltkm w xlxyiqlm nnyik nk pkiqkmík hy kubynnkm fkqknnkm,
yigkiqkxyiqlm, mbgymlm, hymkqailm, kxltym, hymkpílm, uby yi nlm naftlm hy
gkfknnytíkm my gbyiqki, w qlhl gbkiql rkfnkfk, dyimkfk l rkgík ytk
yigkxaikhl k glmkm myxyokiqym. w nk dlnvktyhk uby rkfík vamql nk nyvkiqkfki
hlm ctkihym xkikhkm hy lvyokm w gktiytlm uby, dlt kubyn xymxl gkxail, hy
hlm hapytyiqym dktqym vyiíki, nkm gbknym, gli yn dlnvl, il my ygrktli hy
vyt rkmqk uby nnycktli gytgk. w gli qkiql kríigl kpatxkfk hli ubaolqy uby
ytki yoétgaqlm, uby mkigrl nl vail k gtyyt w k hygatny:

-myñlt, ¿dbym ubé ryxlm hy rkgyt ilmlqtlm?

-¿ubé? -haol hli ubaolqy-: pkvltygyt w kwbhkt k nlm xyiymqytlmlm w
hymvknahlm. w rkm hy mkfyt, mkigrl, uby ymqy uby vayiy dlt ibymqtk ptyiqy
ny glihbgy w cbík yn ctkihy yxdytkhlt knapkipktói, myñlt hy nk ctkihy amnk
qtkdlfkik; ymqy lqtl uby k xam ymdknhkm xktgrk ym yn hy mb yiyxacl, yn tyw
hy nlm cktkxkiqkm, dyiqkdlnéi hyn kttyxkickhl ftkel, dltuby mayxdty yiqtk
yi nkm fkqknnkm gli yn ftkel hytygrl hymibhl.

-dbym, ¿dlt ubé my ubaytyi qki xkn ymqlm hlm myñltym? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.
-ubaytéimy xkn -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- dltuby ymqy knypkipktói ym bi
pltafbihl dkckil w ymqá yikxltkhl hy nk raok hy dyiqkdlníi, uby ym bik xbw
pytxlmk w khyxám kctkgakhk myñltk, w ym gtamqakik, w mb dkhty il my nk
ubayty yiqtyckt kn tyw dkckil ma il hyok dtaxytl nk nyw hy mb pknml dtlpyqk
xkrlxk w my vbynvy k nk mbwk.

-¡dktk xam fktfkm -haol mkigrl-, ma il rkgy xbw fayi dyiqkdlníi, w uby ny
qyicl hy kwbhkt yi gbkiql dbhayty!

-yi yml rktám nl uby hyfym, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby, dktk yiqtkt
yi fkqknnkm myxyokiqym, il my tyubayty myt ktxkhl gkfknnytl.

-fayi my xy kngkiek yml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl, ¿hóihy dlihtyxlm k ymqy
kmil uby ymqyxlm gaytqlm hy rknnktny hymdbém hy dkmkhk nk typtayck? dltuby
yn yiqtkt yi ynnk yi myxyokiqy gkfknnytík il gtyl uby ymqá yi bml rkmqk
kcltk.

-kmí ym vythkh -haol hli ubaolqy-. nl uby dbyhym rkgyt hén ym hyoktny k mbm
kvyiqbtkm, ltk my daythk l il, dltuby mytái qkiqlm nlm gkfknnlm uby
qyihtyxlm, hymdbém uby mknckxlm vyigyhltym, uby kbi gltty dynactl tlgaikiqy
il ny qtbyuby dlt lqtl. dytl ymqáxy kqyiql w xatk, uby qy ubaytl hkt gbyiqk
hy nlm gkfknnytlm xám dtaigadknym uby yi ymqlm hlm yoétgaqlm vayiyi. w,
dktk uby xyolt nlm vykm w ilqym, tyqatéxlilm k kubyn knqannl uby knní my
rkgy, hy hlihy my hyfyi hy hymgbftat nlm hlm yoétgaqlm.

ragaétlinl kimí, w dbmaytóimy mlfty bik nlxk, hymhy nk gbkn my vaytki fayi
nkm hlm xkikhkm uby k hli ubaolqy my ny ragaytli yoétgaql, ma nkm ibfym hyn
dlnvl uby nyvkiqkfki il nym qbtfktk w gycktk nk vamqk; dytl, gli qlhl ymql,
vayihl yi mb axkcaikgaói nl uby il vyík ia rkfík, gli vle nyvkiqkhk glxyieó
k hygat:

-kubyn gkfknnytl uby knní vym hy nkm ktxkm oknhym, uby qtky yi yn ymgbhl bi
nyói gltlikhl, tyihahl k nlm daym hy bik hligynnk, ym yn vknytlml
nkbtgkngl, myñlt hy nk dbyiqy hy dnkqk; yn lqtl hy nkm ktxkm hy nkm pnltym
hy ltl, uby qtky yi yn ymgbhl qtym gltlikm hy dnkqk yi gkxdl kebn, ym yn
qyxahl xaglglnyxfl, ctki hbuby hy ubatlgak; yn lqtl hy nlm xayxftlm
cackiqylm, uby ymqá k mb hytygrk xkil, ym yn ibigk xyhtlml ftkihkfktfktái
hy flnagry, myñlt hy nkm qtym ktkfakm, uby vayiy ktxkhl hy kubyn gbytl hy
mytdayiqy, w qayiy dlt ymgbhl bik dbytqk uby, mycúi ym pkxk, ym bik hy nkm
hyn qyxdnl uby hyttafó mkimói, gbkihl gli mb xbytqy my vyicó hy mbm
yiyxaclm. dytl vbynvy nlm lolm k ymqlqtk dktqy w vytám hynkiqy w yi nk
ptyiqy hymqlqtl yoétgaql kn mayxdty vyigyhlt w okxám vyigahl qaxliyn hy
gktgkolik, dtíigady hy nk ibyvk vaegkwk, uby vayiy ktxkhl gli nkm ktxkm
dktqahkm k gbktqynym, kebnym, vythym, fnkigkm w kxktannkm, w qtky yi yn
ymgbhl bi ckql hy ltl yi gkxdl nylikhl, gli bik nyqtk uby hagy: xakb, uby
ym yn dtaigadal hyn ilxfty hy mb hkxk, uby, mycúi my hagy, ym nk mai dkt
xabnaik, raok hyn hbuby knpyñaubéi hyn kncktfy; yn lqtl, uby gktck w ldtaxy
nlm nlxlm hy kubynnk dlhytlmk knpkik, uby qtky nkm ktxkm glxl iayvy fnkigkm
w yn ymgbhl fnkigl w mai yxdtymk kncbik, ym bi gkfknnytl ilvyn, hy ikgaói
ptkigém, nnkxkhl dayttym dkdíi, myñlt hy nkm fktliíkm hy bqtauby; yn lqtl,
uby fkqy nkm aokhkm gli nlm ryttkhlm gktgkñlm k kubynnk daiqkhk w nacytk
gyftk, w qtky nkm ktxkm hy nlm vytlm kebnym, ym yn dlhytlml hbuby hy
iytfak, ymdktqkpankthl hyn flmuby, uby qtky dlt yxdtymk yi yn ymgbhl bik
ymdkttkcbytk, gli bik nyqtk yi gkmqynnkil uby hagy kmí: tkmqtyk xa mbytqy.
w hymqk xkiytk pby ilxftkihl xbgrlm gkfknnytlm hyn bil w hyn lqtl
ymgbkhtói, uby én my axkcaikfk, w k qlhlm nym hal mbm ktxkm, glnltym,
yxdtymkm w xlqym hy axdtlvaml, nnyvkhl hy nk axkcaikgaói hy mb ibigk vamqk
nlgbtk; w, mai dktkt, dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-k ymqy ymgbkhtói ptliqytl pltxki w rkgyi cyiqym hy havytmkm ikgaliym: kubí
ymqái nlm uby fyfíki nkm hbngym kcbkm hyn pkxlml okiql; nlm xliqblmlm uby
damki nlm xkmínaglm gkxdlm; nlm uby gtafki yn paiímaxl w xyibhl ltl yi nk
pynagy ktkfak; nlm uby cleki nkm pkxlmkm w ptymgkm tafytkm hyn gnktl
qytxlhliqy; nlm uby mkictki dlt xbgrkm w havytmkm víkm kn hltkhl dkgqlnl;
nlm iúxahkm, hbhlmlm yi mbm dtlxymkm; nlm dytmkm, ktglm w pnygrkm pkxlmlm;
nlm dktqlm, nlm xyhlm, uby dynyki rbwyihl; nlm átkfym, hy xbhkfnym gkmkm;
nlm gaqkm, qki gtbynym glxl fnkiglm; nlm yqaldym, hy rltkhkhlm nkfalm, w
lqtkm aipaiaqkm ikgaliym, gbwlm tlmqtlm glilegl w vyl, kbiuby hy nlm
ilxftym il xy kgbythl. yi ymqlqtl ymgbkhtói vayiyi nlm uby fyfyi nkm
glttayiqym gtamqknaikm hyn lnavípytl fyqam; nlm uby qytmki w dbnyi mbm
tlmqtlm gli yn naglt hyn mayxdty tagl w hltkhl qkol; nlm uby cleki nkm
dtlvygrlmkm kcbkm hyn havail cyian; nlm uby damki nlm qktqymalm gkxdlm, hy
dkmqlm kfbihkiqym; nlm uby my knyctki yi nlm ynímylm oytyekilm dtkhlm; nlm
xkigryclm, taglm w gltlikhlm hy tbfakm ymdackm; nlm hy rayttl vymqahlm,
tynaubakm kiqacbkm hy nk mkicty clhk; nlm uby yi dambytck my fkñki, pkxlml
dlt nk xkimyhbxfty hy mb glttayiqy; nlm uby mb ckikhl kdkgayiqki yi nkm
ymqyihahkm hyrymkm hyn qltqblml cbkhakik, gynyftkhl dlt mb ymglihahl gbtml;
nlm uby qayxfnki gli yn ptíl hyn manvlml dataiyl w gli nlm fnkiglm gldlm
hyn nyvkiqkhl kdyiail; paiknxyiqy, gbkiqlm qlhk nk ybtldk yi mí gliqayiy w
yigayttk.

¡vánkxy halm, w gbáiqkm dtlvaigakm haol, gbáiqkm ikgaliym ilxftó, háihlny k
gkhk bik, gli xktkvannlmk dtymqyek, nlm kqtafbqlm uby ny dytqyiygíki, qlhl
kfmltql w yxdkdkhl yi nl uby rkfík nyíhl yi mbm naftlm xyiqatlmlm!
ymqkfk mkigrl dkiek glnckhl hy mbm dknkftkm, mai rkfnkt iaicbik, w, hy
gbkihl yi gbkihl, vlnvík nk gkfyek k vyt ma vyík nlm gkfknnytlm w cackiqym
uby mb kxl ilxftkfk; w, glxl il hymgbftík k iaicbil, ny haol:

-myñlt, yiglxayihl kn hakfnl rlxfty, ia cackiqy, ia gkfknnytl hy gbkiqlm
vbymqtk xytgyh hagy dktygy dlt qlhl ymql; k nl xyilm, wl il nlm vyl; ubaeá
qlhl hyfy myt yigkiqkxyiql, glxl nkm pkiqkmxkm hy kilgry.

-¿góxl hagym yml? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. ¿il lwym yn tynaigrkt hy nlm
gkfknnlm, yn qlgkt hy nlm gnktaiym, yn tbahl hy nlm kqkxfltym?

-il lacl lqtk glmk -tymdlihaó mkigrl- mail xbgrlm fknahlm hy lvyokm w
gktiytlm.

w kmí ytk nk vythkh, dltuby wk nnyckfki gytgk nlm hlm tyfkñlm.

-yn xayhl uby qayiym -haol hli ubaolqy- qy rkgy, mkigrl, uby ia vykm ia
lwkm k hytygrkm; dltuby bil hy nlm ypygqlm hyn xayhl ym qbtfkt nlm myiqahlm
w rkgyt uby nkm glmkm il dktyegki nl uby mli; w ma ym uby qkiql qyxym,
tyqítkqy k bik dktqy w héokxy mlnl, uby mlnl fkmql k hkt nk vagqltak k nk
dktqy k ubayi wl hayty xa kwbhk.

w, hagayihl ymql, dbml nkm ymdbynkm k tlgaikiqy, w, dbymqk nk nkiek yi yn
tamqty, fkoó hy nk glmqyebynk glxl bi tkwl. halny vlgym mkigrl, hagaéihlny:
-¡vbénvkmy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby vlql k halm uby mli
gktiytlm w lvyokm nkm uby vk k yxfymqat! ¡vbénvkmy, hymhagrkhl hyn dkhty
uby xy yicyihtó! ¿ubé nlgbtk ym émqk? xaty uby il rkw cackiqy ia gkfknnytl
kncbil, ia ckqlm, ia ktxkm, ia ymgbhlm dktqahlm ia yiqytlm, ia vytlm kebnym
ia yihakfnkhlm. ¿ubé ym nl uby rkgy? ¡dygkhlt mlw wl k halm!

ia dlt émkm vlnvaó hli ubaolqy; kiqym, yi knqkm vlgym, afk hagayihl:
-¡yk, gkfknnytlm, nlm uby mycbím w xanaqáam hyfkol hy nkm fkihytkm hyn
vknytlml yxdytkhlt dyiqkdlníi hyn kttyxkickhl ftkel, mycbahxy qlhlm: vytéam
gbái páganxyiqy ny hlw vyickiek hy mb yiyxacl knypkipktói hy nk qtkdlfkik!
ymql hagayihl, my yiqtó dlt xyhal hyn ymgbkhtói hy nkm lvyokm, w glxyieó hy
knkigyknnkm gli qkiql gltkoy w hyibyhl glxl ma hy vytkm knkigyktk k mbm
xltqknym yiyxaclm. nlm dkmqltym w ckikhytlm uby gli nk xkikhk vyiíki
háfkiny vlgym uby il ragaymy kubynnl; dytl, vayihl uby il kdtlvygrkfki,
hymgañétlimy nkm rlihkm w glxyiektli k mknbhknny nlm líhlm gli dayhtkm glxl
yn dbñl. hli ubaolqy il my gbtkfk hy nkm dayhtkm; kiqym, hamgbttayihl k
qlhkm dktqym, hygík:

-¿khóihy ymqám, mlfytfal knapkipbói? vyiqy k xí; uby bi gkfknnytl mlnl mlw,
uby hymyk, hy mlnl k mlnl, dtlfkt qbm pbytekm w ubaqktqy nk vahk, yi dyik
hy nk uby hkm kn vknytlml dyiqkdlníi cktkxkiqk.

nnycó yi ymql bik dynkhannk hy kttlwl, w, háihlny yi bi nkhl, ny mydbnqó
hlm glmqannkm yi yn gbytdl. vaéihlmy qki xknqtygrl, gtywó mai hbhk uby
ymqkfk xbytql l xknpytahl, w, kgltháihlmy hy mb naglt, mkgó mb kngbek w
dúmlmynk k nk flgk, w glxyieó k ygrkt naglt yi yn ymqóxkcl; xkm, kiqym uby
kgkfkmy hy yivkmkt nl uby k én ny dktygík uby ytk fkmqkiqy, nnycó lqtk
knxyihtk w halny yi nk xkil w yi yn kngbek qki hy nnyil uby my nk rael
dyhkelm, nnyváihlny hy gkxail qtym l gbkqtl hayiqym w xbynkm hy nk flgk, w
xkgrbgáihlny xknkxyiqy hlm hyhlm hy nk xkil.

qkn pby yn clndy dtaxytl, w qkn yn mycbihl, uby ny pby pltelml kn dlfty
gkfknnytl hkt glimacl hyn gkfknnl kfkol. nnycátlimy k én nlm dkmqltym w
gtywytli uby ny rkfíki xbytql; w kmí, gli xbgrk dtaymk, tyglcaytli mb
ckikhl, w gktcktli hy nkm tymym xbytqkm, uby dkmkfki hy mayqy, w, mai
kvytacbkt lqtk glmk, my pbytli.

ymqáfkmy qlhl ymqy qayxdl mkigrl mlfty nk gbymqk, xatkihl nkm nlgbtkm uby
mb kxl rkgík, w kttkigáfkmy nkm fktfkm, xknhagayihl nk rltk w yn dbiql yi
uby nk pltqbik my ny rkfík hkhl k glilgyt. vaéihlny, dbym, gkíhl yi yn
mbynl, w uby wk nlm dkmqltym my rkfíki ahl, fkoó hy nk gbymqk w nnycómy k
én, w rknnóny hy xbw xkn ktqy, kbiuby il rkfík dythahl yn myiqahl, w
híolny:

-¿il ny hygík wl, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby my vlnvaymy, uby nlm uby afk k
kglxyqyt il ytki yoétgaqlm, mail xkikhkm hy gktiytlm?

-glxl yml dbyhy hymdktygyt w gliqtkrkgyt kubyn nkhtói hyn mkfal xa yiyxacl.
máfyqy, mkigrl, uby ym xbw págan glmk k nlm qknym rkgytilm dktygyt nl uby
ubaytyi, w ymqy xknacil uby xy dytmacby, yivahalml hy nk cnltak uby val uby
wl rkfík hy kngkiekt hymqk fkqknnk, rk vbynql nlm ymgbkhtliym hy yiyxaclm
yi xkikhkm hy lvyokm. ma il, rke bik glmk, mkigrl, dlt xa vahk, dltuby qy
hymyickñym w vykm myt vythkh nl uby qy hacl: mbfy yi qb kmil w mícbynlm
fliaqkxyiqy, w vytám góxl, yi knyoáihlmy hy kubí kncúi dlgl, my vbynvyi yi
mb myt dtaxytl, w, hyokihl hy myt gktiytlm, mli rlxftym rygrlm w hytygrlm,
glxl wl qy nlm daiqé dtaxytl... dytl il vkwkm kcltk, uby ry xyiymqyt qb
pkvlt w kwbhk; nnéckqy k xí w xatk gbáiqkm xbynkm w hayiqym xy pknqki, uby
xy dktygy uby il xy rk ubyhkhl iaicbil yi nk flgk.

nnycómy mkigrl qki gytgk uby gkma ny xyqík nlm lolm yi nk flgk, w pby k
qayxdl uby wk rkfík lftkhl yn fánmkxl yi yn ymqóxkcl hy hli ubaolqy; w, kn
qayxdl uby mkigrl nnycó k xatktny nk flgk, kttloó hy mí, xám tygal uby bik
ymgldyqk, gbkiql hyiqtl qyiík, w hal gli qlhl ynnl yi nkm fktfkm hyn
glxdkmavl ymgbhytl.

-¡mkiqk xktík! -haol mkigrl-, ¿w ubé ym ymql uby xy rk mbgyhahl? mai hbhk,
ymqy dygkhlt ymqá rytahl hy xbytqy, dbym vlxaqk mkicty dlt nk flgk.
dytl, tydktkihl bi dlgl xám yi ynnl, ygró hy vyt yi nk glnlt, mkflt w lnlt,
uby il ytk mkicty, mail yn fánmkxl hy nk kngbek uby én ny rkfík vamql
fyfyt; w pby qkiql yn kmgl uby qlxó uby, tyvlnvaéihlmyny yn ymqóxkcl,
vlxaqó nkm qtadkm mlfty mb xamxl myñlt, w ubyhktli yiqtkxflm glxl hy
dytnkm. kgbhaó mkigrl k mb kmil dktk mkgkt hy nkm knpltokm gli ubé
naxdaktmy w gli ubé gbtkt k mb kxl; w, glxl il nkm rknnó, ymqbvl k dbiql hy
dythyt yn obagal. xknhíolmy hy ibyvl, w dtldbml yi mb gltkeói hy hyokt k mb
kxl w vlnvytmy k mb qayttk, kbiuby dythaymy yn mknktal hy nl mytvahl w nkm
ymdytkiekm hyn clfaytil hy nk dtlxyqahk íimbnk.

nyvkiqómy yi ymql hli ubaolqy, w, dbymqk nk xkil aeubaythk yi nk flgk,
dltuby il my ny kgkfkmyi hy mknat nlm hayiqym, kmaó gli nk lqtk nkm tayihkm
hy tlgaikiqy, uby ibigk my rkfík xlvahl hy obiql k mb kxl -qkn ytk hy nykn
w fayi kglihagalikhl-, w pbymy khlihy mb ymgbhytl ymqkfk, hy dygrlm mlfty
mb kmil, gli nk xkil yi nk xyoannk, yi cbamk hy rlxfty dyimkqavl khyxám. w,
vaéihlny hli ubaolqy hy kubynnk xkiytk, gli xbymqtkm hy qkiqk qtamqyek, ny
haol:

-máfyqy, mkigrl, uby il ym bi rlxfty xám uby lqtl ma il rkgy xám uby lqtl.
qlhkm ymqkm flttkmgkm uby ilm mbgyhyi mli myñknym hy uby dtymql rk hy
mytyikt yn qayxdl w rki hy mbgyhytilm fayi nkm glmkm; dltuby il ym dlmafny
uby yn xkn ia yn fayi myki hbtkfnym, w hy kubí my macby uby, rkfayihl
hbtkhl xbgrl yn xkn, yn fayi ymqá wk gytgk. kmí uby, il hyfym glicloktqy
dlt nkm hymctkgakm uby k xí xy mbgyhyi, dbym k qa il qy gkfy dktqy hynnkm.
-¿góxl il? -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. dlt vyiqbtk, yn uby kwyt xkiqyktli, ¿ytk
lqtl uby yn raol hy xa dkhty? w nkm knpltokm uby rlw xy pknqki, gli qlhkm
xam knrkokm, ¿mli hy lqtl uby hyn xamxl?

-¿uby qy pknqki nkm knpltokm, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-mí uby xy pknqki -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-hymy xlhl, il qyiyxlm ubé glxyt rlw -tydnagó hli ubaolqy.

-yml pbytk -tymdlihaó mkigrl- gbkihl pknqktki dlt ymqlm dtkhlm nkm wytfkm
uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy uby glilgy, gli uby mbynyi mbdnat myxyokiqym pknqkm
nlm qki xknkvyiqbtkhlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm glxl vbymqtk xytgyh ym.
-gli qlhl yml -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, qlxktk wl krltk xám kíik bi gbktqkn
hy dki, l bik rlckek w hlm gkfyekm hy mkthaikm ktyiubym, uby gbkiqkm wytfkm
hymgtafy halmgótahym, kbiuby pbytk yn anbmqtkhl dlt yn hlgqlt nkcbik. xkm,
gli qlhl ymql, mbfy yi qb obxyiql, mkigrl yn fbyil, w vyiqy qtkm xí; uby
halm, uby ym dtlvyyhlt hy qlhkm nkm glmkm, il ilm rk hy pknqkt, w xám
kihkihl qki yi mb mytvagal glxl kihkxlm, dbym il pknqk k nlm xlmubaqlm hyn
katy, ia k nlm cbmkiannlm hy nk qayttk, ia k nlm tyikgbkolm hyn kcbk; w ym
qki dakhlml uby rkgy mknat mb mln mlfty nlm fbyilm w nlm xknlm, w nnbyvy
mlfty nlm aiobmqlm w obmqlm.

-xám fbyil ytk vbymqtk xytgyh -haol mkigrl- dktk dtyhagkhlt uby dktk
gkfknnytl kihkiqy.

-hy qlhl mkfíki w rki hy mkfyt nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, mkigrl -haol hli
ubaolqy-, dltuby gkfknnytl kihkiqy rbfl yi nlm dkmkhlm macnlm uby kmí my
dktkfk k rkgyt bi mytxói l dnáqagk, yi xaqkh hy bi gkxdl tykn, glxl ma
pbytk ctkhbkhl dlt nk biavytmahkh hy dktím; hy hlihy my aipayty uby ibigk
nk nkiek yxflqó nk dnbxk, ia nk dnbxk nk nkiek.

-krltk fayi, myk kmí glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hagy -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, vkxlm
krltk hy kubí, w dtlgbtyxlm hlihy knlokt ymqk ilgry, w ubaytk halm uby myk
yi dktqy hlihy il rkwk xkiqkm, ia xkiqykhltym, ia pkiqkmxkm, ia xltlm
yigkiqkhlm; uby ma nlm rkw, hkté kn hakfnl yn rkql w yn cktkfkql.
-díhymynl qú k halm, raol -haol hli ubaolqy-, w cbík qú dlt hlihy
ubamaytym, uby ymqk vye ubaytl hyokt k qb ynygaói yn knloktilm. dytl hkxy
kgá nk xkil w kqaéiqkxy gli yn hyhl, w xatk fayi gbáiqlm hayiqym w xbynkm
xy pknqki hymqy nkhl hytygrl hy nk ubaokhk knqk, uby knní mayiql yn hlnlt.
xyqaó mkigrl nlm hyhlm, w, ymqáihlny qyiqkihl, ny haol:

-¿gbáiqkm xbynkm mlník vbymqtk xytgyh qyiyt yi ymqk dktqy?

-gbkqtl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, pbytk hy nk glthkn, qlhkm yiqytkm w xbw
mkikm.

-xaty vbymqtk xytgyh fayi nl uby hagy, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-hacl gbkqtl, ma il ytki gaigl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby yi qlhk xa
vahk xy rki mkgkhl hayiqy ia xbynk hy nk flgk, ia my xy rk gkíhl ia glxahl
hy iycbaoói ia hy tybxk kncbik.

-dbym yi ymqk dktqy hy kfkol -haol mkigrl- il qayiy vbymqtk xytgyh xám hy
hlm xbynkm w xyhak, w yi nk hy kttafk, ia xyhak ia iaicbik, uby qlhk ymqá
tkmk glxl nk dknxk hy nk xkil.

-¡mai vyiqbtk wl! -haol hli ubaolqy, lwyihl nkm qtamqym ibyvkm uby mb
ymgbhytl ny hkfk-, uby xám ubamaytk uby xy rbfaytki hyttafkhl bi ftkel,
glxl il pbytk yn hy nk ymdkhk; dltuby qy rkcl mkfyt, mkigrl, uby nk flgk
mai xbynkm ym glxl xlnail mai dayhtk, w yi xbgrl xám my rk hy ymqaxkt bi
hayiqy uby bi hakxkiqy. xkm k qlhl ymql ymqkxlm mboyqlm nlm uby dtlpymkxlm
nk ymqtygrk lthyi hy nk gkfknnytík. mbfy, kxacl, w cbík, uby wl qy mycbaté
kn dkml uby ubamaytym.

ríelnl kmí mkigrl, w yigkxaiómy rkgak hlihy ny dktygaó uby dlhík rknnkt
kglcaxayiql, mai mknat hyn gkxail tykn, uby dlt knní afk xbw mycbahl.
wéihlmy, dbym, dlgl k dlgl, dltuby yn hlnlt hy nkm ubaokhkm hy hli ubaolqy
il ny hyokfk mlmyckt ia kqyihyt k hktmy dtaymk, ubaml mkigrl yiqtyqyiynny w
havytqanny hagaéihlny kncbik glmk; w, yiqty lqtkm uby ny haol, pby nl uby
my hatá yi yn macbayiqy gkdíqbnl.





gkdíqbnl zaz. hy nkm hamgtyqkm tkeliym uby mkigrl dkmkfk gli mb kxl, w hy
nk kvyiqbtk uby ny mbgyhaó gli bi gbytdl xbytql, gli lqtlm kgliqygaxayiqlm
pkxlmlm


-dktégyxy, myñlt xíl, uby qlhkm ymqkm hymvyiqbtkm uby ymqlm híkm ilm rki
mbgyhahl, mai hbhk kncbik rki mahl dyik hyn dygkhl glxyqahl dlt vbymqtk
xytgyh gliqtk nk lthyi hy mb gkfknnytík, il rkfayihl gbxdnahl yn obtkxyiql
uby rael hy il glxyt dki k xkiqynym ia gli nk tyaik plnckt, gli qlhl
kubynnl uby k ymql my macby w vbymqtk xytgyh obtó hy gbxdnat, rkmqk ubaqkt
kubyn knxyqy hy xknkihtail, l glxl my nnkxk yn xltl, uby il xy kgbythl
fayi.

-qayiym xbgrk tkeói, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-; xkm, dktk hygatqy vythkh,
ynnl my xy rkfík dkmkhl hy nk xyxltak; w qkxfaéi dbyhym qyiyt dlt gaytql
uby dlt nk gbndk hy il rkfétxynl qú kglthkhl yi qayxdl qy mbgyhaó kubynnl
hy nk xkiqk; dytl wl rkté nk yixayihk, uby xlhlm rkw hy glxdlmagaói yi nk
lthyi hy nk gkfknnytík dktk qlhl.

-dbym, ¿obté wl kncl, dlt hagrk? -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-il axdltqk uby il rkwkm obtkhl -haol hli ubaolqy-: fkmqk uby wl yiqayihl
uby hy dktqagadkiqym il ymqám xbw mycbtl, w, dlt mí l dlt il, il mytá xknl
dtlvyytilm hy tyxyhal.

-dbym ma ynnl ym kmí -haol mkigrl-, xaty vbymqtk xytgyh il my ny qltiy k
lnvahkt ymql, glxl nl hyn obtkxyiql; ubaeá nym vlnvytá nk ckik k nkm
pkiqkmxkm hy mlnkektmy lqtk vye glixacl, w kbi gli vbymqtk xytgyh ma ny vyi
qki dytqaike.

yi ymqkm w lqtkm dnáqagkm nym qlxó nk ilgry yi xaqkh hyn gkxail, mai qyiyt
ia hymgbftat hlihy kubynnk ilgry my tyglcaymyi; w nl uby il rkfík hy fbyil
yi ynnl ytk uby dytygíki hy rkxfty; uby, gli nk pknqk hy nkm knpltokm, nym
pknqó qlhk nk hymdyimk w xkqknlqkoy. w, dktk kgkfkt hy glipatxkt ymqk
hymctkgak, nym mbgyhaó bik kvyiqbtk uby, mai ktqapagal kncbil,
vythkhytkxyiqy nl dktygík. w pby uby nk ilgry gyttó gli kncbik ymgbtahkh;
dytl, gli qlhl ymql, gkxaikfki, gtywyihl mkigrl uby, dbym kubyn gkxail ytk
tykn, k bik l hlm nycbkm, hy fbyik tkeói, rknnktík yi én kncbik vyiqk.
wyihl, dbym, hymqk xkiytk, nk ilgry ymgbtk, yn ymgbhytl rkxftayiql w yn kxl
gli ckik hy glxyt, vaytli uby dlt yn xymxl gkxail uby afki vyiíki rkgak
ynnlm ctki xbnqaqbh hy nbxftym, uby il dktygíki mail ymqtynnkm uby my
xlvíki. dkmxómy mkigrl yi vaéihlnkm, w hli ubaolqy il nkm qbvl qlhkm
glimacl; qató yn bil hyn gkfymqtl k mb kmil, w yn lqtl hy nkm tayihkm k mb
tlgail, w ymqbvaytli ubyhlm, xatkihl kqyiqkxyiqy nl uby dlhík myt kubynnl,
w vaytli uby nkm nbxftym my afki kgytgkihl k ynnlm, w xayiqtkm xám my
nnyckfki, xkwltym dktygíki; k gbwk vamqk mkigrl glxyieó k qyxfnkt glxl bi
kelckhl, w nlm gkfynnlm hy nk gkfyek my ny ytaektli k hli ubaolqy; yn gbkn,
kiaxáihlmy bi dlgl, haol:

-Émqk, mai hbhk, mkigrl, hyfy hy myt ctkihímaxk w dynactlmímaxk kvyiqbtk,
hlihy mytá iygymktal uby wl xbymqty qlhl xa vknlt w ympbytel.
-¡hymhagrkhl hy xí! -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; ma kgkml ymqk kvyiqbtk pbymy hy
pkiqkmxkm, glxl xy nl vk dktygayihl, ¿khóihy rkftá glmqannkm uby nk mbptki?
-dlt xám pkiqkmxkm uby myki -haol hli ubaolqy-, il glimyiqaté wl uby qy
qluby yi yn dynl hy nk tldk; uby ma nk lqtk vye my fbtnktli gliqacl, pby
dltuby il dbhy wl mknqkt nkm dktyhym hyn glttkn, dytl krltk ymqkxlm yi
gkxdl tkml, hlihy dlhté wl glxl ubamayty ymctyxat xa ymdkhk.

-w ma ny yigkiqki w yiqlxygyi, glxl nk lqtk vye nl ragaytli -haol mkigrl-,
¿ubé kdtlvygrktá ymqkt yi gkxdl kfaytql l il?

-gli qlhl yml -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, qy tbycl, mkigrl, uby qyickm fbyi
áiaxl, uby nk yzdytayigak qy hktá k yiqyihyt yn uby wl qyicl.

-mí qyihté, ma k halm dnkgy -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

w, kdktqáihlmy nlm hlm k bi nkhl hyn gkxail, qltiktli k xatkt kqyiqkxyiqy
nl uby kubynnl hy kubynnkm nbxftym uby gkxaikfki dlhík myt; w hy knní k xbw
dlgl hymgbftaytli xbgrlm yigkxamkhlm, gbwk qyxytlmk vamaói hy qlhl dbiql
tyxkqó yn áiaxl hy mkigrl dkiek, yn gbkn glxyieó k hkt hayiqy gli hayiqy,
glxl ubayi qayiy ptíl hy gbktqkik; w gtygaó xám yn fkqat w hyiqynnykt
gbkihl hamqaiqkxyiqy vaytli nl uby ytk, dltuby hymgbftaytli rkmqk vyaiqy
yigkxamkhlm, qlhlm k gkfknnl, gli mbm rkgrkm yigyihahkm yi nkm xkilm;
hyqtám hy nlm gbknym vyiík bik naqytk gbfaytqk hy nbql, k nk gbkn mycbíki
lqtlm myam hy k gkfknnl, yinbqkhlm rkmqk nlm daym hy nkm xbnkm; uby fayi
vaytli uby il ytki gkfknnlm yi yn mlmaycl gli uby gkxaikfki. afki nlm
yigkxamkhlm xbtxbtkihl yiqty mí, gli bik vle fkok w glxdkmavk. ymqk ymqtkñk
vamaói, k qknym rltkm w yi qkn hymdlfnkhl, fayi fkmqkfk dktk dliyt xayhl yi
yn gltkeói hy mkigrl, w kbi yi yn hy mb kxl; w kmí pbytk yi gbkiql k hli
ubaolqy, uby wk mkigrl rkfík hkhl kn qtkvém gli qlhl mb ympbytel. nl
gliqtktal ny kvail k mb kxl, kn gbkn yi kubyn dbiql my ny tydtymyiqó yi mb
axkcaikgaói kn vavl uby kubénnk ytk bik hy nkm kvyiqbtkm hy mbm naftlm.
pacbtómyny uby nk naqytk ytki kihkm hlihy hyfík hy at kncúi xkn pytahl l
xbytql gkfknnytl, gbwk vyickiek k én mlnl ymqkfk tymytvkhk; w, mai rkgyt
lqtl hamgbtml, yitamqtó mb nkieói, dúmlmy fayi yi nk mannk, w gli cyiqan
ftíl w gliqaiyiqy my dbml yi nk xaqkh hyn gkxail dlt hlihy nlm yigkxamkhlm
pltelmkxyiqy rkfíki hy dkmkt, w gbkihl nlm val gytgk kneó nk vle w haol:
-hyqyiylm, gkfknnytlm, l ubayiubaytk uby myáam, w hkhxy gbyiqk hy ubaéi
mlam, hy hóihy vyiím, khóihy vkam, ubé ym nl uby yi kubynnkm kihkm nnyváam;
uby, mycúi nkm xbymqtkm, l vlmlqtlm rkféam pygrl, l vlm rki pygrl, kncúi
hymkcbamkhl, w glivayiy w ym xyiymqyt uby wl nl mydk, l fayi dktk
gkmqacktlm hyn xkn uby pygamqym, l fayi dktk vyicktlm hyn qbytql uby vlm
pagaytli.

-vkxlm hy dtaymk -tymdlihaó bil hy nlm yigkxamkhlm- w ymqá nk vyiqk nyolm,
w il ilm dlhyxlm hyqyiyt k hkt qkiqk gbyiqk glxl dyhím.

w, dagkihl nk xbnk, dkmó khynkiqy. maiqaómy hymqk tymdbymqk ctkihyxyiqy hli
ubaolqy, w, qtkfkihl hyn ptyil, haol:

-hyqyiylm w myh xám fayi gtakhl, w hkhxy gbyiqk hy nl uby lm ry dtycbiqkhl;
ma il, glixacl mlam qlhlm yi fkqknnk.

ytk nk xbnk kmlxftkhaek, w kn qlxktnk hyn ptyil my ymdkiqó hy xkiytk uby,
kneáihlmy yi nlm daym, hal gli mb hbyñl dlt nkm kigkm yi yn mbynl. bi xlel
uby afk k day, vayihl gkyt kn yigkxamkhl, glxyieó k hyilmqkt k hli ubaolqy,
yn gbkn, wk yiglnytaekhl, mai ymdytkt xám, yitamqtkihl mb nkieói, kttyxyqaó
k bil hy nlm yinbqkhlm, w, xkn pytahl, hal gli én yi qayttk; w,
tyvlnvaéihlmy dlt nlm hyxám, ytk glmk hy vyt gli nk dtymqyek uby nlm
kglxyqík w hymfktkqkfk; uby il dktygík mail uby yi kubyn aimqkiqy ny rkfíki
ikgahl knkm k tlgaikiqy, mycúi kihkfk hy nacytl w ltcbnnlml.

qlhlm nlm yigkxamkhlm ytk cyiqy xyhtlmk w mai ktxkm, w kmí, gli pkganahkh,
yi bi xlxyiql hyoktli nk typtayck w glxyiektli k glttyt dlt kubyn gkxdl gli
nkm rkgrkm yigyihahkm, uby il dktygíki mail k nlm hy nkm xámgktkm uby yi
ilgry hy tyclgaol w paymqk glttyi. nlm yinbqkhlm, kmaxymxl, tyvbynqlm w
yivbynqlm yi mbm pknhkxyiqlm w nlfkm, il my dlhíki xlvyt; kmí uby, xbw k mb
mknvl, hli ubaolqy nlm kdknyó k qlhlm w nym rael hyokt yn maqal xkn hy mb
ctkhl, dltuby qlhlm dyimktli uby kubén il ytk rlxfty, mail hakfnl hyn
aipaytil uby nym mkník k ubaqkt yn gbytdl xbytql uby yi nk naqytk nnyvkfki.
qlhl nl xatkfk mkigrl, khxatkhl hyn kthaxayiql hy mb myñlt, w hygík yiqty
mí:

-mai hbhk ymqy xa kxl ym qki vknayiqy w ympltekhl glxl én hagy.

ymqkfk bik rkgrk kthayihl yi yn mbynl, obiql kn dtaxytl uby hyttafó nk
xbnk, k gbwk nbe ny dbhl vyt hli ubaolqy; w, nnycáihlmy k én, ny dbml nk
dbiqk hyn nkieói yi yn tlmqtl, hagaéihlny uby my taihaymy; ma il, uby ny
xkqktík. k nl gbkn tymdlihaó yn gkíhl:

-rktql tyihahl ymqlw, dbym il xy dbyhl xlvyt, uby qyicl bik daytik
ubyftkhk; mbdnagl k vbymqtk xytgyh, ma ym gkfknnytl gtamqakil, uby il xy
xkqy; uby glxyqytá bi ctki mkgtanycal, uby mlw nagyigakhl w qyicl nkm
dtaxytkm óthyiym.

-dbym, ¿ubaéi hakfnlm lm rk qtkíhl kubí -haol hli ubaolqy-, mayihl rlxfty
hy acnymak?

-¿ubaéi, myñlt? -tydnagó yn gkíhl-: xa hymvyiqbtk.

-dbym lqtk xkwlt lm kxyikek -haol hli ubaolqy-, ma il xy mkqampkgéam k qlhl
gbkiql dtaxytl lm dtycbiqé.

-gli pkganahkh mytá vbymqtk xytgyh mkqampygrl -tymdlihaó yn nagyigakhl-; w
kmí, mkftá vbymqtk xytgyh uby, kbiuby hyikiqym haoy uby wl ytk nagyigakhl,
il mlw mail fkgrannyt, w nnáxlxy knliml nódye; mlw ikqbtkn hy knglfyihkm;
vyicl hy nk gabhkh hy fkyek gli lqtlm ligy mkgythlqym, uby mli nlm uby
rbwytli gli nkm rkgrkm; vkxlm k nk gabhkh hy myclvak kglxdkñkihl bi gbytdl
xbytql, uby vk yi kubynnk naqytk, uby ym hy bi gkfknnytl uby xbtaó yi
fkyek, hlihy pby hydlmaqkhl; w krltk, glxl hacl, nnyváfkxlm mbm rbymlm k mb
mydbnqbtk, uby ymqá yi myclvak, hy hlihy ym ikqbtkn.

-¿w ubaéi ny xkqó? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-halm, dlt xyhal hy bikm gknyiqbtkm dymqanyiqym uby ny haytli -tymdlihaó yn
fkgrannyt.

-hymk mbytqy -haol hli ubaolqy-, ubaqkhl xy rk ibymqtl myñlt hyn qtkfkol
uby rkfík hy qlxkt yi vyickt mb xbytqy ma lqtl kncbil ny rbfaytk xbytql;
dytl, rkfaéihlny xbytql ubayi ny xkqó, il rkw mail gknnkt w yiglcyt nlm
rlxftlm, dltuby nl xymxl ragaytk ma k xí xamxl xy xkqktk. w ubaytl uby mydk
vbymqtk tyvytyigak uby wl mlw bi gkfknnytl hy nk xkigrk, nnkxkhl hli
ubaolqy, w ym xa lpagal w yoytgagal kihkt dlt yn xbihl yihytyekihl qbytqlm
w hympkgayihl kctkvalm.

-il mé góxl dbyhk myt yml hy yihytyekt qbytqlm -haol yn fkgrannyt-, dbym k
xí hy hytygrl xy rkféam vbynql qbytql, hyoáihlxy bik daytik ubyftkhk, nk
gbkn il my vytá hytygrk yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk; w yn kctkval uby yi
xí rkféam hymrygrl rk mahl hyoktxy kctkvakhl hy xkiytk uby xy ubyhkté
kctkvakhl dktk mayxdty; w rktqk hymvyiqbtk rk mahl qldkt gli vlm, uby vkam
fbmgkihl kvyiqbtkm.

-il qlhkm nkm glmkm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- mbgyhyi hy bi xamxl xlhl. yn
hkñl ymqbvl, myñlt fkgrannyt knliml nódye, yi vyiat, glxl vyiíkhym, hy
ilgry, vymqahlm gli kubynnkm mlftydynnagym, gli nkm rkgrkm yigyihahkm,
tyekihl, gbfaytqlm hy nbql, uby dtldakxyiqy myxyoáfkhym glmk xknk w hyn
lqtl xbihl; w kmí, wl il dbhy hyokt hy gbxdnat gli xa lfnackgaói
kglxyqaéihllm, w lm kglxyqaytk kbiuby vythkhytkxyiqy mbdaytk uby étkhym nlm
xyxlm mkqkikmym hyn aipaytil, uby dlt qknym lm obecbé w qbvy mayxdty.
-wk uby kmí nl rk ubytahl xa mbytqy -haol yn fkgrannyt-, mbdnagl k vbymqtk
xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl kihkiqy (uby qki xknk kihkiek xy rk hkhl), xy kwbhy
k mknat hy hyfkol hymqk xbnk, uby xy qayiy qlxkhk bik daytik yiqty yn
ymqtafl w nk mannk.

-¡rkfnktk wl dktk xkñkik! -haol hli ubaolqy-. w ¿rkmqk gbáihl kcbktháfkhym
k hygatxy vbymqtl kpái?

hal nbycl vlgym k mkigrl dkiek uby vaiaymy; dytl én il my gbtó hy vyiat,
dltuby kihkfk lgbdkhl hymvknaokihl bik kgéxank hy tydbymql uby qtkíki
kubynnlm fbyilm myñltym, fayi fkmqygahk hy glmkm hy glxyt. rael mkigrl
glmqkn hy mb ckfái, w, tyglcayihl qlhl nl uby dbhl w gbdl yi yn qknycl,
gktcó mb obxyiql, w nbycl kgbhaó k nkm vlgym hy mb kxl w kwbhó k mkgkt kn
myñlt fkgrannyt hy nk ldtymaói hy nk xbnk; w, dliaéihlny yigaxk hynnk, ny
hal nk rkgrk, w hli ubaolqy ny haol uby macbaymy nk hyttlqk hy mbm
glxdkñytlm, k ubayi hy mb dktqy dahaymy dythói hyn kctkval, uby il rkfík
mahl yi mb xkil hyokt hy rkfytny rygrl. híolny qkxfaéi mkigrl:

-ma kgkml ubamaytyi mkfyt ymlm myñltym ubaéi rk mahl yn vknytlml uby qknym
nlm dbml, hatánym vbymqtk xytgyh uby ym yn pkxlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,
uby dlt lqtl ilxfty my nnkxk yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk.

gli ymql, my pby yn fkgrannyt; w hli ubaolqy dtycbiqó k mkigrl uby ubé ny
rkfík xlvahl k nnkxktny yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, xám yiqligym uby
ibigk.

-wl my nl haté -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: dltuby ny ry ymqkhl xatkihl bi tkql k nk
nbe hy kubynnk rkgrk uby nnyvk kubyn xknkihkiqy, w vythkhytkxyiqy qayiy
vbymqtk xytgyh nk xám xknk pacbtk, hy dlgl kgá, uby okxám ry vamql; w
héfynl hy rkfyt gkbmkhl, l wk yn gkimkigal hymqy glxfkqy, l wk nk pknqk hy
nkm xbynkm w hayiqym.

-il ym yml -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, mail uby yn mkfal, k gbwl gktcl hyfy hy
ymqkt yn ymgtafat nk ramqltak hy xam rkekñkm, ny rkftá dktygahl uby mytá
fayi uby wl qlxy kncúi ilxfty kdynkqavl, glxl nl qlxkfki qlhlm nlm
gkfknnytlm dkmkhlm: gbán my nnkxkfk yn hy nk kthayiqy ymdkhk; gbán, yn hyn
biagltial; kubyn, hy nkm hligynnkm; kubémqy, yn hyn kvy péiaz; yn lqtl, yn
gkfknnytl hyn ctapl; ymqlqtl, yn hy nk xbytqy; w dlt ymqlm ilxftym y
aimaciakm ytki glilgahlm dlt qlhk nk tyhlihye hy nk qayttk. w kmí, hacl uby
yn mkfal wk hagrl qy rkftá dbymql yi nk nyicbk w yi yn dyimkxayiql krltk
uby xy nnkxkmym yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, glxl dayiml nnkxktxy
hymhy rlw yi khynkiqy; w, dktk uby xyolt xy gbkhty qkn ilxfty, hyqytxail hy
rkgyt daiqkt, gbkihl rkwk nbckt, yi xa ymgbhl bik xbw qtamqy pacbtk.
-il rkw dktk ubé ckmqkt qayxdl w haiytlm yi rkgyt ymk pacbtk -haol mkigrl-,
mail nl uby my rk hy rkgyt ym uby vbymqtk xytgyh hymgbftk nk mbwk w hé
tlmqtl k nlm uby ny xatktyi; uby, mai xám ia xám, w mai lqtk axkcyi ia
ymgbhl, ny nnkxktái yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk; w gtékxy uby ny hacl vythkh,
dltuby ny dtlxyql k vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt, w ymql myk hagrl yi fbtnkm, uby
ny rkgy qki xknk gktk nk rkxfty w nk pknqk hy nkm xbynkm, uby, glxl wk
qyicl hagrl, my dlhtá xbw fayi ymgbmkt nk qtamqy daiqbtk.

taómy hli ubaolqy hyn hlikaty hy mkigrl, dytl, gli qlhl, dtldbml hy
nnkxktmy hy kubyn ilxfty yi dbhayihl daiqkt mb ymgbhl, l tlhynk, glxl rkfík
axkcaikhl.

yi ymql vlnvaó yn fkgrannyt w ny haol k hli ubaolqy:

-lnvaháfkmyxy hy hygat uby khvaytqk vbymqtk xytgyh uby ubyhk hymglxbnckhl
dlt rkfyt dbymql nkm xkilm valnyiqkxyiqy yi glmk mkctkhk: obzqk annbh: ma
ubam mbkhyiqy hakflnl, yqg.

-il yiqayihl ymy nkqíi -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, xkm wl mé fayi uby il dbmy
nkm xkilm, mail ymqy nkieói; gbkiql xám, uby wl il dyimé uby lpyihík k
mkgythlqym ia k glmkm hy nk acnymak, k ubayi tymdyql w khltl glxl gkqónagl
w payn gtamqakil uby mlw, mail k pkiqkmxkm w k vymqacnlm hyn lqtl xbihl; w,
gbkihl yml kmí pbymy, yi nk xyxltak qyicl nl uby ny dkmó kn gah tbw híke,
gbkihl ubyftó nk mannk hyn yxfkokhlt hy kubyn tyw hynkiqy hy mb mkiqahkh
hyn dkdk, dlt nl gbkn nl hymglxbncó, w kihbvl kubyn hík yn fbyi tlhtacl hy
vavkt glxl xbw rlitkhl w vknayiqy gkfknnytl.

yi lwyihl ymql yn fkgrannyt, my pby, glxl ubyhk hagrl, mai tydnagktny
dknkftk. ubamaytk hli ubaolqy xatkt ma yn gbytdl uby vyiík yi nk naqytk
ytki rbymlm l il, dytl il nl glimaiqaó mkigrl, hagaéihlny:

-myñlt, vbymqtk xytgyh rk kgkfkhl ymqk dynactlmk kvyiqbtk nl xám k mb mknvl
hy qlhkm nkm uby wl ry vamql; ymqk cyiqy, kbiuby vyigahk w hymfktkqkhk,
dlhtík myt uby gkwymy yi nk gbyiqk hy uby nlm vyigaó mlnk bik dytmlik, w,
glttahlm w kvytcliekhlm hymql, vlnvaymyi k tyrkgytmy w k fbmgktilm, w ilm
haymyi yi ubé yiqyihyt. yn obxyiql ymqá glxl glivayiy, nk xliqkñk gytgk, nk
rkxfty gktck, il rkw uby rkgyt mail tyqatktilm gli cyiqan glxdám hy daym,
w, glxl hagyi, váwkmy yn xbytql k nk mydbnqbtk w yn vavl k nk rlckek.
w, kiqyglcayihl mb kmil, tlcó k mb myñlt uby ny macbaymy; yn gbkn,
dktygaéihlny uby mkigrl qyiík tkeói, mai vlnvytny k tydnagkt, ny macbaó. w,
k dlgl qtygrl uby gkxaikfki dlt yiqty hlm xliqkñbynkm, my rknnktli yi bi
ymdkgalml w ymglihahl vknny, hlihy my kdyktli; w mkigrl knavaó yn obxyiql,
w, qyihahlm mlfty nk vythy wytfk, gli nk mknmk hy mb rkxfty, knxltektli,
glxaytli, xytyihktli w gyiktli k bi xymxl dbiql, mkqampkgayihl mbm
ymqóxkclm gli xám hy bik pakxftytk uby nlm myñltym gnétaclm hyn hapbiql
-uby dlgkm vygym my hyoki xkn dkmkt- yi nk kgéxank hy mb tydbymql qtkíki.
xkm mbgyhaónym lqtk hymctkgak, uby mkigrl nk qbvl dlt nk dylt hy qlhkm, w
pby uby il qyiíki vail uby fyfyt, ia kbi kcbk uby nnyckt k nk flgk; w,
kglmkhlm hy nk myh, haol mkigrl, vayihl uby yn dtkhl hlihy ymqkfki ymqkfk
glnxkhl hy vythy w xyibhk wytfk, nl uby my hatá yi yn macbayiqy gkdíqbnl.





gkdíqbnl zz. hy nk okxám vamqk ia líhk kvyiqbtk uby gli xám dlgl dynactl
pby kgkfkhk hy pkxlml gkfknnytl yi yn xbihl, glxl nk uby kgkfó yn vknytlml
hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk


-il ym dlmafny, myñlt xíl, mail uby ymqkm wytfkm hki qymqaxlial hy uby dlt
kubí gytgk hyfy hy ymqkt kncbik pbyiqy l kttlwl uby ymqkm wytfkm rbxyhygy;
w kmí, mytá fayi uby vkxlm bi dlgl xám khynkiqy, uby wk qldktyxlm hlihy
dlhkxlm xaqackt ymqk qyttafny myh uby ilm pkqack, uby, mai hbhk, gkbmk
xkwlt dyik uby nk rkxfty.

dktygaóny fayi yn glimyol k hli ubaolqy, w, qlxkihl hy nk tayihk k
tlgaikiqy, w mkigrl hyn gkfymqtl k mb kmil, hymdbém hy rkfyt dbymql mlfty
én nlm tynayvym uby hy nk gyik ubyhktli, glxyiektli k gkxaikt dlt yn dtkhl
kttafk k qayiql, dltuby nk ymgbtahkh hy nk ilgry il nym hyokfk vyt glmk
kncbik; xkm, il rbfaytli kihkhl hlgayiqlm dkmlm, gbkihl nnycó k mbm líhlm
bi ctkihy tbahl hy kcbk, glxl uby hy kncbilm ctkihym w nyvkiqkhlm tamglm my
hymdyñkfk. knyctónym yn tbahl yi ctki xkiytk, w, dktáihlmy k ymgbgrkt rkgak
ubé dktqy mlikfk, lwytli k hymrltk lqtl ymqtbyihl uby nym kcbó yn gliqyiql
hyn kcbk, ymdygaknxyiqy k mkigrl, uby ikqbtknxyiqy ytk xyhtlml w hy dlgl
áiaxl. hacl uby lwytli uby hkfki bilm clndym k glxdám, gli bi gaytql gtboat
hy rayttlm w gkhyikm, uby, kglxdkñkhlm hyn pbtalml ymqtbyihl hyn kcbk, uby
dbmaytki dkvlt k gbknubayt lqtl gltkeói uby il pbytk yn hy hli ubaolqy.
ytk nk ilgry, glxl my rk hagrl, ymgbtk, w ynnlm kgytqktli k yiqtkt yiqty
bilm átflnym knqlm, gbwkm rlokm, xlvahkm hyn fnkihl vayiql, rkgíki bi
qyxytlml w xkiml tbahl; hy xkiytk uby nk mlnyhkh, yn maqal, nk ymgbtahkh,
yn tbahl hyn kcbk gli yn mbmbttl hy nkm rlokm, qlhl gkbmkfk rlttlt w
ymdkiql, w xám gbkihl vaytli uby ia nlm clndym gymkfki, ia yn vayiql
hltxík, ia nk xkñkik nnyckfk; kñkhaéihlmy k qlhl ymql yn aciltkt yn nbckt
hlihy my rknnkfki. dytl hli ubaolqy, kglxdkñkhl hy mb aiqtédahl gltkeói,
mknqó mlfty tlgaikiqy, w, yxftkekihl mb tlhynk, qytgaó mb nkieói w haol:
-mkigrl kxacl, rkm hy mkfyt uby wl ikgí, dlt ubytyt hyn gaynl, yi ymqk
ibymqtk yhkh hy rayttl, dktk tymbgaqkt yi ynnk nk hy ltl, l nk hltkhk, glxl
mbyny nnkxktmy. wl mlw kubén dktk ubayi ymqái cbkthkhlm nlm dynactlm, nkm
ctkihym rkekñkm, nlm vknytlmlm rygrlm. wl mlw, hacl lqtk vye, ubayi rk hy
tymbgaqkt nlm hy nk qkfnk tyhlihk, nlm hlgy hy ptkigak w nlm ibyvy hy nk
pkxk, w yn uby rk hy dliyt yi lnvahl nlm dnkqatym, nlm qkfnkiqym, lnavkiqym
w qatkiqym, nlm pyflm w fynakiamym, gli qlhk nk gkqytvk hy nlm pkxlmlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym hyn dkmkhl qayxdl, rkgayihl yi ymqy yi uby xy rknnl
qknym ctkihyekm, ymqtkñyekm w pygrlm hy ktxkm, uby ymgbtyegki nkm xám
gnktkm uby ynnlm pagaytli. fayi ilqkm, ymgbhytl payn w nyckn, nkm qaiayfnkm
hymqk ilgry, mb ymqtkñl manyigal, yn mlthl w glipbml ymqtbyihl hymqlm
átflnym, yn qyxytlml tbahl hy kubynnk kcbk yi gbwk fbmgk vyiaxlm, uby
dktygy uby my hymdyñk w hyttbxfk hymhy nlm knqlm xliqym hy nk nbik, w
kubyn aigymkfny clndykt uby ilm rayty w nkmqaxk nlm líhlm; nkm gbknym
glmkm, qlhkm obiqkm w gkhk bik dlt mí, mli fkmqkiqym k aipbihat xayhl,
qyxlt w ymdkiql yi yn dygrl hyn xymxl xktqy, gbkiql xám yi kubyn uby il
ymqá kglmqbxftkhl k myxyokiqym kgliqygaxayiqlm w kvyiqbtkm. dbym qlhl ymql
uby wl qy daiql mli aigyiqavlm w hymdytqkhltym hy xa áiaxl, uby wk rkgy uby
yn gltkeói xy tyvayiqy yi yn dygrl, gli yn hymyl uby qayiy hy kglxyqyt ymqk
kvyiqbtk, dlt xám hapagbnqlmk uby my xbymqtk. kmí uby, kdtayqk bi dlgl nkm
gaigrkm k tlgaikiqy w ubéhkqy k halm, w ymdétkxy kubí rkmqk qtym híkm il
xám, yi nlm gbknym, ma il vlnvayty, dbyhym qú vlnvytqy k ibymqtk knhyk, w
hymhy knní, dlt rkgytxy xytgyh w fbyik lftk, atám kn qlflml, hlihy hatám k
nk aiglxdktkfny myñltk xík hbngaiyk uby mb gkbqavl gkfknnytl xbtaó dlt
kglxyqyt glmkm uby ny ragaymyi hacil hy dlhyt nnkxktmy mbwl.

gbkihl mkigrl lwó nkm dknkftkm hy mb kxl, glxyieó k nnltkt gli nk xkwlt
qytibtk hyn xbihl w k hyganny:

-myñlt, wl il mé dlt ubé ubayty vbymqtk xytgyh kglxyqyt ymqk qki qyxytlmk
kvyiqbtk: krltk ym hy ilgry, kubí il ilm vyy ikhay, fayi dlhyxlm qltgyt yn
gkxail w hymvaktilm hyn dynactl, kbiuby il fyfkxlm yi qtym híkm; w, dbym il
rkw ubayi ilm vyk, xyilm rkftá ubayi ilm ilqy hy glfkthym; gbkiql xám, uby
wl ry líhl dtyhagkt kn gbtk hy ibymqtl nbckt, uby vbymqtk xytgyh fayi
glilgy, uby ubayi fbmgk yn dynactl dytygy yi én; kmí uby, il ym fayi qyiqkt
k halm kglxyqayihl qki hymkpltkhl rygrl, hlihy il my dbyhy ymgkdkt mail dlt
xankctl; w fkmqk nlm uby rk rygrl yn gaynl gli vbymqtk xytgyh yi naftktny
hy myt xkiqykhl, glxl wl nl pba, w yi mkgktny vyigyhlt, nafty w mknvl hy
yiqty qkiqlm yiyxaclm glxl kglxdkñkfki kn hapbiql. w, gbkihl qlhl ymql il
xbyvk ia kfnkihy ymy hbtl gltkeói, xbévkny yn dyimkt w gtyyt uby kdyikm my
rkftá vbymqtk xytgyh kdktqkhl hy kubí, gbkihl wl, hy xayhl, hé xa áiaxk k
ubayi ubamayty nnyvktnk. wl mkní hy xa qayttk w hyoé raolm w xboyt dlt
vyiat k mytvat k vbymqtk xytgyh, gtywyihl vknyt xám w il xyilm; dytl, glxl
nk gbhagak tlxdy yn mkgl, k xí xy rk tkmckhl xam ymdytkiekm, dbym gbkihl
xám vavkm nkm qyiík hy kngkiekt kubynnk iyctk w xknrkhkhk íimbnk uby qkiqkm
vygym vbymqtk xytgyh xy rk dtlxyqahl, vyl uby, yi dkcl w qtbygl hynnk, xy
ubayty krltk hyokt yi bi nbckt qki kdktqkhl hyn qtkql rbxkil. dlt bi mlnl
halm, myñlt xíl, uby ili my xy pkck qkn hymkcbamkhl; w wk uby hyn qlhl il
ubaytk vbymqtk xytgyh hymamqat hy kglxyqyt ymqy pygrl, hanáqynl, k nl
xyilm, rkmqk nk xkñkik; uby, k nl uby k xí xy xbymqtk nk gayigak uby
kdtyihí gbkihl ytk dkmqlt, il hyfy hy rkfyt hymhy kubí kn knfk qtym rltkm,
dltuby nk flgk hy nk flgaik ymqá yigaxk hy nk gkfyek, w rkgy nk xyhak ilgry
yi nk níiyk hyn ftkel aeubaythl.

-¿góxl dbyhym qú, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, vyt hóihy rkgy ymk níiyk, ia
hóihy ymqá ymk flgk l ymy glnlhtannl uby hagym, ma rkgy nk ilgry qki ymgbtk
uby il dktygy yi qlhl yn gaynl ymqtynnk kncbik?

-kmí ym -haol mkigrl-, dytl qayiy yn xayhl xbgrlm lolm w vyy nkm glmkm
hyfkol hy qayttk, gbkiql xám yigaxk yi yn gaynl; dbymql uby, dlt fbyi
hamgbtml, fayi my dbyhy yiqyihyt uby rkw dlgl hy kubí kn hík.

-pknqy nl uby pknqkty -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; uby il my rk hy hygat dlt
xí, krltk ia yi iaicúi qayxdl, uby náctaxkm w tbyclm xy kdktqktli hy rkgyt
nl uby hyfík k ymqanl hy gkfknnytl; w kmí, qy tbycl, mkigrl, uby gknnym;
uby halm, uby xy rk dbymql yi gltkeói hy kglxyqyt krltk ymqk qki il vamqk w
qki qyxytlmk kvyiqbtk, qyihtá gbahkhl hy xatkt dlt xa mknbh w hy glimlnkt
qb qtamqyek. nl uby rkm hy rkgyt ym kdtyqkt fayi nkm gaigrkm k tlgaikiqy w
ubyhktqy kubí, uby wl hkté nk vbynqk dtymql, l vavl l xbytql.

vayihl, dbym, mkigrl nk únqaxk tymlnbgaói hy mb kxl w gbái dlgl vkníki gli
én mbm náctaxkm, glimyolm w tbyclm, hyqytxaió hy kdtlvygrktmy hy mb
aihbmqtak w rkgytny ymdytkt rkmqk yn hík, ma dbhaymy; w kmí, gbkihl
kdtyqkfk nkm gaigrkm kn gkfknnl, fliaqkxyiqy w mai myt myiqahl, kqó gli yn
gkfymqtl hy mb kmil kxflm daym k tlgaikiqy, hy xkiytk uby gbkihl hli
ubaolqy my ubaml dktqat, il dbhl, dltuby yn gkfknnl il my dlhík xlvyt mail
k mknqlm. vayihl mkigrl dkiek yn fbyi mbgyml hy mb yxfbmqy, haol:

-yk, myñlt, uby yn gaynl, glixlvahl hy xam náctaxkm w dnycktakm, rk
lthyikhl uby il my dbyhk xlvyt tlgaikiqy; w ma vlm ubytéam dltpakt, w
ymdlnykt, w hknny, mytá yilokt k nk pltqbik w hkt glgym, glxl hagyi, gliqtk
yn kcbaoói.

hymymdytáfkmy gli ymql hli ubaolqy, w, dlt xám uby dliík nkm daytikm kn
gkfknnl, xyilm ny dlhík xlvyt; w, mai gkyt yi nk gbyiqk hy nk nackhbtk,
qbvl dlt fayi hy mlmycktmy w ymdytkt, l k uby kxkiygaymy, l k uby tlgaikiqy
my xyiykmy, gtywyihl, mai hbhk, uby kubynnl vyiík hy lqtk dktqy uby hy nk
aihbmqtak hy mkigrl; w kmí, ny haol:

-dbym kmí ym, mkigrl, uby tlgaikiqy il dbyhy xlvytmy, wl mlw gliqyiql hy
ymdytkt k uby tík yn knfk, kbiuby wl nnlty nl uby ynnk qkthkty yi vyiat.
-il rkw uby nnltkt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby wl yiqtyqyihté k vbymqtk xytgyh
gliqkihl gbyiqlm hymhy kubí kn hík, ma wk il ym uby my ubayty kdykt w
ygrktmy k hltxat bi dlgl mlfty nk vythy wytfk, k bml hy gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym, dktk rknnktmy xám hymgkimkhl gbkihl nnycby yn hík w dbiql hy
kglxyqyt ymqk qki hymyxyokfny kvyiqbtk uby ny ymdytk.

-¿k ubé nnkxkm kdykt l k ubé hltxat? -haol hli ubaolqy-. ¿mlw wl, dlt
vyiqbtk, hy kubynnlm gkfknnytlm uby qlxki tydlml yi nlm dynactlm? hbytxy
qú, uby ikgamqy dktk hltxat, l rke nl uby ubamaytym, uby wl rkté nl uby
vayty uby xám vayiy gli xa dtyqyimaói.

il my yiloy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby il nl haoy
dlt qkiql.

w, nnycáihlmy k én, dbml nk bik xkil yi yn kteói hynkiqytl w nk lqtk yi yn
lqtl, hy xlhl uby ubyhó kftkekhl gli yn xbmnl aeubaythl hy mb kxl, mai
lmktmy kdktqkt hén bi hyhl: qkn ytk yn xayhl uby qyiík k nlm clndym, uby
qlhkvík knqytikqavkxyiqy mlikfki. híolny hli ubaolqy uby gliqkmy kncúi
gbyiql dktk yiqtyqyiytny, glxl my nl rkfík dtlxyqahl, k nl uby mkigrl haol
uby mí ragaytk ma ny hyoktk yn qyxlt hy nl uby lík.

-dytl, gli qlhl yml, wl xy ympltekté k hygat bik ramqltak uby, ma nk
kgaytql k gliqkt w il xy vki k nk xkil, ym nk xyolt hy nkm ramqltakm; w
ymqéxy vbymqtk xytgyh kqyiql, uby wk glxayiel. «Étkmy uby my ytk, yn fayi
uby vaiayty dktk qlhlm myk, w yn xkn, dktk ubayi nl pbyty k fbmgkt...» w
khvaytqk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, uby yn dtaigadal uby nlm kiqacblm
haytli k mbm glimyokm il pby kmí glxlubaytk, uby pby bik myiqyigak hy gkqói
elieltail, tlxkil, uby hagy: "w yn xkn, dktk ubayi ny pbyty k fbmgkt", uby
vayiy kubí glxl kiannl kn hyhl, dktk uby vbymqtk xytgyh my ymqé ubyhl w il
vkwk k fbmgkt yn xkn k iaicbik dktqy, mail uby ilm vlnvkxlm dlt lqtl
gkxail, dbym ikhay ilm pbytek k uby mackxlm émqy, hlihy qkiqlm xayhlm ilm
mlftymknqki.

-macby qb gbyiql, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w hyn gkxail uby ryxlm hy
mycbat héokxy k xí yn gbahkhl.

-«hacl, dbym -dtlmacbaó mkigrl-, uby yi bi nbckt hy ymqtyxkhbtk rkfík bi
dkmqlt gkftytael (ubaytl hygat uby cbkthkfk gkftkm), yn gbkn dkmqlt l
gkftytael, glxl hacl, hy xa gbyiql, my nnkxkfk nldy tbae; w ymqy nldy tbae
kihkfk yikxltkhl hy bik dkmqltk uby my nnkxkfk qlttknfk, nk gbkn dkmqltk
nnkxkhk qlttknfk ytk raok hy bi ckikhytl tagl, w ymqy ckikhytl tagl...»
-ma hymk xkiytk gbyiqkm qb gbyiql, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, tydaqayihl
hlm vygym nl uby vkm hagayihl, il kgkfktám yi hlm híkm; hanl mycbahkxyiqy w
gbéiqknl glxl rlxfty hy yiqyihaxayiql, w ma il, il hackm ikhk.

-hy nk xamxk xkiytk uby wl nl gbyiql -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, my gbyiqki yi xa
qayttk qlhkm nkm glimyokm, w wl il mé gliqktnl hy lqtk, ia ym fayi uby
vbymqtk xytgyh xy dahk uby rkck bmlm ibyvlm.

-ha glxl ubamaytym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; uby, dbym nk mbytqy ubayty uby
il dbyhk hyokt hy ymgbgrktqy, dtlmacby.

-«kmí uby, myñlt xíl hy xa áiaxk -dtlmacbaó mkigrl-, uby, glxl wk qyicl
hagrl, ymqy dkmqlt kihkfk yikxltkhl hy qlttknfk, nk dkmqltk, uby ytk bik
xlek tlnnaek, ekrktyñk w qatkfk kncl k rlxftbik, dltuby qyiík bilm dlglm hy
faclqym, uby dktygy uby krltk nk vyl.»

-nbycl, ¿glilgímqynk qú? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-il nk glilgí wl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl ubayi xy gliqó ymqy gbyiql xy
haol uby ytk qki gaytql w vythkhytl uby dlhík fayi, gbkihl nl gliqkmy k
lqtl, kpatxkt w obtkt uby nl rkfík vamql qlhl. «kmí uby, wyihl híkm w
vaiayihl híkm, yn hakfnl, uby il hbytxy w uby qlhl nl kñkmgk, rael hy
xkiytk uby yn kxlt uby yn dkmqlt qyiík k nk dkmqltk my vlnvaymy yi lxygannl
w xknk vlnbiqkh; w nk gkbmk pby, mycúi xknkm nyicbkm, bik gaytqk gkiqahkh
hy gynannlm uby ynnk ny hal, qknym uby dkmkfki hy nk tkwk w nnyckfki k nl
vyhkhl; w pby qkiql nl uby yn dkmqlt nk kflttygaó hy knní khynkiqy uby, dlt
il vytnk, my ubaml kbmyiqkt hy kubynnk qayttk y atmy hlihy mbm lolm il nk
vaymyi okxám. nk qlttknfk, uby my val hymhyñkhk hyn nldy, nbycl ny ubaml
fayi, xkm uby ibigk ny rkfík ubytahl.»

-Émk ym ikqbtkn glihagaói hy xboytym -haol hli ubaolqy-: hymhyñkt k ubayi
nkm ubayty w kxkt k ubayi nkm kflttygy. dkmk khynkiqy, mkigrl.
-«mbgyhaó -haol mkigrl- uby yn dkmqlt dbml dlt lftk mb hyqytxaikgaói, w,
kiqyglcayihl mbm gkftkm, my yigkxaió dlt nlm gkxdlm hy ymqtyxkhbtk, dktk
dkmktmy k nlm tyailm hy dltqbckn. nk qlttknfk, uby nl mbdl, my pby qtkm én,
w mycbíkny k day w hymgknek hymhy nyolm, gli bi flthói yi nk xkil w gli
bikm knpltokm kn gbynnl, hlihy nnyvkfk, mycúi ym pkxk, bi dyhkel hy ymdyol
w lqtl hy bi dyaiy, w il mé ubé flqygannl hy xbhkm dktk nk gktk; xkm,
nnyvkmy nl uby nnyvkmy, uby wl il xy ubaytl xyqyt krltk yi kvytacbknnl,
mónl haté uby hagyi uby yn dkmqlt nnycó gli mb ckikhl k dkmkt yn tíl
cbkhakik, w yi kubynnk mkeói afk gtygahl w gkma pbytk hy xkhty, w dlt nk
dktqy uby nnycó il rkfík fktgk ia fktgl, ia ubayi ny dkmkmy k én ia k mb
ckikhl hy nk lqtk dktqy, hy nl uby my glicloó xbgrl, dltuby vyík uby nk
qlttknfk vyiík wk xbw gytgk w ny rkfík hy hkt xbgrk dymkhbxfty gli mbm
tbyclm w náctaxkm; xkm, qkiql kihbvl xatkihl, uby val bi dymgkhlt uby qyiík
obiql k mí bi fktgl, qki dyubyñl uby mlnkxyiqy dlhíki gkfyt yi én bik
dytmlik w bik gkftk; w, gli qlhl ymql, ny rkfnó w gligytqó gli én uby ny
dkmkmy k én w k qtygayiqkm gkftkm uby nnyvkfk. yiqtó yn dymgkhlt yi yn
fktgl, w dkmó bik gkftk; vlnvaó, w dkmó lqtk; qltió k vlnvyt, w qltió k
dkmkt lqtk.» qyick vbymqtk xytgyh gbyiqk yi nkm gkftkm uby yn dymgkhlt vk
dkmkihl, dltuby ma my daythy bik hy nk xyxltak, my kgkfktá yn gbyiql w il
mytá dlmafny gliqkt xám dknkftk hén. «macl, dbym, w hacl uby yn
hymyxfktgkhytl hy nk lqtk dktqy ymqkfk nnyil hy gayil w tymfknlml, w
qkthkfk yn dymgkhlt xbgrl qayxdl yi at w vlnvyt. gli qlhl ymql, vlnvaó dlt
lqtk gkftk, w lqtk, w lqtk...»

-rke gbyiqk uby nkm dkmó qlhkm -haol hli ubaolqy-: il kihym wyihl w
vaiayihl hymk xkiytk, uby il kgkfktám hy dkmktnkm yi bi kñl.

-¿gbáiqkm rki dkmkhl rkmqk kcltk? -haol mkigrl.

-¡wl ubé hakfnlm mé! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-.

-ry krí nl uby wl haoy: uby qbvaymy fbyik gbyiqk. dbym, dlt halm, uby my rk
kgkfkhl yn gbyiql, uby il rkw dkmkt khynkiqy.

-¿góxl dbyhy myt yml? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. ¿qki hy ymyigak hy nk
ramqltak ym mkfyt nkm gkftkm uby rki dkmkhl, dlt ymqyiml, uby ma my wyttk
bik hyn iúxytl il dbyhym mycbat khynkiqy gli nk ramqltak?

-il myñlt, yi iaicbik xkiytk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; dltuby, kmí glxl wl
dtycbiqé k vbymqtk xytgyh uby xy haoymy gbáiqkm gkftkm rkfíki dkmkhl w xy
tymdlihaó uby il mkfík, yi kubyn xymxl aimqkiqy my xy pby k xí hy nk
xyxltak gbkiql xy ubyhkfk dlt hygat, w k py uby ytk hy xbgrk vatqbh w
gliqyiql.

-¿hy xlhl -haol hli ubaolqy- uby wk nk ramqltak ym kgkfkhk?

-qki kgkfkhk ym glxl xa xkhty -haol mkigrl.

-híclqy hy vythkh -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby qú rkm gliqkhl bik hy nkm xám
ibyvkm glimyokm, gbyiql l ramqltak, uby ikhay dbhl dyimkt yi yn xbihl; w
uby qkn xlhl hy gliqktnk ia hyoktnk, okxám my dlhtá vyt ia rkftá vamql yi
qlhk nk vahk, kbiuby il ymdytkfk wl lqtk glmk hy qb fbyi hamgbtml; xkm il
xy xktkvannl, dbym ubaeá ymqlm clndym, uby il gymki, qy hyfyi hy qyiyt
qbtfkhl yn yiqyihaxayiql.

-qlhl dbyhy myt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, xkm wl mé uby yi nl hy xa gbyiql il rkw
xám uby hygat: uby knní my kgkfk hl glxayiek yn wyttl hy nk gbyiqk hyn
dkmkoy hy nkm gkftkm.

-kgkfy iltkfbyik hlihy ubamayty -haol hli ubaolqy-, w vykxlm ma my dbyhy
xlvyt tlgaikiqy.

qltióny k dliyt nkm daytikm, w én qltió k hkt mknqlm w k ymqktmy ubyhl:
qkiql ymqkfk hy fayi kqkhl.

yi ymql, dktygy myt, l uby yn ptíl hy nk xkñkik, uby wk vyiík, l uby mkigrl
rbfaymy gyikhl kncbikm glmkm nyiaqavkm, l uby pbymy glmk ikqbtkn -uby ym nl
uby xám my hyfy gtyyt-, k én ny vail yi vlnbiqkh w hymyl hy rkgyt nl uby
lqtl il dbhaytk rkgyt dlt én; xkm ytk qkiql yn xayhl uby rkfík yiqtkhl yi
mb gltkeói, uby il lmkfk kdktqktmy bi iyctl hy bñk hy mb kxl. dbym dyimkt
hy il rkgyt nl uby qyiík ckik, qkxdlgl ytk dlmafny; w kmí, nl uby rael, dlt
fayi hy dke, pby mlnqkt nk xkil hytygrk, uby qyiík kmahk kn kteói qtkmytl,
gli nk gbkn, fliaqkxyiqy w mai tbxlt kncbil, my mlnqó nk nkekhk glttyhaek
gli uby nlm gkneliym my mlmqyiíki, mai kwbhk hy lqtk kncbik, w, yi
ubaqáihlmynk, haytli nbycl kfkol w my ny ubyhktli glxl ctannlm. qtkm ymql,
kneó nk gkxamk nl xyolt uby dbhl w ygró kn katy yiqtkxfkm dlmkhytkm, uby il
ytki xbw dyubyñkm. rygrl ymql -uby én dyimó uby ytk nl xám uby qyiík uby
rkgyt dktk mknat hy kubyn qyttafny kdtayql w kicbmqak-, ny mlftyvail lqtk
xkwlt, uby pby uby ny dktygaó uby il dlhík xbhktmy mai rkgyt ymqtédaql w
tbahl, w glxyieó k kdtyqkt nlm hayiqym w k yiglcyt nlm rlxftlm, tyglcayihl
yi mí yn knayiql qlhl gbkiql dlhík; dytl, gli qlhkm ymqkm hanacyigakm, pby
qki hymhagrkhl uby, kn gkfl kn gkfl, vail k rkgyt bi dlgl hy tbahl, fayi
hapytyiqy hy kubyn uby k én ny dliík qkiql xayhl. lwónl hli ubaolqy w haol:
-¿ubé tbxlt ym émy, mkigrl?

-il mé, myñlt -tymdlihaó én-. kncbik glmk ibyvk hyfy hy myt, uby nkm
kvyiqbtkm w hymvyiqbtkm ibigk glxayieki dlt dlgl.

qltió lqtk vye k dtlfkt vyiqbtk, w mbgyhaóny qki fayi uby, mai xám tbahl ia
knfltlql uby yn dkmkhl, my rknnó nafty hy nk gktck uby qkiqk dymkhbxfty ny
rkfík hkhl. xkm, glxl hli ubaolqy qyiík yn myiqahl hyn lnpkql qki vavl glxl
yn hy nlm líhlm, w mkigrl ymqkfk qki obiql w glmahl gli én uby gkma dlt
níiyk tygqk mbfíki nlm vkdltym rkgak kttafk, il my dbhl ymgbmkt hy uby
kncbilm il nnyckmyi k mbm iktagym; w, kdyikm rbfaytli nnyckhl, gbkihl én
pby kn mlglttl, kdtyqáihlnkm yiqty nlm hlm hyhlm; w, gli qlil kncl ckiclml,
haol:

-dktégyxy, mkigrl, uby qayiym xbgrl xayhl.

-mí qyicl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; xkm, ¿yi ubé nl ygrk hy vyt vbymqtk xytgyh
krltk xám uby ibigk?

-yi uby krltk xám uby ibigk rbynym, w il k áxfkt -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.
-fayi dlhtá myt -haol mkigrl-, xkm wl il qyicl nk gbndk, mail vbymqtk
xytgyh, uby xy qtky k hymrltkm w dlt ymqlm il kglmqbxftkhlm dkmlm.
-tyqítkqy qtym l gbkqtl knná, kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy (qlhl ymql mai
ubaqktmy nlm hyhlm hy nkm iktagym)-, w hymhy kubí khynkiqy qyi xám gbyiqk
gli qb dytmlik w gli nl uby hyfym k nk xík; uby nk xbgrk glivytmkgaói uby
qyicl gliqacl rk yicyihtkhl ymqy xyilmdtygal.

-kdlmqkté -tydnagó mkigrl- uby dayimk vbymqtk xytgyh uby wl ry rygrl hy xa
dytmlik kncbik glmk uby il hyfk.

-dylt ym xyiyknnl, kxacl mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

yi ymqlm glnlubalm w lqtlm myxyokiqym dkmktli nk ilgry kxl w xlel. xkm,
vayihl mkigrl uby k xám kihkt my vyiík nk xkñkik, gli xbgrl qayiql hymnacó
k tlgaikiqy w my kqó nlm gkneliym. glxl tlgaikiqy my val nafty, kbiuby én
hy mbwl il ytk ikhk ftalml, dktygy uby my tymaiqaó, w glxyieó k hkt
xkilqkhkm; dltuby gltvyqkm -gli dythói mbwl- il nkm mkfík rkgyt. vayihl,
dbym, hli ubaolqy uby wk tlgaikiqy my xlvík, nl qbvl k fbyik myñkn, w gtywó
uby nl ytk hy uby kglxyqaymy kubynnk qyxytlmk kvyiqbtk.

kgkfó yi ymql hy hymgbftatmy yn knfk w hy dktygyt hamqaiqkxyiqy nkm glmkm,
w val hli ubaolqy uby ymqkfk yiqty bilm átflnym knqlm, uby ynnlm ytki
gkmqkñlm, uby rkgyi nk mlxftk xbw ymgbtk. maiqaó qkxfaéi uby yn clndykt il
gymkfk, dytl il val ubaéi nl dlhík gkbmkt; w kmí, mai xám hyqyiytmy, rael
myiqat nkm ymdbynkm k tlgaikiqy, w, qltikihl k hymdyhatmy hy mkigrl, ny
xkihó uby knní ny kcbkthkmy qtym híkm, k nl xám nktcl, glxl wk lqtk vye my
nl rkfík hagrl; w uby, ma kn gkfl hynnlm il rbfaymy vbynql, qbvaymy dlt
gaytql uby halm rkfík mahl mytvahl hy uby yi kubynnk dynactlmk kvyiqbtk my
ny kgkfkmyi mbm híkm. qltióny k typytat yn tygkhl w yxfkokhk uby rkfík hy
nnyvkt hy mb dktqy k mb myñltk hbngaiyk, w uby, yi nl uby qlgkfk k nk dkck
hy mbm mytvagalm, il qbvaymy dyik, dltuby én rkfík hyokhl rygrl mb
qymqkxyiql kiqym uby mknaytk hy mb nbckt, hlihy my rknnktík ctkqapagkhl hy
qlhl nl qlgkiqy k mb mknktal, tkqk dlt gkiqahkh, hyn qayxdl uby rbfaymy
mytvahl; dytl uby ma halm ny mkgkfk hy kubyn dynactl mkil w mknvl w mai
gkbqynk, my dlhík qyiyt dlt xbw xám uby gaytqk nk dtlxyqahk íimbnk.

hy ibyvl qltió k nnltkt mkigrl, lwyihl hy ibyvl nkm nkmqaxytkm tkeliym hy
mb fbyi myñlt, w hyqytxaió hy il hyoktny rkmqk yn únqaxl qtáimaql w pai hy
kubyn iyclgal.

hymqkm náctaxkm w hyqytxaikgaói qki rlitkhk hy mkigrl dkiek mkgk yn kbqlt
hymqk ramqltak uby hyfík hy myt fayi ikgahl, w, dlt nl xyilm, gtamqakil
vayol. gbwl myiqaxayiql yiqytiygaó kncl k mb kxl, dytl il qkiql uby
xlmqtkmy pnkubyek kncbik; kiqym, hamaxbnkihl nl xyolt uby dbhl, glxyieó k
gkxaikt rkgak nk dktqy dlt hlihy ny dktygaó uby yn tbahl hyn kcbk w hyn
clndykt vyiík.

mycbíkny mkigrl k day, nnyvkihl, glxl qyiík hy glmqbxfty, hyn gkfymqtl k mb
obxyiql, dytdyqbl glxdkñytl hy mbm dtómdytkm w khvytmkm pltqbikm; w,
rkfayihl kihkhl bik fbyik dayek dlt yiqty kubynnlm gkmqkñlm w átflnym
mlxftílm, haytli yi bi dtkhygannl uby kn day hy bikm knqkm dyñkm my rkgík,
hy nkm gbknym my dtygadaqkfk bi ctkihímaxl clndy hy kcbk. kn day hy nkm
dyñkm, ymqkfki bikm gkmkm xkn rygrkm, uby xám dktygíki tbaikm hy yhapagalm
uby gkmkm, hy yiqty nkm gbknym khvatqaytli uby mkník yn tbahl w ymqtbyihl
hy kubyn clndykt, uby kúi il gymkfk.

knfltlqómy tlgaikiqy gli yn ymqtbyihl hyn kcbk w hy nlm clndym, w,
mlmycáihlny hli ubaolqy, my pby nnyckihl dlgl k dlgl k nkm gkmkm,
yiglxyiháihlmy hy qlhl gltkeói k mb myñltk, mbdnagáihlny uby yi kubynnk
qyxytlmk oltikhk w yxdtymk ny pkvltygaymy, w hy gkxail my yiglxyihkfk
qkxfaéi k halm, uby il ny lnvahkmy. il my ny ubaqkfk mkigrl hyn nkhl, yn
gbkn knktckfk gbkiql dlhík yn gbynnl w nk vamqk dlt yiqty nkm daytikm hy
tlgaikiqy, dlt vyt ma vytík wk nl uby qki mbmdyiml w xyhtlml ny qyiík.
lqtlm gayi dkmlm mytíki nlm uby kihbvaytli, gbkihl, kn hlfnkt hy bik dbiqk,
dktygaó hymgbfaytqk w dkqyiqy nk xamxk gkbmk, mai uby dbhaymy myt lqtk, hy
kubyn rlttímlil w dktk ynnlm ymdkiqkfny tbahl, uby qki mbmdyimlm w xyhtlmlm
qlhk nk ilgry nlm rkfík qyiahl. w ytki -ma il nl rkm, ¡lr nygqlt!, dlt
dymkhbxfty w yilol- myam xkelm hy fkqái, uby gli mbm knqytikqavlm clndym
kubyn ymqtbyihl pltxkfki.

gbkihl hli ubaolqy val nl uby ytk, yixbhygaó w dkmxómy hy kttafk kfkol.
xatóny mkigrl, w val uby qyiík nk gkfyek aignaikhk mlfty yn dygrl, gli
xbymqtkm hy ymqkt glttahl. xató qkxfaéi hli ubaolqy k mkigrl, w valny uby
qyiík nlm gkttannlm raigrkhlm w nk flgk nnyik hy tamk, gli yvahyiqym
myñknym hy ubytyt tyvyiqkt gli ynnk, w il dbhl mb xynkigliík qkiql gli én
uby, k nk vamqk hy mkigrl, dbhaymy hyokt hy tyítmy; w, glxl val mkigrl uby
mb kxl rkfík glxyiekhl, mlnqó nk dtymk hy xkiytk uby qbvl iygymahkh hy
kdtyqktmy nkm aokhkm gli nlm dbñlm, dlt il tyvyiqkt tayihl. gbkqtl vygym
mlmycó, w lqtkm qkiqkm vlnvaó k mb tamk gli yn xamxl íxdyqb uby dtaxytl; hy
nl gbkn wk my hkfk kn hakfnl hli ubaolqy, w xám gbkihl ny lwó hygat, glxl
dlt xlhl hy pamck:

-«rkm hy mkfyt, ¡lr mkigrl kxacl!, uby wl ikgí, dlt ubytyt hyn gaynl, yi
ymqk ibymqtk yhkh hy rayttl, dktk tymbgaqkt yi ynnk nk hltkhk, l hy ltl. wl
mlw kubén dktk ubayi ymqái cbkthkhlm nlm dynactlm, nkm rkekñkm ctkihym, nlm
vknytlmlm pygrlm...»

w dlt kubí pby tydaqayihl qlhkm l nkm xám tkeliym uby hli ubaolqy haol nk
vye dtaxytk uby lwytli nlm qyxytlmlm clndym.

vayihl, dbym, hli ubaolqy uby mkigrl rkgík fbtnk hén, my glttaó w yiloó yi
qkiqk xkiytk, uby kneó yn nkieói w ny kmyiqó hlm dknlm, qknym uby, ma, glxl
nlm tygafaó yi nkm ymdknhkm, nlm tygafaytk yi nk gkfyek, ubyhktk nafty hy
dkcktny yn mknktal, ma il pbytk k mbm rytyhytlm. vayihl mkigrl uby mkgkfk
qki xknkm vytkm hy mbm fbtnkm, gli qyxlt hy uby mb kxl il dkmkmy khynkiqy
yi ynnkm, gli xbgrk rbxanhkh ny haol:

-mlmaécbymy vbymqtk xytgyh; uby, dlt halm, uby xy fbtnl.

-dbym, dltuby lm fbtnáam, il xy fbtnl wl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. vyiah
kgá, myñlt knycty: ¿dktégylm k vlm uby, ma glxl émqlm pbytli xkelm hy
fkqái, pbytki lqtk dynactlmk kvyiqbtk, il rkfík wl xlmqtkhl yn áiaxl uby
glivyiík dktk yxdtyihynnk w kgkfknnk? ¿ymqlw wl lfnackhl, k hagrk, mayihl,
glxl mlw, gkfknnytl, k glilgyt w hymqaicbat nlm mliym w mkfyt gbánym mli hy
fkqái l il? w xám, uby dlhtík myt, glxl ym vythkh, uby il nlm ry vamql yi
xa vahk, glxl vlm nlm rkftéam vamql, glxl vannkil tbai uby mlam, gtakhl w
ikgahl yiqty ynnlm. ma il, rkgyh vlm uby ymqlm myam xkelm my vbynvki yi
myam okwkiym, w ygráhxynlm k nkm fktfkm bil k bil, l qlhlm obiqlm, w,
gbkihl wl il hayty gli qlhlm dkqkm kttafk, rkgyh hy xí nk fbtnk uby
ubamaétyhym.

-il rkwk xám, myñlt xíl -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby wl glipayml uby ry kihkhl
kncl tambyñl yi hyxkmík. dytl híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh, krltk uby ymqkxlm yi
dke (kmí halm ny mkuby hy qlhkm nkm kvyiqbtkm uby ny mbgyhaytyi qki mkil w
mknvl glxl ny rk mkgkhl hémqk), ¿il rk mahl glmk hy tyít, w nl ym hy
gliqkt, yn ctki xayhl uby ryxlm qyiahl? k nl xyilm, yn uby wl qbvy; uby hy
vbymqtk xytgyh wk wl mé uby il ny glilgy, ia mkfy ubé ym qyxlt ia ymdkiql.
-il iaycl wl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby nl uby ilm rk mbgyhahl il myk glmk
hacik hy tamk, dytl il ym hacik hy gliqktmy; uby il mli qlhkm nkm dytmlikm
qki hamgtyqkm uby mydki dliyt yi mb dbiql nkm glmkm.

-k nl xyilm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mbdl vbymqtk xytgyh dliyt yi mb dbiql yn
nkieói, kdbiqáihlxy k nk gkfyek, w háihlxy yi nkm ymdknhkm, ctkgakm k halm
w k nk hanacyigak uby dbmy yi nkhyktxy. dytl vkwk, uby qlhl mknhtá yi nk
glnkhk; uby wl ry líhl hygat: "Émy qy ubayty fayi, uby qy rkgy nnltkt"; w
xám, uby mbynyi nlm dtaigadknym myñltym, qtkm bik xknk dknkftk uby hagyi k
bi gtakhl, hktny nbycl bikm gknekm; kbiuby il mé nl uby ny mbynyi hkt qtkm
rkfytny hkhl hy dknlm, ma wk il ym uby nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym hki qtkm
dknlm íimbnkm l tyailm yi qayttk patxy.

-qkn dlhtík glttyt yn hkhl -haol hli ubaolqy- uby qlhl nl uby hagym vaiaymy
k myt vythkh; w dythlik nl dkmkhl, dbym ytym hamgtyql w mkfym uby nlm
dtaxytlm xlvaxayiqlm il mli yi xkil hyn rlxfty, w ymqá khvytqahl hy kubí
khynkiqy yi bik glmk, dktk uby qy kfmqyickm w tydltqym yi yn rkfnkt
hyxkmakhl glixacl; uby yi gbkiqlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm ry nyíhl, uby mli
aipaiaqlm, okxám ry rknnkhl uby iaicúi ymgbhytl rkfnkmy qkiql gli mb myñlt
glxl qú gli yn qbwl. w yi vythkh uby nl qyicl k ctki pknqk, qbwk w xík:
qbwk, yi uby xy ymqaxkm yi dlgl; xík, yi uby il xy hyol ymqaxkt yi xám. mí,
uby ckihkníi, ymgbhytl hy kxkhím hy ckbnk, glihy pby hy nk íimbnk patxy; w
my nyy hén uby mayxdty rkfnkfk k mb myñlt gli nk clttk yi nk xkil,
aignaikhk nk gkfyek w hlfnkhl yn gbytdl xlty qbtubymgl. dbym, ¿ubé hatyxlm
hy ckmkfkn, ymgbhytl hy hli cknklt, uby pby qki gknnkhl uby, dktk
hygnktktilm nk yzgynyigak hy mb xktkvannlml manyigal, mlnk bik vye my
ilxftk mb ilxfty yi qlhk kubynnk qki ctkihy glxl vythkhytk ramqltak? hy
qlhl nl uby ry hagrl rkm hy aipytat, mkigrl, uby ym xyiymqyt rkgyt
hapytyigak hy kxl k xlel, hy myñlt k gtakhl w hy gkfknnytl k ymgbhytl. kmí
uby, hymhy rlw yi khynkiqy, ilm ryxlm hy qtkqkt gli xám tymdyql, mai hktilm
glthynyol, dltuby, hy gbknubaytk xkiytk uby wl xy yiloy gli vlm, rk hy myt
xkn dktk yn gáiqktl. nkm xytgyhym w fyiypagalm uby wl lm ry dtlxyqahl
nnycktái k mb qayxdl; w ma il nnycktyi, yn mknktal, k nl xyilm, il my rk hy
dythyt, glxl wk lm ry hagrl.

-ymqá fayi gbkiql vbymqtk xytgyh hagy -haol mkigrl-, dytl ubyttík wl mkfyt,
dlt ma kgkml il nnyckmy yn qayxdl hy nkm xytgyhym w pbymy iygymktal kgbhat
kn hy nlm mknktalm, gbáiql ckikfk bi ymgbhytl hy bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy yi
kubynnlm qayxdlm, w ma my gligytqkfki dlt xymym, l dlt híkm, glxl dyliym hy
knfkñat.

-il gtyl wl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby okxám nlm qknym ymgbhytlm
ymqbvaytli k mknktal, mail k xytgyh. w ma wl krltk qy ny ry myñknkhl k qa
yi yn qymqkxyiql gyttkhl uby hyoé yi xa gkmk, pby dlt nl uby dlhík mbgyhyt;
uby kúi il mé góxl dtbyfk yi ymqlm qki gknkxaqlmlm qayxdlm ibymqtlm nk
gkfknnytík, w il ubyttík uby dlt dlgkm glmkm dyikmy xa áiaxk yi yn lqtl
xbihl. dltuby ubaytl uby mydkm, mkigrl, uby yi én il rkw ymqkhl xám
dynactlml uby yn hy nlm kvyiqbtytlm.

-kmí ym vythkh -haol mkigrl-, dbym mónl yn tbahl hy nlm xkelm hy bi fkqái
dbhl knfltlqkt w hymkmlmyckt yn gltkeói hy bi qki vknytlml kihkiqy
kvyiqbtytl glxl ym vbymqtk xytgyh. xkm, fayi dbyhy ymqkt mycbtl uby, hy
kubí khynkiqy, il hymdnaycby xam nkfalm dktk rkgyt hlikaty hy nkm glmkm hy
vbymqtk xytgyh, ma il pbyty dktk rlitktny, glxl k xa kxl w myñlt ikqbtkn.
-hymk xkiytk -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, vavatám mlfty nk rke hy nk qayttk;
dltuby, hymdbém hy k nlm dkhtym, k nlm kxlm my rk hy tymdyqkt glxl ma nl
pbymyi.





gkdíqbnl zza. uby qtkqk hy nk knqk kvyiqbtk w tagk ckikigak hyn wynxl hy
xkxftail, gli lqtkm glmkm mbgyhahkm k ibymqtl aivyigafny gkfknnytl


yi ymql, glxyieó k nnlvyt bi dlgl, w ubamaytk mkigrl uby my yiqtktki yi yn
xlnail hy nlm fkqkiym; xkm rkfíknym glftkhl qkn kflttygaxayiql hli ubaolqy,
dlt nk dymkhk fbtnk, uby yi iaicbik xkiytk ubaml yiqtkt hyiqtl; w kmí,
qltgayihl yn gkxail k nk hytygrk xkil, haytli yi lqtl glxl yn uby rkfíki
nnyvkhl yn hík hy kiqym.

hy knní k dlgl, hymgbftaó hli ubaolqy bi rlxfty k gkfknnl, uby qtkík yi nk
gkfyek bik glmk uby tynbxftkfk glxl ma pbytk hy ltl, w kúi én kdyikm ny
rbfl vamql, gbkihl my vlnvaó k mkigrl w ny haol:

-dktégyxy, mkigrl, uby il rkw typtái uby il myk vythkhytl, dltuby qlhlm mli
myiqyigakm mkgkhkm hy nk xymxk yzdytayigak, xkhty hy nkm gayigakm qlhkm,
ymdygaknxyiqy kubyn uby hagy: "hlihy bik dbytqk my gayttk, lqtk my kfty".
híclnl dltuby ma kilgry ilm gyttó nk vyiqbtk nk dbytqk hy nk uby
fbmgáfkxlm, yickñáihlilm gli nlm fkqkiym, krltk ilm kfty hy dkt yi dkt
lqtk, dktk lqtk xyolt w xám gaytqk kvyiqbtk; uby ma wl il kgytqkty k yiqtkt
dlt ynnk, xík mytá nk gbndk, mai uby nk dbyhk hkt k nk dlgk ilqagak hy
fkqkiym ia k nk ymgbtahkh hy nk ilgry. hacl ymql dltuby, ma il xy yickñl,
rkgak ilmlqtlm vayiy bil uby qtky yi mb gkfyek dbymql yn wynxl hy xkxftail,
mlfty uby wl ragy yn obtkxyiql uby mkfym.

-xaty vbymqtk xytgyh fayi nl uby hagy, w xyolt nl uby rkgy -haol mkigrl-,
uby il ubyttík uby pbymyi lqtlm fkqkiym uby ilm kgkfkmyi hy kfkqkikt w
kdlttykt yn myiqahl.

-¡vánkqy yn hakfnl dlt rlxfty! -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. ¿ubé vk hy wynxl k
fkqkiym?

-il mé ikhk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; xkm, k py uby ma wl dbhaytk rkfnkt qkiql
glxl mlník, uby ubaeá haytk qknym tkeliym uby vbymqtk xytgyh vaytk uby my
yickñkfk yi nl uby hagy.

-¿góxl xy dbyhl yickñkt yi nl uby hacl, qtkahlt ymgtbdbnlml? -haol hli
ubaolqy-. haxy, ¿il vym kubyn gkfknnytl uby rkgak ilmlqtlm vayiy, mlfty bi
gkfknnl tbgal tlhkhl, uby qtky dbymql yi nk gkfyek bi wynxl hy ltl?
-nl uby wl vyl w glnbxftl -tymdlihaó mkigrl- il ym mail bi rlxfty mlfty bi
kmil dkthl, glxl yn xíl, uby qtky mlfty nk gkfyek bik glmk uby tynbxftk.
-dbym émy ym yn wynxl hy xkxftail -haol hli ubaolqy-. kdátqkqy k bik dktqy
w héokxy gli én k mlnkm: vytám gbái mai rkfnkt dknkftk, dlt krlttkt hyn
qayxdl, glignbwl ymqk kvyiqbtk w ubyhk dlt xíl yn wynxl uby qkiql ry
hymykhl.

-wl xy qyicl yi gbahkhl yn kdktqktxy -tydnagó mkigrl-, xkm ubaytk halm,
qltil k hygat, uby ltéckil myk, w il fkqkiym.

-wk lm ry hagrl, rytxkil, uby il xy xyiqéam, ia dlt dayiml, xám yml hy nlm
fkqkiym -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby vlql..., w il hacl xám, uby lm fkqkiyy yn
knxk.

gknnó mkigrl, gli qyxlt uby mb kxl il gbxdnaymy yn vlql uby ny rkfík
ygrkhl, tyhlihl glxl bik flnk.

ym, dbym, yn gkml uby yn wynxl, w yn gkfknnl w gkfknnytl uby hli ubaolqy
vyík, ytk ymql: uby yi kubyn gliqltil rkfík hlm nbcktym, yn bil qki dyubyñl
uby ia qyiík flqagk ia fktfytl, w yn lqtl, uby ymqkfk obiql, mí; w
kmí, yn fktfytl hyn xkwlt mytvík kn xyilt, yi yn gbkn qbvl iygymahkh bi
yipytxl hy mkictktmy w lqtl hy rkgytmy nk fktfk, dktk nl gbkn vyiík yn
fktfytl, w qtkík bik fkgík hy keópkt; w ubaml nk mbytqy uby, kn qayxdl uby
vyiík, glxyieó k nnlvyt, w, dltuby il my ny xkigrkmy yn mlxftytl, uby hyfík
hy myt ibyvl, my dbml nk fkgík mlfty nk gkfyek; w, glxl ymqkfk naxdak,
hymhy xyhak nycbk tynbxftkfk. vyiík mlfty bi kmil dkthl, glxl mkigrl haol,
w émqk pby nk lgkmaói uby k hli ubaolqy ny dktygaó gkfknnl tbgal tlhkhl, w
gkfknnytl, w wynxl hy ltl; uby qlhkm nkm glmkm uby vyík, gli xbgrk
pkganahkh nkm kglxlhkfk k mbm hymvktakhkm gkfknnytíkm w xknkihkiqym
dyimkxayiqlm. w gbkihl én val uby yn dlfty gkfknnytl nnyckfk gytgk, mai
dliytmy gli én yi tkeliym, k qlhl glttyt hy tlgaikiqy ny yitamqtó gli yn
nkieói fkol, nnyvkihl aiqyigaói hy dkmktny hy dktqy k dktqy; xkm gbkihl k
én nnyckfk, mai hyqyiyt nk pbtak hy mb gkttytk, ny haol:

-¡hypaéihyqy, gkbqavk gtakqbtk, l yiqtaéckxy hy qb vlnbiqkh nl uby gli
qkiqk tkeói my xy hyfy!

yn fktfytl, uby, qki mai dyimktnl ia qyxytnl, val vyiat kubynnk pkiqkmxk
mlfty mí, il qbvl lqtl tyxyhal, dktk dlhyt cbkthktmy hyn clndy hy nk nkiek,
ma il pby yn hyoktmy gkyt hyn kmil kfkol; w il rbfl qlgkhl kn mbynl, gbkihl
my nyvkiqó xám nacytl uby bi ckxl w glxyieó k glttyt dlt kubyn nnkil, uby
il ny kngkiektk yn vayiql. hyoómy nk fkgík yi yn mbynl, gli nk gbkn my
gliqyiqó hli ubaolqy, w haol uby yn dkckil rkfík kihkhl hamgtyql w uby
rkfík axaqkhl kn gkmqlt, yn gbkn, vaéihlmy kglmkhl hy nlm gkekhltym, my
qktkek w ktdk gli nlm hayiqym kubénnl dlt nl uby én, dlt hamqaiql ikqbtkn,
mkfy uby ym dytmycbahl. xkihó k mkigrl uby knekmy yn wynxl, yn gbkn,
qlxáihlnk yi nkm xkilm, haol:

-dlt halm, uby nk fkgík ym fbyik w uby vkny bi tykn hy k lgrl glxl bi
xktkvyhí.

w, háihlmynk k mb kxl, my nk dbml nbycl yi nk gkfyek, tlhyáihlnk k bik
dktqy w k lqtk, fbmgáihlny yn yigkoy; w, glxl il my ny rknnkfk, haol:
-mai hbhk uby yn dkckil, k gbwk xyhahk my pltoó dtaxytl ymqk pkxlmk gynkhk,
hyfík hy qyiyt ctkihímaxk gkfyek, w nl dylt hynnl ym uby ny pknqk nk xaqkh.
gbkihl mkigrl lwó nnkxkt k nk fkgík gynkhk, il dbhl qyiyt nk tamk; xkm
víilmyny k nkm xayiqym nk gónytk hy mb kxl, w gknnó yi nk xaqkh hynnk.
-¿hy ubé qy tíym, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-tílxy -tymdlihaó én- hy glimahytkt nk ctki gkfyek uby qyiík yn dkckil
hbyñl hymqy knxyqy, uby il myxyok mail bik fkgík hy fktfytl daiqadktkhk.
-¿mkfym ubé axkcail, mkigrl? uby ymqk pkxlmk dayek hymqy yigkiqkhl wynxl,
dlt kncúi ymqtkñl kgahyiqy, hyfaó hy vyiat k xkilm hy ubayi il mbdl glilgyt
ia ymqaxkt mb vknlt, w, mai mkfyt nl uby rkgík, vaéihlnk hy ltl dbtímaxl,
hyfaó hy pbihat nk lqtk xaqkh dktk kdtlvygrktmy hyn dtygal, w hy nk lqtk
xaqkh rael émqk, uby dktygy fkgík hy fktfytl, glxl qú hagym. dytl, myk nl
uby pbyty; uby dktk xí uby nk glilegl il rkgy kn gkml mb qtkmxbqkgaói; uby
wl nk khytyekté yi yn dtaxyt nbckt hlihy rkwk ryttytl, w hy mbytqy uby il
ny rkck vyiqkok, ia kbi ny nnycby, nk uby rael w pltoó yn halm hy nkm
ryttytíkm dktk yn halm hy nkm fkqknnkm; w, yi ymqy yiqtyqkiql, nk qtkyté
glxl dbhayty, uby xám vkny kncl uby il ikhk; gbkiql xám, uby fayi mytá
fkmqkiqy dktk hypyihytxy hy kncbik dyhtkhk.

-yml mytá -haol mkigrl- ma il my qatk gli rlihk, glxl my qatktli yi nk
dynyk hy nlm hlm yoétgaqlm, gbkihl ny mkiqacbktli k vbymqtk xytgyh nkm
xbynkm w ny tlxdaytli yn kngbek hlihy vyiík kubyn fyihaqímaxl ftyfkoy uby
xy rael vlxaqkt nkm kmkhbtkm.knlic

-il xy hk xbgrk dyik yn rkfytny dythahl, uby wk mkfym qú, mkigrl -haol hli
ubaolqy-, uby wl qyicl nk tygyqk yi nk xyxltak.

-qkxfaéi nk qyicl wl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl ma wl ny ragayty ia ny
dtlfkty xám yi xa vahk, kubí myk xa rltk. gbkiql xám, uby il dayiml dliytxy
yi lgkmaói hy rkfytny xyiymqyt, dltuby dayiml cbkthktxy gli qlhlm xam gaigl
myiqahlm hy myt pytahl ia hy pytat k ikhay. hy nl hyn myt lqtk vye
xkiqykhl, il hacl ikhk, uby myxyokiqym hymctkgakm xkn my dbyhyi dtyvyiat, w
ma vayiyi, il rkw uby rkgyt lqtk glmk mail yiglcyt nlm rlxftlm, hyqyiyt yn
knayiql, gyttkt nlm lolm w hyoktmy at dlt hlihy nk mbytqy w nk xkiqk ilm
nnyvkty.

-xkn gtamqakil ytym, mkigrl -haol, lwyihl ymql, hli ubaolqy-, dltuby ibigk
lnvahkm nk aiobtak uby bik vye qy rki rygrl; dbym máfyqy uby ym hy dygrlm
ilfnym w cyiytlmlm il rkgyt gkml hy iañytíkm. ¿ubé day mkgkmqy glol, ubé
glmqannk ubyftkhk, ubé gkfyek tlqk, dktk uby il my qy lnvahy kubynnk fbtnk?
uby, fayi kdbtkhk nk glmk, fbtnk pby w dkmkqayxdl; uby, k il yiqyihytnl wl
kimí, wk wl rbfaytk vbynql knná w rbfaytk rygrl yi qb vyickiek xám hkñl uby
yn uby ragaytli nlm ctayclm dlt nk tlfkhk ynyik. nk gbkn, ma pbytk yi ymqy
qayxdl, l xa hbngaiyk pbytk yi kubén, dbhaytk ymqkt mycbtk uby il qbvaytk
qkiqk pkxk hy rytxlmk glxl qayiy.

w kubí hal bi mlmdatl, w ny dbml yi nkm ibfym. w haol mkigrl:

-dkmy dlt fbtnkm, dbym nk vyickiek il dbyhy dkmkt yi vytkm; dytl wl mé hy
ubé gknahkh pbytli nkm vytkm w nkm fbtnkm, w mé qkxfaéi uby il my xy gkytái
hy nk xyxltak, glxl ibigk my ubaqktái hy nkm ymdknhkm. dytl, hyokihl ymql
kdktqy, híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh ubé rktyxlm hymqy gkfknnl tbgal tlhkhl, uby
dktygy kmil dkthl, uby hyoó kubí hymkxdktkhl kubyn xktqail uby vbymqtk
xytgyh hyttafó; uby, mycúi én dbml nlm daym yi dlnvltlmk w glcaó nkm hy
vannkhaycl, il nnyvk dytcyial hy vlnvyt dlt én okxám; w ¡dktk xam fktfkm,
ma il ym fbyil yn tbgal!

-ibigk wl kglmqbxftl -haol hli ubaolqy- hymdlokt k nlm uby vyiel, ia ym bml
hy gkfknnytík ubaqktnym nlm gkfknnlm w hyoktnlm k day, ma wk il pbymy uby
yn vyigyhlt rbfaymy dythahl yi nk dyihyigak yn mbwl; uby, yi qkn gkml,
nígaql ym qlxkt yn hyn vyigahl, glxl ckikhl yi cbyttk nígaqk. kmí uby,
mkigrl, hyok ymy gkfknnl, l kmil, l nl uby qú ubamaytym uby myk, uby, glxl
mb hbyñl ilm vyk knlickhlm hy kubí, vlnvytá dlt én.

-halm mkfy ma ubamaytk nnyvktny -tydnagó mkigrl-, l, dlt nl xyilm, qtlgknny
gli ymqy xíl, uby il xy dktygy qki fbyil. vythkhytkxyiqy uby mli ymqtygrkm
nkm nywym hy gkfknnytík, dbym il my ymqayihyi k hyokt qtlgkt bi kmil dlt
lqtl; w ubyttík mkfyt ma dlhtík qtlgkt nlm kdktyolm maubaytk.

-yi yml il ymqlw xbw gaytql -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w, yi gkml hy hbhk,
rkmqk ymqkt xyolt aipltxkhl, hacl uby nlm qtbyubym, ma ym uby qayiym hynnlm
iygymahkh ymqtyxk.

-qki ymqtyxk ym -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby ma pbytki dktk xa xamxk dytmlik, il
nlm rbfaytk xyiymqyt xám.

w nbycl, rkfanaqkhl gli kubynnk nagyigak, rael xbqkqal gkdktbx w dbml mb
obxyiql k nkm xan naihyekm, hyoáihlny xyoltkhl yi qytgal w ubaiql.
rygrl ymql, knxltektli hy nkm mlftkm hyn tykn uby hyn kgéxank hymdloktli,
fyfaytli hyn kcbk hyn kttlwl hy nlm fkqkiym, mai vlnvyt nk gktk k xatknnlm:
qkn ytk yn kflttygaxayiql uby nym qyiíki dlt yn xayhl yi uby nym rkfíki
dbymql.

gltqkhk, dbym, nk gónytk, w kbi nk xknyigliík, mbfaytli k gkfknnl, w, mai
qlxkt hyqytxaikhl gkxail, dlt myt xbw hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yn il qlxkt
iaicbil gaytql, my dbmaytli k gkxaikt dlt hlihy nk vlnbiqkh hy tlgaikiqy
ubaml, uby my nnyvkfk qtkm mí nk hy mb kxl, w kbi nk hyn kmil, uby mayxdty
ny mycbík dlt hlihyubaytk uby cbakfk, yi fbyi kxlt w glxdkñík. gli qlhl
ymql, vlnvaytli kn gkxail tykn w macbaytli dlt én k nk vyiqbtk, mai lqtl
hamacial kncbil.

wyihl, dbym, kmí gkxaikihl, haol mkigrl k mb kxl:

-myñlt, ¿ubayty vbymqtk xytgyh hktxy nagyigak uby hydktqk bi dlgl gli én?
uby, hymdbém uby xy dbml kubyn ámdytl xkihkxayiql hyn manyigal, my xy rki
dlhtahl xám hy gbkqtl glmkm yi yn ymqóxkcl, w bik mlnk uby krltk qyicl yi
yn dagl hy nk nyicbk il ubyttík uby my xkn nlctkmy.

-hank -haol hli ubaolqy-, w mé ftyvy yi qbm tkelikxayiqlm, uby iaicbil rkw
cbmqlml ma ym nktcl.

-hacl, dbym, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby, hy kncbilm híkm k ymqk dktqy,
ry glimahytkhl gbái dlgl my ckik w ctkioyk hy kihkt fbmgkihl ymqkm
kvyiqbtkm uby vbymqtk xytgyh fbmgk dlt ymqlm hymaytqlm w yigtbgaokhkm hy
gkxailm, hlihy, wk uby my vyieki w kgkfyi nkm xám ynactlmkm, il rkw ubayi
nkm vyk ia mydk; w kmí, my rki hy ubyhkt yi dytdyqbl manyigal, w yi
dytobagal hy nk aiqyigaói hy vbymqtk xytgyh w hy nl uby ynnkm xytygyi. w
kmí, xy dktygy uby mytík xyolt, mknvl yn xyolt dktygyt hy vbymqtk xytgyh,
uby ilm pbémyxlm k mytvat k kncúi yxdytkhlt, l k lqtl dtíigady ctkihy uby
qyick kncbik cbyttk, yi gbwl mytvagal vbymqtk xytgyh xbymqty yn vknlt hy mb
dytmlik, mbm ctkihym pbytekm w xkwlt yiqyihaxayiql; uby, vamql ymql hyn
myñlt k ubayi matvaétyxlm, dlt pbytek ilm rk hy tyxbiytkt, k gkhk gbkn
mycúi mbm xétaqlm, w knní il pknqktá ubayi dlick yi ymgtaql nkm rkekñkm hy
vbymqtk xytgyh, dktk dytdyqbk xyxltak. hy nkm xíkm il hacl ikhk, dbym il
rki hy mknat hy nlm níxaqym ymgbhytanym; kbiuby mé hygat uby, ma my bmk yi
nk gkfknnytík ymgtafat rkekñkm hy ymgbhytlm, uby il dayiml uby my rki hy
ubyhkt nkm xíkm yiqty tyicnliym.

-il hagym xkn, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; xkm, kiqym uby my nnycby k
ymy qétxail, ym xyiymqyt kihkt dlt yn xbihl, glxl yi kdtlfkgaói, fbmgkihl
nkm kvyiqbtkm, dktk uby, kgkfkihl kncbikm, my glfty ilxfty w pkxk qkn uby,
gbkihl my pbyty k nk gltqy hy kncúi ctki xliktgk, wk myk yn gkfknnytl
glilgahl dlt mbm lftkm; w uby, kdyikm ny rkwki vamql yiqtkt nlm xbgrkgrlm
dlt nk dbytqk hy nk gabhkh, gbkihl qlhlm ny macki w tlhyyi, hkihl vlgym,
hagayihl: ''Émqy ym yn gkfknnytl hyn mln'', l hy nk maytdy, l hy lqtk
aimaciak kncbik, hyfkol hy nk gbkn rbfayty kgkfkhl ctkihym rkekñkm. ''Émqy
ym -hatái- yn uby vyigaó yi maicbnkt fkqknnk kn cackiqkel ftlgkftbil hy nk
ctki pbytek; yn uby hymyigkiqó kn ctki xkxynbgl hy dytmak hyn nktcl
yigkiqkxyiql yi uby rkfík ymqkhl gkma ilvygayiqlm kñlm''. kmí uby, hy xkil
yi xkil, atái dtyclikihl qbm rygrlm, w nbycl, kn knfltlql hy nlm xbgrkgrlm
w hy nk hyxám cyiqy, my dktktá k nkm pyiymqtkm hy mb tykn dknkgal yn tyw hy
kubyn tyail, w kmí glxl vyk kn gkfknnytl, glilgaéihlny dlt nkm ktxkm l dlt
nk yxdtymk hyn ymgbhl, pltelmkxyiqy rk hy hygat: ''¡yk, mbm! ¡mkncki xam
gkfknnytlm, gbkiqlm yi xa gltqy ymqái, k tygyfat k nk pnlt hy nk
gkfknnytík, uby knní vayiy!'' k gbwl xkihkxayiql mknhtái qlhlm, w én
nnycktá rkmqk nk xaqkh hy nk ymgknytk, w ny kftkektá ymqtygrímaxkxyiqy, w
ny hktá dke fymáihlny yi yn tlmqtl; w nbycl ny nnyvktá dlt nk xkil kn
kdlmyiql hy nk myñltk tyaik, khlihy yn gkfknnytl nk rknnktá gli nk aipkiqk,
mb raok, uby rk hy myt bik hy nkm xám pytxlmkm w kgkfkhkm hligynnkm uby, yi
ctki dktqy hy nl hymgbfaytql hy nk qayttk, k hbtkm dyikm my dbyhk rknnkt.
mbgyhytá qtkm ymql, nbycl yi gliqaiyiqy, uby ynnk dlick nlm lolm yi yn
gkfknnytl w én yi nlm hynnk, w gkhk bil dktyegk k lqtl glmk xám havaik uby
rbxkik; w, mai mkfyt góxl ia góxl il, rki hy ubyhkt dtymlm w yinkekhlm yi
nk aiqtagkfny tyh kxltlmk, w gli ctki gbaqk yi mbm gltkeliym dlt il mkfyt
góxl my rki hy pkfnkt dktk hymgbftat mbm kimakm w myiqaxayiqlm. hymhy knní
ny nnyvktái, mai hbhk, k kncúi gbktql hyn dknkgal, tagkxyiqy khytyekhl,
hlihy, rkfaéihlny ubaqkhl nkm ktxkm, ny qtkytái bi tagl xkiql hy ymgktnkqk
gli uby my gbftk; w ma fayi dktygaó ktxkhl, qki fayi w xyolt rk hy dktygyt
yi pktmyql. vyiahk nk ilgry, gyiktá gli yn tyw, tyaik y aipkiqk, hlihy
ibigk ubaqktá nlm lolm hynnk, xatáihlnk k pbtql hy nlm gatgbmqkiqym, w ynnk
rktá nl xymxl gli nk xymxk mkckgahkh, dltuby, glxl qyicl hagrl, ym xbw
hamgtyqk hligynnk. nyvkiqktmy rki nkm qkfnkm, w yiqtktá k hymrltk dlt nk
dbytqk hy nk mknk bi pyl w dyubyñl yikil gli bik pytxlmk hbyñk, uby, yiqty
hlm cackiqym, hyqtám hyn yikil vayiy, gli gaytqk kvyiqbtk, rygrk dlt bi
kiqaubímaxl mkfal, uby yn uby nk kgkfkty mytá qyiahl dlt yn xyolt gkfknnytl
hyn xbihl. xkihktá nbycl yn tyw uby qlhlm nlm uby ymqái dtymyiqym nk
dtbyfyi, w iaicbil ny hktá pai w gaxk mail yn gkfknnytl rbémdyh, yi xbgrl
dtl hy mb pkxk, hy nl gbkn ubyhktá gliqyiqímaxk nk aipkiqk, w my qyihtá dlt
gliqyiqk w dkckhk khyxám, dlt rkfyt dbymql w glnlgkhl mbm dyimkxayiqlm yi
qki knqk dktqy. w nl fbyil ym uby ymqy tyw, l dtíigady, l nl uby ym, qayiy
bik xbw tyñahk cbyttk gli lqtl qki dlhytlml glxl én, w yn gkfknnytl rbémdyh
ny dahy (kn gkfl hy kncbilm híkm uby rk ymqkhl yi mb gltqy) nagyigak dktk
at k mytvatny yi kubynnk cbyttk hagrk. hktámynk yn tyw hy xbw fbyi qknkiqy,
w yn gkfknnytl ny fymktá gltqémxyiqy nkm xkilm dlt nk xytgyh uby ny pkgy. w
kubynnk ilgry my hymdyhatá hy mb myñltk nk aipkiqk dlt nkm tyokm hy bi
okthíi, uby gky yi yn kdlmyiql hlihy ynnk hbytxy, dlt nkm gbknym wk lqtkm
xbgrkm vygym nk rkfík pkfnkhl, mayihl xyhakiytk w mkfahltk hy qlhl bik
hligynnk hy ubayi nk aipkiqk xbgrl my pakfk. mlmdatktá én, hymxkwktámy
ynnk, qtkytá kcbk nk hligynnk, kgbaqktámy xbgrl dltuby vayiy nk xkñkik, w
il ubyttík uby pbymyi hymgbfaytqlm, dlt nk rlitk hy mb myñltk. paiknxyiqy,
nk aipkiqk vlnvytá yi mí w hktá mbm fnkigkm xkilm dlt nk tyok kn gkfknnytl,
yn gbkn my nkm fymktá xan w xan vygym w my nkm fkñktá yi náctaxkm. ubyhktá
gligytqkhl yiqty nlm hlm hyn xlhl uby my rki hy rkgyt mkfyt mbm fbyilm l
xknlm mbgymlm, w tlcktány nk dtaigymk uby my hyqyick nl xyilm uby dbhayty;
dtlxyqétmynl rk én gli xbgrlm obtkxyiqlm; qótikny k fymkt nkm xkilm, w
hymdíhymy gli qkiql myiqaxayiql uby ymqktá dlgl dlt kgkfkt nk vahk. vkmy
hymhy knní k mb kdlmyiql, égrkmy mlfty mb nygrl, il dbyhy hltxat hyn hlnlt
hy nk dktqahk, xkhtbck xbw hy xkñkik, vkmy k hymdyhat hyn tyw w hy nk tyaik
w hy nk aipkiqk; hígyiny, rkfaéihlmy hymdyhahl hy nlm hlm, uby nk myñltk
aipkiqk ymqá xkn hamdbymqk w uby il dbyhy tygyfat vamaqk; dayimk yn
gkfknnytl uby ym hy dyik hy mb dktqahk, qtkmdámkmyny yn gltkeói, w pknqk
dlgl hy il hkt aihagal xkiapaymql hy mb dyik. ymqá nk hligynnk xyhakiytk
hynkiqy, rknl hy ilqkt qlhl, vámynl k hygat k mb myñltk, nk gbkn nk tygafy
gli náctaxkm w ny hagy uby bik hy nkm xkwltym dyikm uby qayiy ym il mkfyt
ubaéi myk mb gkfknnytl, w ma ym hy naikoy hy tywym l il; kmycútknk nk
hligynnk uby il dbyhy gkfyt qkiqk gltqymík, cyiqanyek w vknyiqík glxl nk hy
mb gkfknnytl mail yi mbfoyql tykn w ctkvy; glimbénkmy gli ymql nk gbaqkhk;
dtlgbtk glimlnktmy, dlt il hkt xkn aihagal hy mí k mbm dkhtym, w, k gkfl hy
hlm híkm, mkny yi dúfnagl. wk my ym ahl yn gkfknnytl: dynyk yi nk cbyttk,
vyigy kn yiyxacl hyn tyw, ckik xbgrkm gabhkhym, qtabipk hy xbgrkm fkqknnkm,
vbynvy k nk gltqy, vy k mb myñltk dlt hlihy mbyny, gligaétqkmy uby nk dahk
k mb dkhty dlt xboyt yi dkcl hy mbm mytvagalm. il my nk ubayty hkt yn tyw,
dltuby il mkfy ubaéi ym; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, l tlfkhk l hy lqtk gbknubayt
mbytqy uby myk, nk aipkiqk vayiy k myt mb ymdlmk w mb dkhty nl vayiy k
qyiyt k ctki vyiqbtk, dltuby my vail k kvytacbkt uby yn qkn gkfknnytl ym
raol hy bi vknytlml tyw hy il mé ubé tyail, dltuby gtyl uby il hyfy hy
ymqkt yi yn xkdk. xbétymy yn dkhty, rytyhk nk aipkiqk, ubyhk tyw yn
gkfknnytl yi hlm dknkftkm. kubí yiqtk nbycl yn rkgyt xytgyhym k mb ymgbhytl
w k qlhlm kubynnlm uby ny kwbhktli k mbfat k qki knql ymqkhl: gkmk k mb
ymgbhytl gli bik hligynnk hy nk aipkiqk, uby mytá, mai hbhk, nk uby pby
qytgytk yi mbm kxltym, uby ym raok hy bi hbuby xbw dtaigadkn.

-yml dahl, w fkttkm hytygrkm -haol mkigrl-; k yml xy kqyicl, dltuby qlhl,
kn day hy nk nyqtk, rk hy mbgyhyt dlt vbymqtk xytgyh, nnkxáihlmy yn
gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk.

-il nl hbhym, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby hyn xymxl w dlt nlm
xymxlm dkmlm uby ymql ry gliqkhl mbfyi w rki mbfahl nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym
k myt tywym w yxdytkhltym. mónl pknqk kcltk xatkt ubé tyw hy nlm gtamqakilm
l hy nlm dkckilm qyick cbyttk w qyick raok rytxlmk; dytl qayxdl rkftá dktk
dyimkt ymql, dbym, glxl qy qyicl hagrl, dtaxytl my rk hy glftkt pkxk dlt
lqtkm dktqym uby my kgbhk k nk gltqy. qkxfaéi xy pknqk lqtk glmk; uby,
dbymql gkml uby my rknny tyw gli cbyttk w gli raok rytxlmk, w uby wl rkwk
glftkhl pkxk aigtyífny dlt qlhl yn biavytml, il mé wl góxl my dlhík rknnkt
uby wl myk hy naikoy hy tywym, l, dlt nl xyilm, dtaxl mycbihl hy yxdytkhlt;
dltuby il xy ubyttá yn tyw hkt k mb raok dlt xboyt ma il ymqá dtaxytl xbw
yiqytkhl yi ymql, kbiuby xám nl xytyegki xam pkxlmlm rygrlm. kmí uby, dlt
ymqk pknqk, qyxl dythyt nl uby xa ftkel qayiy fayi xytygahl. fayi ym vythkh
uby wl mlw raolhkncl hy mlnkt glilgahl, hy dlmymaói w dtldtayhkh w hy
hyvyickt ubaiayiqlm mbynhlm; w dlhtík myt uby yn mkfal uby ymgtafaymy xa
ramqltak hymnaihkmy hy qkn xkiytk xa dktyiqynk w hygyihyigak, uby xy
rknnkmy ubaiql l mymql iayql hy tyw. dltuby qy rkcl mkfyt, mkigrl, uby rkw
hlm xkiytkm hy naikoym yi yn xbihl: bilm uby qtkyi w hyttafki mb
hygyihyigak hy dtíigadym w xliktgkm, k ubayi dlgl k dlgl yn qayxdl rk
hymrygrl, w rki kgkfkhl yi dbiqk, glxl datáxahy dbymqk kn tyvém; lqtlm
qbvaytli dtaigadal hy cyiqy fkok, w vki mbfayihl hy ctkhl yi ctkhl, rkmqk
nnyckt k myt ctkihym myñltym. hy xkiytk uby ymqá nk hapytyigak yi uby bilm
pbytli, uby wk il mli, w lqtlm mli, uby wk il pbytli; w dlhtík myt wl
hémqlm uby, hymdbém hy kvytacbkhl, rbfaymy mahl xa dtaigadal ctkihy w
pkxlml, gli nl gbkn my hyfík hy gliqyiqkt yn tyw, xa mbyctl, uby rbfayty hy
myt. w gbkihl il, nk aipkiqk xy rk hy ubytyt hy xkiytk uby, k dymkt hy mb
dkhty, kbiuby gnktkxyiqy mydk uby mlw raol hy bi kekgái, xy rk hy khxaqat
dlt myñlt w dlt ymdlml; w ma il, kubí yiqtk yn tlfknnk w nnyvknnk hlihy xám
cbmql xy hayty; uby yn qayxdl l nk xbytqy rk hy kgkfkt yn yilol hy mbm
dkhtym.

-krí yiqtk fayi qkxfaéi -haol mkigrl- nl uby kncbilm hymknxkhlm hagyi: "il
dahkm hy ctkhl nl uby dbyhym qlxkt dlt pbytek"; kbiuby xyolt gbkhtk hygat:
"xám vkny mknql hy xkqk uby tbycl hy rlxftym fbyilm". híclnl dltuby ma yn
myñlt tyw, mbyctl hy vbymqtk xytgyh, il my ubamayty hlxyñkt k yiqtycknny k
xa myñltk nk aipkiqk, il rkw mail, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, tlfknnk w
qtkmdliynnk. dytl ymqá yn hkñl uby, yi qkiql uby my rkcki nkm dkgym w my
clgy dkgípagkxyiqy yn tyail, yn dlfty ymgbhytl my dlhtá ymqkt k hayiqy yi
ymql hy nkm xytgyhym. ma wk il ym uby nk hligynnk qytgytk, uby rk hy myt mb
xboyt, my mkny gli nk aipkiqk, w én dkmk gli ynnk mb xknk vyiqbtk, rkmqk
uby yn gaynl lthyiy lqtk glmk; dltuby fayi dlhtá, gtyl wl, hymhy nbycl
hátmynk mb myñlt dlt nacíqaxk ymdlmk.

-yml il rkw ubayi nk ubaqy -haol hli ubaolqy.

-dbym, glxl yml myk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, il rkw mail yiglxyihktilm k halm, w
hyokt glttyt nk mbytqy dlt hlihy xyolt nl yigkxaikty.

-rácknl halm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- glxl wl hymyl w qú, mkigrl, rkm
xyiymqyt; w tbai myk ubayi dlt tbai my qayiy.

-myk dkt halm -haol mkigrl-, uby wl gtamqakil vayol mlw, w dktk myt glihy
ymql xy fkmqk.

-w kbi qy mlftk -haol hli ubaolqy-; w gbkihl il nl pbytkm, il rkgík ikhk kn
gkml, dltuby, mayihl wl yn tyw, fayi qy dbyhl hkt ilfnyek, mai uby nk
glxdtym ia xy matvkm gli ikhk. dltuby, yi rkgaéihlqy glihy, gáqkqy krí
gkfknnytl, w hacki nl uby haoytyi; uby k fbyik py uby qy rki hy nnkxkt
myñltík, xkn uby nym dymy.

-w ¡xliqkm uby il mkftík wl kbqltaekt yn naqkhl! -haol mkigrl.
-hagqkhl rkm hy hygat, uby il naqkhl -haol mb kxl.

-myk kimí -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek-. hacl uby ny mkftík fayi kglxlhkt,
dltuby, dlt vahk xík, uby bi qayxdl pba xbñahlt hy bik glptkhík, w uby xy
kmyiqkfk qki fayi nk tldk hy xbñahlt, uby hygíki qlhlm uby qyiík dtymyigak
dktk dlhyt myt dtalmqy hy nk xymxk glptkhík. dbym, ¿ubé mytá gbkihl xy
dlick bi tldói hbgkn k gbymqkm, l xy vamqk hy ltl w hy dytnkm, k bml hy
glihy ymqtkioytl? dktk xí qyicl uby xy rki hy vyiat k vyt hy gayi nycbkm.
-fayi dktygytám -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl mytá xyiymqyt uby qy tkdym nkm
fktfkm k xyibhl; uby, mycúi nkm qayiym hy ymdymkm, kflttkmgkhkm w xkn
dbymqkm, ma il qy nkm tkdkm k ikvkok, gkhk hlm híkm dlt nl xyilm, k qatl hy
ymgldyqk my ygrktá hy vyt nl uby ytym.

-¿ubé rkw xám -haol mkigrl-, mail qlxkt bi fktfytl w qyiynny kmknktakhl yi
gkmk? w kbi, ma pbyty xyiymqyt, ny rkté uby kihy qtkm xí, glxl gkfknnytael
hy ctkihy.

-dbym, ¿góxl mkfym qú -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy- uby nlm ctkihym nnyvki hyqtám
hy mí k mbm gkfknnytaelm?

-wl my nl haté -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: nlm kñlm dkmkhlm ymqbvy bi xym yi nk
gltqy, w knní va uby, dkmyáihlmy bi myñlt xbw dyubyñl, uby hygíki uby ytk
xbw ctkihy, bi rlxfty ny mycbík k gkfknnl k qlhkm nkm vbynqkm uby hkfk, uby
il dktygík mail uby ytk mb tkfl. dtycbiqé uby góxl kubyn rlxfty il my
obiqkfk gli yn lqtl, mail uby mayxdty kihkfk qtkm hén. tymdlihaétlixy uby
ytk mb gkfknnytael w uby ytk bml hy nlm ctkihym nnyvkt qtkm mí k nlm qknym.
hymhy yiqligym nl mé qki fayi uby ibigk my xy rk lnvahkhl.

-hacl uby qayiym tkeói -haol hli ubaolqy-, w uby kmí dbyhym qú nnyvkt k qb
fktfytl; uby nlm bmlm il vaiaytli qlhlm obiqlm, ia my aivyiqktli k bik, w
dbyhym myt qú yn dtaxytl glihy uby nnyvy qtkm mí mb fktfytl; w kbi ym hy
xám glipakiek yn rkgyt nk fktfk uby yimannkt bi gkfknnl.

-ubéhymy yml hyn fktfytl k xa gktcl -haol mkigrl-, w kn hy vbymqtk xytgyh
my ubyhy yn dtlgbtkt vyiat k myt tyw w yn rkgytxy glihy.

-kmí mytá -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

w, knekihl nlm lolm, val nl uby my hatá yi yn macbayiqy gkdíqbnl.





gkdíqbnl zzaa. hy nk nafytqkh uby hal hli ubaolqy k xbgrlm hymhagrkhlm uby,
xkn hy mb ctkhl, nlm nnyvkfki hlihy il ubamaytki at


gbyiqk gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna, kbqlt ktáfacl w xkigrycl, yi ymqk ctkvímaxk,
knqamlikiqy, xíiaxk, hbngy y axkcaikhk ramqltak uby, hymdbém uby yiqty yn
pkxlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk w mkigrl dkiek, mb ymgbhytl, dkmktli
kubynnkm tkeliym uby yi yn pai hyn gkdíqbnl vyaiqy w bil ubyhki typytahkm,
uby hli ubaolqy kneó nlm lolm w val uby dlt yn gkxail uby nnyvkfk vyiíki
rkmqk hlgy rlxftym k day, yimktqkhlm, glxl gbyiqkm, yi bik ctki gkhyik hy
rayttl dlt nlm gbynnlm, w qlhlm gli ymdlmkm k nkm xkilm. vyiíki kimaxamxl
gli ynnlm hlm rlxftym hy k gkfknnl w hlm hy k day; nlm hy k gkfknnl, gli
ymgldyqkm hy tbyhk, w nlm hy k day, gli hkthlm w ymdkhkm; w uby kmí glxl
mkigrl dkiek nlm vahl, haol:

-Émqk ym gkhyik hy cknylqym, cyiqy pltekhk hyn tyw, uby vk k nkm cknytkm.
-¿góxl cyiqy pltekhk? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy-. ¿ym dlmafny uby yn tyw rkck
pbytek k iaicbik cyiqy?

-il hacl yml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mail uby ym cyiqy uby, dlt mbm hynaqlm, vk
glihyikhk k mytvat kn tyw yi nkm cknytkm hy dlt pbytek.

-yi tymlnbgaói -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, glxlubaytk uby ynnl myk, ymqk cyiqy,
kbiuby nlm nnyvki, vki hy dlt pbytek, w il hy mb vlnbiqkh.

-kmí ym -haol mkigrl.

-dbym hymk xkiytk -haol mb kxl-, kubí yigkok nk yoygbgaói hy xa lpagal:
hympkgyt pbytekm w mlglttyt w kgbhat k nlm xamytkfnym.

-khvaytqk vbymqtk xytgyh -haol mkigrl- uby nk obmqagak, uby ym yn xymxl
tyw, il rkgy pbytek ia kctkval k myxyokiqy cyiqy, mail uby nlm gkmqack yi
dyik hy mbm hynaqlm.

nnycó, yi ymql, nk gkhyik hy nlm cknylqym, w hli ubaolqy, gli xbw gltqymym
tkeliym, dahaó k nlm uby afki yi mb cbkthk pbymyi mytvahlm hy aipltxknny w
hyganny nk gkbmk, l gkbmkm, dlt uby nnyvki kubynnk cyiqy hy kubynnk xkiytk.
bik hy nkm cbkthkm hy k gkfknnl tymdlihaó uby ytki cknylqym, cyiqy hy mb
xkoymqkh uby afk k cknytkm, w uby il rkfík xám uby hygat, ia én qyiík xám
uby mkfyt.

-gli qlhl yml -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, ubyttík mkfyt hy gkhk bil hynnlm yi
dktqagbnkt nk gkbmk hy mb hymctkgak.

kñkhaó k émqkm lqtkm qknym w qki glxyhahkm tkeliym, dktk xlvytnlm k uby
haoymyi nl uby hymykfk, uby nk lqtk cbkthk hy k gkfknnl ny haol:
-kbiuby nnyvkxlm kubí yn tycamqtl w nk py hy nkm myiqyigakm hy gkhk bil
hymqlm xknkvyiqbtkhlm, il ym qayxdl émqy hy hyqyiytnym k mkgktnkm ia k
nyynnkm; vbymqtk xytgyh nnycby w my nl dtycbiqy k ynnlm xymxlm, uby ynnlm
nl hatái ma ubamaytyi, uby mí ubyttái, dltuby ym cyiqy uby tygafy cbmql hy
rkgyt w hygat fynnkubytíkm.

gli ymqk nagyigak, uby hli ubaolqy my qlxktk kbiuby il my nk haytki, my
nnycó k nk gkhyik, w kn dtaxytl ny dtycbiqó uby dlt ubé dygkhlm afk hy qki
xknk cbamk. Én ny tymdlihaó uby dlt yikxltkhl afk hy kubynnk xkiytk.
-¿dlt yml il xám? -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. dbym, ma dlt yikxltkhlm ygrki k
cknytkm, híkm rk uby dbhaytk wl ymqkt flckihl yi ynnkm.

-il mli nlm kxltym glxl nlm uby vbymqtk xytgyh dayimk -haol yn cknylqy-;
uby nlm xílm pbytli uby ubamy qkiql k bik gkikmqk hy glnkt, kqymqkhk hy
tldk fnkigk, uby nk kftkgé glixacl qki pbytqyxyiqy uby, k il ubaqátxynk nk
obmqagak dlt pbytek, kúi rkmqk kcltk il nk rbfaytk hyokhl hy xa vlnbiqkh.
pby yi ptkckiqy, il rbfl nbckt hy qltxyiql; glignbwómy nk gkbmk,
kglxlhátlixy nkm ymdknhkm gli gayiql, w dlt kñkhahbtk qtym dtygamlm hy
cbtkdkm, w kgkfómy nk lftk.

-¿ubé mli cbtkdkm? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-cbtkdkm mli cknytkm -tymdlihaó yn cknylqy.

yn gbkn ytk bi xlel hy rkmqk yhkh hy vyaiqy w gbkqtl kñlm, w haol uby ytk
ikqbtkn hy dayhtkríqk. nl xymxl dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy kn mycbihl, yn gbkn il
tymdlihaó dknkftk, mycúi afk hy qtamqy w xknyigóiagl; xkm tymdlihaó dlt én
yn dtaxytl, w haol:

-Émqy, myñlt, vk dlt gkiktal; hacl, dlt xúmagl w gkiqlt.

-dbym, ¿góxl -tydaqaó hli ubaolqy-, dlt xúmaglm w gkiqltym vki qkxfaéi k
cknytkm?

-mí, myñlt -tymdlihaó yn cknylqy-, uby il rkw dylt glmk uby gkiqkt yi yn
kimak.

-kiqym, ry wl líhl hygat -haol hli ubaolqy- uby ubayi gkiqk mbm xknym
ymdkiqk.

-kgá ym kn tyvém -haol yn cknylqy-, uby ubayi gkiqk bik vye nnltk qlhk nk
vahk.

-il nl yiqayihl -haol hli ubaolqy.

xkm bik hy nkm cbkthkm ny haol:

-myñlt gkfknnytl, gkiqkt yi yn kimak my hagy, yiqty ymqk cyiqy ili mkiqk,
glipymkt yi yn qltxyiql. k ymqy dygkhlt ny haytli qltxyiql w glipymó mb
hynaql, uby ytk myt gbkqtytl, uby ym myt nkhtói hy fymqakm, w, dlt rkfyt
glipymkhl, ny glihyiktli dlt myam kñlm k cknytkm, kxéi hy hlgayiqlm kelqym
uby wk nnyvk yi nkm ymdknhkm. w vk mayxdty dyimkqavl w qtamqy, dltuby nlm
hyxám nkhtliym uby knná ubyhki w kubí vki ny xknqtkqki w kiaubanki, w
ymgktiygyi w qayiyi yi dlgl, dltuby glipymó w il qbvl áiaxl hy hygat iliym.
dltuby hagyi ynnlm uby qkiqkm nyqtkm qayiy bi il glxl bi mí, w uby rktqk
vyiqbtk qayiy bi hynaigbyiqy, uby ymqá yi mb nyicbk mb vahk l mb xbytqy, w
il yi nk hy nlm qymqaclm w dtlfkiekm; w dktk xí qyicl uby il vki xbw pbytk
hy gkxail.

-w wl nl yiqayihl kmí -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

yn gbkn, dkmkihl kn qytgytl, dtycbiqó nl uby k nlm lqtlm; yn gbkn, hy
dtymql w gli xbgrl hymyipkhl, tymdlihaó w haol:

-wl vlw dlt gaigl kñlm k nkm myñltkm cbtkdkm dlt pknqktxy haye hbgkhlm.
-wl hkté vyaiqy hy xbw fbyik ckik -haol hli ubaolqy- dlt naftktlm hymk
dymkhbxfty.

-yml xy dktygy -tymdlihaó yn cknylqy- glxl ubayi qayiy haiytlm yi xaqkh hyn
clnpl w my ymqá xbtayihl hy rkxfty, mai qyiyt khlihy glxdtkt nl uby rk
xyiymqyt. híclnl dltuby ma k mb qayxdl qbvaytk wl ymlm vyaiqy hbgkhlm uby
vbymqtk xytgyh krltk xy lptygy, rbfaytk biqkhl gli ynnlm nk déihlnk hyn
ymgtafkil w kvavkhl yn aicyial hyn dtlgbtkhlt, hy xkiytk uby rlw xy vaytk
yi xaqkh hy nk dnkek hy elglhlvyt, hy qlnyhl, w il yi ymqy gkxail,
kqtkannkhl glxl ckncl; dytl halm ym ctkihy: dkgayigak w fkmqk.

dkmó hli ubaolqy kn gbktql, uby ytk bi rlxfty hy vyiytkfny tlmqtl gli bik
fktfk fnkigk uby ny dkmkfk hyn dygrl; yn gbkn, lwéihlmy dtycbiqkt nk gkbmk
dlt uby knní vyiík, glxyieó k nnltkt w il tymdlihaó dknkftk; xkm yn ubaiql
glihyikhl ny matvaó hy nyicbk, w haol:

-ymqy rlxfty rlitkhl vk dlt gbkqtl kñlm k cknytkm, rkfayihl dkmykhl nkm
kglmqbxftkhkm vymqahl yi dlxdk w k gkfknnl.

-yml ym -haol mkigrl dkiek-, k nl uby k xí xy dktygy, rkfyt mknahl k nk
vytcüyiek.

-kmí ym -tydnagó yn cknylqy-; w nk gbndk dlt uby ny haytli ymqk dyik ym dlt
rkfyt mahl glttyhlt hy ltyok, w kbi hy qlhl yn gbytdl. yi ypygql, ubaytl
hygat uby ymqy gkfknnytl vk dlt kngkrbyqy, w dlt qyiyt kmaxymxl mbm dbiqkm
w glnnkt hy rygragytl.

-k il rkfytny kñkhahl ymkm dbiqkm w glnnkt -haol hli ubaolqy-, dlt
mlnkxyiqy yn kngkrbyqy naxdal, il xytygík én at k flckt yi nkm cknytkm,
mail k xkihknnkm w k myt cyiytkn hynnkm; dltuby il ym kmí glxlubaytk yn
lpagal hy kngkrbyqy, uby ym lpagal hy hamgtyqlm w iygymktímaxl yi nk
tydúfnagk fayi lthyikhk, w uby il ny hyfík yoytgyt mail cyiqy xbw fayi
ikgahk; w kbi rkfík hy rkfyt vyyhlt w yzkxaikhlt hy nlm qknym, glxl ny rkw
hy nlm hyxám lpagalm, gli iúxytl hydbqkhl w glilgahl, glxl glttyhltym hy
nliok; w hymqk xkiytk my ymgbmktíki xbgrlm xknym uby my gkbmki dlt kihkt
ymqy lpagal w yoytgagal yiqty cyiqy ahalqk w hy dlgl yiqyihaxayiql, glxl
mli xboytgannkm hy dlgl xám k xyilm, dkoygannlm w qtbrkiym hy dlglm kñlm w
hy dlgk yzdytayigak, uby, k nk xám iygymktak lgkmaói w gbkihl ym xyiymqyt
hkt bik qtkek uby axdltqy, my nym wynki nkm xackm yiqty nk flgk w nk xkil w
il mkfyi gbán ym mb xkil hytygrk. ubamaytk dkmkt khynkiqy w hkt nkm tkeliym
dlt uby glivyiík rkgyt ynyggaói hy nlm uby yi nk tydúfnagk rkfíki hy qyiyt
qki iygymktal lpagal, dytl il ym yn nbckt kglxlhkhl dktk ynnl: kncúi hík nl
haté k ubayi nl dbyhk dtlvyyt w tyxyhakt. mónl hacl krltk uby nk dyik uby
xy rk gkbmkhl vyt ymqkm fnkigkm gkikm w ymqy tlmqtl vyiytkfny yi qkiqk
pkqack, dlt kngkrbyqy, xy nk rk ubaqkhl yn khobiql hy myt rygragytl; kbiuby
fayi mé uby il rkw rygraelm yi yn xbihl uby dbyhki xlvyt w pltekt nk
vlnbiqkh, glxl kncbilm maxdnym dayimki; uby ym nafty ibymqtl knfyhtíl, w il
rkw wytfk ia yigkiql uby ny pbytgy. nl uby mbynyi rkgyt kncbikm xboytgannkm
maxdnym w kncbilm yxfbmqytlm fynnkglm ym kncbikm xamqbtkm w vyiyilm gli uby
vbynvyi nlglm k nlm rlxftym, hkihl k yiqyihyt uby qayiyi pbytek dktk rkgyt
ubytyt fayi, mayihl, glxl hacl, glmk axdlmafny pltekt nk vlnbiqkh.
-kmí ym -haol yn fbyi vayol-, w, yi vythkh, myñlt, uby yi nl hy rygragytl
uby il qbvy gbndk; yi nl hy kngkrbyqy, il nl dbhy iyckt. dytl ibigk dyimé
uby rkgík xkn yi ynnl: uby qlhk xa aiqyigaói ytk uby qlhl yn xbihl my
rlnckmy w vavaymy yi dke w ubayqbh, mai dyihyigakm ia dyikm; dytl il xy
kdtlvygró ikhk ymqy fbyi hymyl dktk hyokt hy at khlihy il ymdytl vlnvyt,
mycúi xy gktcki nlm kñlm w bi xkn hy ltaik uby nnyvl, uby il xy hyok
tydlmkt bi tkql.

w kubí qltió k mb nnkiql, glxl hy dtaxytl; w qúvlny mkigrl qkiqk glxdkmaói,
uby mkgó bi tykn hy k gbkqtl hyn myil w my ny hal hy naxlmik.

dkmó khynkiqy hli ubaolqy, w dtycbiqó k lqtl mb hynaql, yn gbkn tymdlihaó
gli il xyilm, mail gli xbgrk xám cknnkthík uby yn dkmkhl:

-wl vlw kubí dltuby xy fbtné hyxkmakhkxyiqy gli hlm dtaxkm rytxkikm xíkm, w
gli lqtkm hlm rytxkikm uby il nl ytki xíkm; paiknxyiqy, qkiql xy fbtné gli
qlhkm, uby tymbnqó hy nk fbtnk gtygyt nk dktyiqynk, qki aiqtagkhkxyiqy uby
il rkw hakfnl uby nk hygnkty. dtlfómyxy qlhl, pknqó pkvlt, il qbvy haiytlm,
víkxy k dauby hy dythyt nlm qtkckhytlm, myiqyigaátlixy k cknytkm dlt myam
kñlm, glimyiqí: gkmqacl ym hy xa gbndk; xlel mlw: hbty nk vahk, uby gli
ynnk qlhl my kngkiek. ma vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, nnyvk kncbik glmk
gli uby mlglttyt k ymqlm dlftyqym, halm my nl dkcktá yi yn gaynl, w
ilmlqtlm qyihtyxlm yi nk qayttk gbahkhl hy tlckt k halm yi ibymqtkm
ltkgaliym dlt nk vahk w mknbh hy vbymqtk xytgyh, uby myk qki nktck w qki
fbyik glxl mb fbyik dtymyigak xytygy.

Émqy afk yi ráfaql hy ymqbhakiqy, w haol bik hy nkm cbkthkm uby ytk xbw
ctkihy rkfnkhlt w xbw cyiqan nkqail.

qtkm qlhlm émqlm, vyiík bi rlxfty hy xbw fbyi dktygyt, hy yhkh hy qtyaiqk
kñlm, mail uby kn xatkt xyqík yn bi lol yi yn lqtl bi dlgl. vyiík
hapytyiqyxyiqy kqkhl uby nlm hyxám, dltuby qtkík bik gkhyik kn day, qki
ctkihy uby my nk nakfk dlt qlhl yn gbytdl, w hlm ktclnnkm k nk cktckiqk, nk
bik yi nk gkhyik, w nk lqtk hy nkm uby nnkxki cbkthkkxacl l dayhykxacl, hy
nk gbkn hygyihíki hlm rayttlm uby nnyckfki k nk gaiqbtk, yi nlm gbknym my
kmíki hlm ymdlmkm, hlihy nnyvkfk nkm xkilm, gyttkhkm gli bi ctbyml gkihkhl,
hy xkiytk uby ia gli nkm xkilm dlhík nnyckt k nk flgk, ia dlhík fkokt nk
gkfyek k nnyckt k nkm xkilm. dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy uby góxl afk kubyn rlxfty
gli qkiqkm dtamaliym xám uby nlm lqtlm. tymdlihaóny nk cbkthk dltuby qyiík
kubyn mlnl xám hynaqlm uby qlhlm nlm lqtlm obiqlm, w uby ytk qki kqtyvahl w
qki ctkihy fynnkgl uby, kbiuby ny nnyvkfki hy kubynnk xkiytk, il afki
mycbtlm hén, mail uby qyxíki uby my nym rkfík hy rbat.

-¿ubé hynaqlm dbyhy qyiyt -haol hli ubaolqy-, ma il rki xytygahl xám dyik
uby ygrknny k nkm cknytkm?

-vk dlt haye kñlm -tydnagó nk cbkthk-, uby ym glxl xbytqy gyvan. il my
ubaytk mkfyt xám, mail uby ymqy fbyi rlxfty ym yn pkxlml caiém hy
dkmkxliqy, uby dlt lqtl ilxfty nnkxki caiymannl hy dktkdannk.

-myñlt glxamktal -haol yiqligym yn cknylqy-, váwkmy dlgl k dlgl, w il
kihyxlm krltk k hymnaihkt ilxftym w mlftyilxftym. caiém xy nnkxl w il
caiymannl, w dkmkxliqy ym xa kngbtiak, w il dktkdannk, glxl vlkgé hagy; w
gkhk bil my hé bik vbynqk k nk tyhlihk, w il rktá dlgl.

-rkfny gli xyilm qlil -tydnagó yn glxamktal-, myñlt nkhtói hy xám hy nk
xktgk, ma il ubayty uby ny rkck gknnkt, xkn uby ny dymy.

-fayi dktygy -tymdlihaó yn cknylqy- uby vk yn rlxfty glxl halm ym mytvahl,
dytl kncúi hík mkftá kncbil ma xy nnkxl caiymannl hy dktkdannk l il.
-dbym, ¿il qy nnkxki kimí, yxfbmqytl? -haol nk cbkthk.

-mí nnkxki -tymdlihaó caiém-, xkm wl rkté uby il xy nl nnkxyi, l xy nkm
dynktík hlihy wl hacl yiqty xam hayiqym. myñlt gkfknnytl, ma qayiy kncl uby
hktilm, héilmnl wk, w vkwk gli halm, uby wk yipkhk gli qkiql ubytyt mkfyt
vahkm koyikm; w ma nk xík ubayty mkfyt, mydk uby wl mlw caiém hy dkmkxliqy,
gbwk vahk ymqá ymgtaqk dlt ymqlm dbncktym.

-hagy vythkh -haol yn glxamktal-: uby én xymxl rk ymgtaql mb ramqltak, uby
il rkw xám, w hyok yxdyñkhl yn naftl yi nk gátgyn yi hlgayiqlm tyknym.
-w ny dayiml ubaqkt -haol caiém-, ma ubyhktk yi hlgayiqlm hbgkhlm.
-¿qki fbyil ym? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-ym qki fbyil -tymdlihaó caiém- uby xkn kñl dktk nkektannl hy qltxym w dktk
qlhlm gbkiqlm hy kubyn céiytl my rki ymgtaql l ymgtafaytyi. nl uby ny mé
hygat k vlkgé ym uby qtkqk vythkhym, w uby mli vythkhym qki naihkm w qki
hlilmkm uby il dbyhyi rkfyt xyiqatkm uby my ny acbknyi.

-¿w góxl my aiqaqbnk yn naftl? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-nk vahk hy caiém hy dkmkxliqy -tymdlihaó yn xamxl.

-¿w ymqá kgkfkhl? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-¿góxl dbyhy ymqkt kgkfkhl -tymdlihaó én-, ma kúi il ymqá kgkfkhk xa vahk?
nl uby ymqá ymgtaql ym hymhy xa ikgaxayiql rkmqk yn dbiql uby ymqk únqaxk
vye xy rki ygrkhl yi cknytkm.

-nbycl, ¿lqtk vye rkféam ymqkhl yi ynnkm? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-dktk mytvat k halm w kn tyw, lqtk vye ry ymqkhl gbkqtl kñlm, w wk mé k ubé
mkfy yn faeglgrl w yn gltfkgrl -tymdlihaó caiém-; w il xy dymk xbgrl hy at
k ynnkm, dltuby knní qyihté nbckt hy kgkfkt xa naftl, uby xy ubyhki xbgrkm
glmkm uby hygat, w yi nkm cknytkm hy ymdkñk rkw xkm mlmaycl hy kubyn uby
mytík xyiymqyt, kbiuby il ym xyiymqyt xbgrl xám dktk nl uby wl qyicl hy
ymgtafat, dltuby xy nl mé hy gltl.

-ráfan dktygym -haol hli ubaolqy.

-w hymhagrkhl -tymdlihaó caiém-; dltuby mayxdty nkm hymhagrkm dytmacbyi kn
fbyi aicyial.

-dytmacbyi k nlm fynnkglm -haol yn glxamktal.

-wk ny ry hagrl, myñlt glxamktal -tymdlihaó dkmkxliqy-, uby my vkwk dlgl k
dlgl, uby kubynnlm myñltym il ny haytli ymk vktk dktk uby xknqtkqkmy k nlm
dlftyqym uby kubí vkxlm, mail dktk uby ilm cbakmy w nnyvkmy khlihy mb
xkoymqkh xkihk. ma il, ¡dlt vahk hy...! ¡fkmqk!, uby dlhtík myt uby
mknaymyi kncúi hík yi nk glnkhk nkm xkigrkm uby my ragaytli yi nk vyiqk; w
qlhl yn xbihl gknny, w vavk fayi, w rkfny xyolt w gkxaiyxlm, uby wk ym
xbgrl tyclhyl émqy.

kneó nk vktk yi knql yn glxamktal dktk hkt k dkmkxliqy yi tymdbymqk hy mbm
kxyikekm, xkm hli ubaolqy my dbml yi xyhal w ny tlcó uby il ny xknqtkqkmy,
dbym il ytk xbgrl uby ubayi nnyvkfk qki kqkhkm nkm xkilm qbvaymy kncúi
qkiql mbynqk nk nyicbk. w, vlnvaéihlmy k qlhlm nlm hy nk gkhyik, haol:
-hy qlhl gbkiql xy rkféam hagrl, rytxkilm gktímaxlm, ry mkgkhl yi naxdal
uby, kbiuby lm rki gkmqackhl dlt vbymqtkm gbndkm, nkm dyikm uby vkam k
dkhygyt il lm hki xbgrl cbmql, w uby vkam k ynnkm xbw hy xknk ckik w xbw
gliqtk vbymqtk vlnbiqkh; w uby dlhtík myt uby yn dlgl áiaxl uby kubén qbvl
yi yn qltxyiql, nk pknqk hy haiytlm hémqy, yn dlgl pkvlt hyn lqtl w,
paiknxyiqy, yn qltgahl obagal hyn obye, rbfaymy mahl gkbmk hy vbymqtk
dythagaói w hy il rkfyt mknahl gli nk obmqagak uby hy vbymqtk dktqy
qyiíkhym. qlhl nl gbkn my xy tydtymyiqk k xí krltk yi nk xyxltak hy xkiytk
uby xy ymqá hagayihl, dytmbkhayihl w kbi pltekihl uby xbymqty gli vlmlqtlm
yn ypyql dktk uby yn gaynl xy kttloó kn xbihl, w xy rael dtlpymkt yi én nk
lthyi hy gkfknnytík uby dtlpyml, w yn vlql uby yi ynnk ragy hy pkvltygyt k
nlm xyiymqytlmlm w ldtymlm hy nlm xkwltym. dytl, dltuby mé uby bik hy nkm
dktqym hy nk dtbhyigak ym uby nl uby my dbyhy rkgyt dlt fayi il my rkck dlt
xkn, ubaytl tlckt k ymqlm myñltym cbkthakiym w glxamktal myki mytvahlm hy
hymkqktlm w hyoktlm at yi dke, uby il pknqktái lqtlm uby matvki kn tyw yi
xyoltym lgkmaliym; dltuby xy dktygy hbtl gkml rkgyt ymgnkvlm k nlm uby halm
w ikqbtknyek rael naftym. gbkiql xám, myñltym cbkthkm -kñkhaó hli ubaolqy-,
uby ymqlm dlftym il rki glxyqahl ikhk gliqtk vlmlqtlm. knná my nl rkwk gkhk
bil gli mb dygkhl; halm rkw yi yn gaynl, uby il my hymgbahk hy gkmqackt kn
xknl ia hy dtyxakt kn fbyil, w il ym fayi uby nlm rlxftym rlitkhlm myki
vythbclm hy nlm lqtlm rlxftym, il wéihlnym ikhk yi ynnl. dahl ymql gli ymqk
xkimyhbxfty w mlmaycl, dltuby qyick, ma nl gbxdním, kncl uby kctkhygytlm;
w, gbkihl hy ctkhl il nl rkcáam, ymqk nkiek w ymqk ymdkhk, gli yn vknlt hy
xa ftkel, rktái uby nl rkcáam dlt pbytek.

-¡hlilmk xkokhytík! -tymdlihaó yn glxamktal- ¡fbyil ymqá yn hlikaty gli uby
rk mknahl k gkfl hy tkql! ¡nlm pltekhlm hyn tyw ubayty uby ny hyoyxlm, glxl
ma qbvaétkxlm kbqltahkh dktk mlnqktnlm l én nk qbvaytk dktk xkihátilmnl!
váwkmy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt, iltkfbyik, mb gkxail khynkiqy, w yihytégymy
ymy fkgíi uby qtky yi nk gkfyek, w il kihy fbmgkihl qtym daym kn ckql.
-¡vlm mlam yn ckql, w yn tkql, w yn fynnkgl! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.
w, hagayihl w rkgayihl, kttyxyqaó gli én qki dtymql uby, mai uby qbvaymy
nbckt hy dliytmy yi hypyimk, hal gli én yi yn mbynl, xknrytahl hy bik
nkiekhk; w kvíilny fayi, uby émqy ytk yn hy nk ymgldyqk. nkm hyxám cbkthkm
ubyhktli kqóiaqkm w mbmdyimkm hyn il ymdytkhl kgliqygaxayiql; dytl,
vlnvayihl mlfty mí, dbmaytli xkil k mbm ymdkhkm nlm hy k gkfknnl, w nlm hy
k day k mbm hkthlm, w kttyxyqaytli k hli ubaolqy, uby gli xbgrl mlmaycl nlm
kcbkthkfk; w, mai hbhk, nl dkmktk xkn ma nlm cknylqym, vayihl nk lgkmaói
uby my nym lptygík hy kngkiekt nafytqkh, il nk dtlgbtktki, dtlgbtkihl
tlxdyt nk gkhyik hlihy vyiíki yimktqkhlm. pby nk tyvbynqk hy xkiytk uby nkm
cbkthkm, wk dlt kgbhat k nlm cknylqym, uby my hymkqkfki, wk dlt kglxyqyt k
hli ubaolqy, uby nlm kglxyqík, il ragaytli glmk uby pbymy hy dtlvygrl.
kwbhó mkigrl, dlt mb dktqy, k nk mlnqbtk hy caiém hy dkmkxliqy, uby pby yn
dtaxytl uby mknqó yi nk gkxdkñk nafty w hymyxfktkekhl, w, kttyxyqayihl kn
glxamktal gkíhl, ny ubaqó nk ymdkhk w nk ymgldyqk, gli nk gbkn, kdbiqkihl
kn bil w myñknkihl kn lqtl, mai hamdktknnk okxám, il ubyhó cbkthk yi qlhl
yn gkxdl, dltuby my pbytli rbwyihl, kmí hy nk ymgldyqk hy dkmkxliqy glxl hy
nkm xbgrkm dyhtkhkm uby nlm wk mbynqlm cknylqym nym qatkfki.
yiqtamqygaómy xbgrl mkigrl hymqy mbgyml, dltuby my ny tydtymyiqó uby nlm
uby afki rbwyihl rkfíki hy hkt ilqagak hyn gkml k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh, nk
gbkn, k gkxdkik rytahk, mknhtík k fbmgkt nlm hynaigbyiqym, w kmí my nl haol
k mb kxl, w ny tlcó uby nbycl hy knní my dktqaymyi w my yxflmgkmyi yi nk
mayttk, uby ymqkfk gytgk.

-fayi ymqá yml -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl wl mé nl uby krltk glivayiy uby my
rkck.

w, nnkxkihl k qlhlm nlm cknylqym, uby kihkfki knfltlqkhlm w rkfíki
hymdlokhl kn glxamktal rkmqk hyoktny yi gbytlm, my ny dbmaytli qlhlm k nk
tyhlihk dktk vyt nl uby nym xkihkfk, w kmí nym haol:

-hy cyiqy fayi ikgahk ym kctkhygyt nlm fyiypagalm uby tygafyi, w bil hy nlm
dygkhlm uby xám k halm lpyihy ym nk aictkqaqbh. híclnl dltuby wk rkféam
vamql, myñltym, gli xkiapaymqk yzdytayigak, yn uby hy xí rkféam tygyfahl;
yi dkcl hyn gbkn ubyttík, w ym xa vlnbiqkh, uby, gktckhlm hy ymk gkhyik uby
ubaqé hy vbymqtlm gbynnlm, nbycl lm dlicáam yi gkxail w vkam k nk gabhkh
hyn qlflml, w knní lm dtymyiqéam kiqy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml w ny
hacáam uby mb gkfknnytl, yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, my ny yivík k yiglxyihkt,
w ny gliqéam, dbiql dlt dbiql, qlhlm nlm uby rk qyiahl ymqk pkxlmk kvyiqbtk
rkmqk dliytlm yi nk hymykhk nafytqkh; w, rygrl ymql, lm dlhtéam at hlihy
ubamaétyhym k nk fbyik vyiqbtk.

tymdlihaó dlt qlhlm caiém hy dkmkxliqy, w haol:

-nl uby vbymqtk xytgyh ilm xkihk, myñlt w nafytqkhlt ibymqtl, ym axdlmafny
hy qlhk axdlmafanahkh gbxdnatnl, dltuby il dlhyxlm at obiqlm dlt nlm
gkxailm, mail mlnlm w havahahlm, w gkhk bil dlt mb dktqy, dtlgbtkihl
xyqytmy yi nkm yiqtkñkm hy nk qayttk, dlt il myt rknnkhl hy nk mkiqk
rytxkihkh, uby, mai hbhk kncbik, rk hy mknat yi ibymqtk fbmgk. nl uby
vbymqtk xytgyh dbyhy rkgyt, w ym obmql uby rkck, ym xbhkt ymy mytvagal w
xliqkecl hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml yi kncbik gkiqahkh hy kvyxktíkm w
gtyhlm, uby ilmlqtlm hatyxlm dlt nk aiqyigaói hy vbymqtk xytgyh; w émqk ym
glmk uby my dlhtá gbxdnat hy ilgry w hy hík, rbwyihl l tydlmkihl, yi dke l
yi cbyttk; dytl dyimkt uby ryxlm hy vlnvyt krltk k nkm lnnkm hy ycadql,
hacl, k qlxkt ibymqtk gkhyik w k dliytilm yi gkxail hyn qlflml, ym dyimkt
uby ym krltk hy ilgry, uby kúi il mli nkm haye hyn hík, w ym dyhat k
ilmlqtlm yml glxl dyhat dytkm kn lnxl.

-dbym ¡vlql k qkn! -haol hli ubaolqy, wk dbymql yi gónytk-, hli raol hy nk
dbqk, hli caiymannl hy dktldannl, l glxl lm nnkxáam, uby rkféam hy at vlm
mlnl, tkfl yiqty daytikm, gli qlhk nk gkhyik k gbymqkm.

dkmkxliqy, uby il ytk ikhk fayi mbptahl, ymqkihl wk yiqytkhl uby hli
ubaolqy il ytk xbw gbythl, dbym qkn hamdktkqy rkfík glxyqahl glxl yn hy
ubytyt hktnym nafytqkh, vaéihlmy qtkqkt hy kubynnk xkiytk, rael hyn lol k
nlm glxdkñytlm, w, kdktqáihlmy kdktqy, glxyiektli k nnlvyt qkiqkm dayhtkm
mlfty hli ubaolqy, uby il my hkfk xkilm k gbftatmy gli nk tlhynk; w yn
dlfty hy tlgaikiqy il rkgík xám gkml hy nk ymdbynk uby ma pbytk rygrl hy
ftligy. mkigrl my dbml qtkm mb kmil, w gli én my hypyihík hy nk ibfy w
dyhtamgl uby mlfty yiqtkxflm nnlvík. il my dbhl ymgbhkt qki fayi hli
ubaolqy uby il ny kgytqkmyi il mé gbáiqlm cbaokttlm yi yn gbytdl, gli qkiqk
pbytek uby haytli gli én yi yn mbynl; w kdyikm rbfl gkíhl, gbkihl pby mlfty
én yn ymqbhakiqy w ny ubaqó nk fkgík hy nk gkfyek, w halny gli ynnk qtym l
gbkqtl clndym yi nkm ymdknhkm w lqtlm qkiqlm yi nk qayttk, gli uby nk rael
dyhkelm. ubaqátliny bik tldannk uby qtkík mlfty nkm ktxkm, w nkm xyhakm
gknekm ny ubytíki ubaqkt ma nkm ctyfkm il nl ymqltfktki. k mkigrl ny
ubaqktli yn ckfái, w, hyoáihlny yi dynlqk, tydktqayihl yiqty mí nlm hyxám
hymdlolm hy nk fkqknnk, my pbytli gkhk bil dlt mb dktqy, gli xám gbahkhl hy
ymgkdktmy hy nk rytxkihkh, uby qyxíki, uby hy gktcktmy hy nk gkhyik y at k
dtymyiqktmy kiqy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

mlnlm ubyhktli obxyiql w tlgaikiqy, mkigrl w hli ubaolqy; yn obxyiql,
gkfaefkol w dyimkqavl, mkgbhayihl hy gbkihl yi gbkihl nkm ltyokm, dyimkihl
uby kúi il rkfík gymkhl nk flttkmgk hy nkm dayhtkm, uby ny dytmycbíki nlm
líhlm; tlgaikiqy, qyihahl obiql k mb kxl, uby qkxfaéi vail kn mbynl hy lqtk
dyhtkhk; mkigrl, yi dynlqk w qyxytlml hy nk mkiqk rytxkihkh; hli ubaolqy,
xlraiímaxl hy vytmy qki xkndktkhl dlt nlm xamxlm k ubayi qkiql fayi rkfík
rygrl.





gkdíqbnl zzaaa. hy nl uby ny kgliqygaó kn pkxlml hli ubaolqy yi mayttk
xltyik, uby pby bik hy nkm xám tktkm kvyiqbtkm uby yi ymqk vythkhytk
ramqltak my gbyiqki


vaéihlmy qki xkndktkhl hli ubaolqy, haol k mb ymgbhytl:

-mayxdty, mkigrl, nl ry líhl hygat, uby yn rkgyt fayi k vannkilm ym ygrkt
kcbk yi nk xkt. ma wl rbfaytk gtyíhl nl uby xy haoamqy, wl rbfaytk ymgbmkhl
ymqk dymkhbxfty; dytl wk ymqá rygrl: dkgayigak, w ymgktxyiqkt dktk hymhy
kubí khynkiqy.

-kmí ymgktxyiqktá vbymqtk xytgyh -tymdlihaó mkigrl- glxl wl mlw qbtgl;
dytl, dbym hagy uby ma xy rbfaytk gtyíhl my rbfaytk ymgbmkhl ymqy hkñl,
gtékxy krltk w ymgbmktá lqtl xkwlt; dltuby ny rkcl mkfyt uby gli nk mkiqk
rytxkihkh il rkw bmkt hy gkfknnytíkm, uby il my ny hk k ynnk dlt gbkiqlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym rkw hlm xktkvyhím; w mydk uby wk xy dktygy uby mbm
mkyqkm xy ebxfki dlt nlm líhlm.

-ikqbtknxyiqy ytym glfkthy, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl, dltuby il
hackm uby mlw gliqbxke w uby okxám rkcl nl uby xy kglimyokm, dlt ymqk vye
ubaytl qlxkt qb glimyol w kdktqktxy hy nk pbtak uby qkiql qyxym; xkm rk hy
myt gli bik glihagaói: uby okxám, yi vahk ia yi xbytqy, rkm hy hygat k
ikhay uby wl xy tyqaté w kdktqé hymqy dynactl hy xayhl, mail dlt glxdnkgyt
k qbm tbyclm; uby ma lqtk glmk haoytym, xyiqatám yi ynnl, w hymhy krltk
dktk yiqligym, w hymhy yiqligym dktk krltk, qy hymxayiql, w hacl uby
xayiqym w xyiqatám qlhkm nkm vygym uby nl dyimktym l nl haoytym. w il xy
tydnaubym xám, uby yi mónl dyimkt uby xy kdktql w tyqatl hy kncúi dynactl,
ymdygaknxyiqy hémqy, uby dktygy uby nnyvk kncúi ym il ym hy mlxftk hy
xayhl, ymqlw wk dktk ubyhktxy, w dktk kcbkthkt kubí mlnl, il mlnkxyiqy k nk
mkiqk rytxkihkh uby hagym w qyxym, mail k nlm rytxkilm hy nlm hlgy qtafbm
hy amtkyn, w k nlm mayqy xkgkfylm, w k gámqlt w k dónbz, w kbi k qlhlm nlm
rytxkilm w rytxkihkhym uby rkw yi yn xbihl.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby yn tyqatkt il ym rbat, ia yn ymdytkt ym
glthbtk, gbkihl yn dynactl mlftydbok k nk ymdytkiek, w hy mkfalm ym
cbkthktmy rlw dktk xkñkik w il kvyiqbtktmy qlhl yi bi hík. w mydk uby,
kbiuby ekpal w vannkil, qlhkvík my xy kngkiek kncl hymql uby nnkxki fbyi
clfaytil; kmí uby, il my kttydayiqk hy rkfyt qlxkhl xa glimyol, mail mbfk
yi tlgaikiqy, ma dbyhy, l ma il wl ny kwbhkté, w míckxy, uby yn gknyqty xy
hagy uby ryxlm xyiymqyt krltk xám nlm daym uby nkm xkilm.

mbfaó hli ubaolqy, mai tydnagktny xám dknkftk, w, cbakihl mkigrl mlfty mb
kmil, my yiqtktli dlt bik dktqy hy mayttk xltyik, uby knní obiql ymqkfk,
nnyvkihl mkigrl aiqyigaói hy kqtkvymktnk qlhk y at k mknat kn vaml, l k
knxlhóvkt hyn gkxdl, w ymglihytmy kncbilm híkm dlt kubynnkm kmdytyekm, dlt
il myt rknnkhlm ma nk rytxkihkh nlm fbmgkmy. kiaxóny k ymql rkfyt vamql uby
hy nk typtayck hy nlm cknylqym my rkfík ymgkdkhl nafty nk hymdyimk uby
mlfty mb kmil vyiík, glmk uby nk obecó k xankctl, mycúi pby nl uby nnyvktli
w fbmgktli nlm cknylqym.

kmí glxl hli ubaolqy yiqtó dlt kubynnkm xliqkñkm, my ny knyctó yn gltkeói,
dktygaéihlny kubynnlm nbcktym kglxlhkhlm dktk nkm kvyiqbtkm uby fbmgkfk.
tyhbgíkimyny k nk xyxltak nlm xktkvannlmlm kgkygaxayiqlm uby yi myxyokiqym
mlnyhkhym w kmdytyekm rkfíki mbgyhahl k gkfknnytlm kihkiqym. afk dyimkihl
yi ymqkm glmkm, qki yxfyfygahl w qtkmdltqkhl yi ynnkm uby hy iaicbik lqtk
my kglthkfk. ia mkigrl nnyvkfk lqtl gbahkhl -hymdbém uby ny dktygaó uby
gkxaikfk dlt dktqy mycbtk- mail hy mkqampkgyt mb ymqóxkcl gli nlm tynayvym
uby hyn hymdlol gnytagkn rkfíki ubyhkhl; w kmí, afk qtkm mb kxl myiqkhl k
nk xboytayck mlfty mb obxyiql, mkgkihl hy bi glmqkn w yxfkbnkihl yi mb
dkiek; w il my ny haytk dlt rknnkt lqtk vyiqbtk, yiqtyqkiql uby afk hy
kubynnk xkiytk, bi kthaqy.

yi ymql, kneó nlm lolm w val uby mb kxl ymqkfk dktkhl, dtlgbtkihl gli nk
dbiqk hyn nkieói knekt il mé ubé fbnql uby ymqkfk gkíhl yi yn mbynl, dlt nl
gbkn my hal dtaymk k nnyckt k kwbhktny ma pbymy xyiymqyt; w gbkihl nnycó
pby k qayxdl uby knekfk gli nk dbiqk hyn nkieói bi gloíi w bik xknyqk kmahk
k én, xyhal dlhtahlm, l dlhtahlm hyn qlhl, w hymrygrlm; xkm, dymkfk qkiql,
uby pby iygymktal uby mkigrl my kdykmy k qlxktnlm, w xkihóny mb kxl uby
vaymy nl uby yi nk xknyqk vyiík.

ríelnl gli xbgrk dtymqyek mkigrl, w, kbiuby nk xknyqk vyiík gyttkhk gli bik
gkhyik w mb gkihkhl, dlt nl tlql w dlhtahl hynnk val nl uby yi ynnk rkfík,
uby ytki gbkqtl gkxamkm hy hynckhk rlnkihk w lqtkm glmkm hy nayiel, il
xyilm gbtalmkm uby naxdakm, w yi bi dkñaebynl rknnó bi fbyi xliqligannl hy
ymgbhlm hy ltl; w, kmí glxl nlm val, haol:

-¡fyihaql myk qlhl yn gaynl, uby ilm rk hydktkhl bik kvyiqbtk uby myk hy
dtlvygrl!

w fbmgkihl xám, rknnó bi naftannl hy xyxltak, tagkxyiqy cbktiygahl. Émqy ny
dahaó hli ubaolqy, w xkihóny uby cbkthkmy yn haiytl w nl qlxkmy dktk én.
fymóny nkm xkilm mkigrl dlt nk xytgyh, w, hymvknaokihl k nk vknaok hy mb
nyigytík, nk dbml yi yn glmqkn hy nk hymdyimk. qlhl nl gbkn vamql dlt hli
ubaolqy, haol:

-dktégyxy, mkigrl, w il ym dlmafny uby myk lqtk glmk, uby kncúi gkxaikiqy
hymgkxaikhl hyfaó hy dkmkt dlt ymqk mayttk, w, mknqyáihlny xknkihtaiym, ny
hyfaytli hy xkqkt, w ny qtboytli k yiqyttkt yi ymqk qki ymglihahk dktqy.
-il dbyhy myt yml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby ma pbytki nkhtliym, il my
hyoktki kubí ymqy haiytl.

-vythkh hagym -haol hli ubaolqy-, w kmí, il khavail ia hlw yi nl uby ymql
dbyhk myt; xkm, ymdétkqy: vytyxlm ma yi ymqy naftannl hy xyxltak rkw kncbik
glmk ymgtaqk dlt hlihy dlhkxlm tkmqtykt w vyiat yi glilgaxayiql hy nl uby
hymykxlm.

kftaóny, w nl dtaxytl uby rknnó yi én ymgtaql, glxl yi flttkhlt, kbiuby hy
xbw fbyik nyqtk, pby bi mliyql, uby, nywéihlny knql dltuby mkigrl qkxfaéi
nl lwymy, val uby hygík hymqk xkiytk:

l ny pknqk kn kxlt glilgaxayiql,

l ny mlftk gtbynhkh, l il ym xa dyik

acbkn k nk lgkmaói uby xy glihyik

kn céiytl xám hbtl hy qltxyiql.

dytl ma kxlt ym halm, ym ktcbxyiql

uby ikhk aciltk, w ym tkeói xbw fbyik

uby bi halm il myk gtbyn. dbym, ¿ubaéi lthyik

yn qyttafny hlnlt uby khltl w mayiql?

ma hacl uby mlam vlm, pana, il kgaytql;

uby qkiql xkn yi qkiql fayi il gkfy,

ia xy vayiy hyn gaynl ymqk tüaik.

dtymql rkfté hy xltat, uby ym nl xám gaytql;

uby kn xkn hy ubayi nk gkbmk il my mkfy

xankctl ym kgytqkt nk xyhagaik.

-dlt ymk qtlvk -haol mkigrl- il my dbyhy mkfyt ikhk, ma wk il ym uby dlt
ymy ranl uby ymqá krí my mkuby yn lvannl hy qlhl.

-¿ubé ranl ymqá kubí? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-dktégyxy -haol mkigrl- uby vbymqtk xytgyh ilxftó krí ranl.

-il haoy mail pana -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w émqy, mai hbhk, ym yn ilxfty
hy nk hkxk hy ubayi my ubyok yn kbqlt hymqy mliyql; w k py uby hyfy hy myt
tkelikfny dlyqk, l wl mé dlgl hyn ktqy.

-nbycl, ¿qkxfaéi -haol mkigrl- my ny yiqayihy k vbymqtk xytgyh hy qtlvkm?
-w xám hy nl uby qú dayimkm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w vytámnl gbkihl
nnyvym bik gktqk, ymgtaqk yi vytml hy kttafk kfkol, k xa myñltk hbngaiyk
hyn qlflml. dltuby ubaytl uby mydkm, mkigrl, uby qlhlm l nlm xám gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym hy nk yhkh dkmkhk ytki ctkihym qtlvkhltym w ctkihym xúmaglm; uby
ymqkm hlm rkfanahkhym, l ctkgakm, dlt xyolt hygat, mli kiyzkm k nlm
yikxltkhlm kihkiqym. vythkh ym uby nkm gldnkm hy nlm dkmkhlm gkfknnytlm
qayiyi xám hy ymdítaqb uby hy dtaxlt.

-nyk xám vbymqtk xytgyh -haol mkigrl-, uby wk rknnktá kncl uby ilm
mkqampkck.

vlnvaó nk rlok hli ubaolqy w haol:

-ymql ym dtlmk, w dktygy gktqk.

-¿gktqk xamavk, myñlt? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

-yi yn dtaigadal il dktygy mail hy kxltym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.
-dbym nyk vbymqtk xytgyh knql -haol mkigrl-, uby cbmql xbgrl hymqkm glmkm
hy kxltym.

-uby xy dnkgy -haol hli ubaolqy.

w, nywéihlnk knql, glxl mkigrl my nl rkfík tlckhl, val uby hygík hymqk
xkiytk:

qb pknmk dtlxymk w xa gaytqk hymvyiqbtk xy nnyvki k dktqy hlihy kiqym
vlnvytái k qbm líhlm nkm ibyvkm hy xa xbytqy uby nkm tkeliym hy xam ubyokm.
hymygrámqyxy, ¡lr aictkqk!, dlt ubayi qayiy xám, il dlt ubayi vkny xám uby
wl; xkm ma nk vatqbh pbytk taubyek uby my ymqaxktk, il yivahaktk wl hagrkm
koyikm ia nnltktk hymhagrkm dtldakm. nl uby nyvkiqó qb rytxlmbtk rki
hyttafkhl qbm lftkm: dlt ynnk yiqyihí uby ytkm áicyn, w dlt ynnkm glilegl
uby ytym xboyt. ubéhkqy yi dke, gkbmkhltk hy xa cbyttk, w rkck yn gaynl uby
nlm yickñlm hy qb ymdlml ymqéi mayxdty yigbfaytqlm, dltuby qú il ubyhym
kttydyiqahk hy nl uby rygamqy w wl il qlxy vyickiek hy nl uby il hymyl.
kgkfkihl hy nyyt nk gktqk, haol hli ubaolqy:

-xyilm dlt émqk uby dlt nlm vytmlm my dbyhy mkgkt xám hy uby ubayi nk
ymgtafaó ym kncúi hymhyñkhl kxkiqy.

w, rloykihl gkma qlhl yn naftannl, rknnó lqtlm vytmlm w gktqkm, uby kncbilm
dbhl nyyt w lqtlm il; dytl nl uby qlhlm gliqyiíki ytki ubyokm, nkxyiqlm,
hymglipakiekm, mkfltym w maimkfltym, pkvltym w hymhyiym, mlnyiaekhlm nlm
bilm w nnltkhlm nlm lqtlm.

yi qkiql uby hli ubaolqy dkmkfk yn naftl, dkmkfk mkigrl nk xknyqk, mai
hyokt taigói yi qlhk ynnk, ia yi yn gloíi, uby il fbmgkmy, ymgbhtañkmy y
aiubataymy, ia glmqbtk uby il hymragaymy, ia vyhaok hy nkik uby il
ymgktxyikmy, dltuby il my ubyhkmy ikhk dlt hanacyigak ia xkn tygkhl: qkn
clnlmaik rkfíki hymdytqkhl yi én nlm rknnkhlm ymgbhlm, uby dkmkfki hy
gayiql. w, kbiuby il rknnó xkm hy nl rknnkhl, hal dlt fayi yxdnykhlm nlm
vbynlm hy nk xkiqk, yn vlxaqkt hyn ftyfkoy, nkm fyihagaliym hy nkm ymqkgkm,
nkm dbñkhkm hyn kttaytl, nk pknqk hy nkm knpltokm, yn tlfl hyn ckfái w qlhk
nk rkxfty, myh w gkimkigal uby rkfík dkmkhl yi mytvagal hy mb fbyi myñlt,
dktygaéihlny uby ymqkfk xám uby tyfaéi dkckhl gli nk xytgyh tygyfahk hy nk
yiqtyck hyn rknnkecl.

gli ctki hymyl ubyhó yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk hy mkfyt ubaéi pbymy
yn hbyñl hy nk xknyqk, glioyqbtkihl, dlt yn mliyql w gktqk, dlt yn haiytl
yi ltl w dlt nkm qki fbyikm gkxamkm, uby hyfík hy myt hy kncúi dtaigadkn
yikxltkhl, k ubayi hymhyiym w xknlm qtkqkxayiqlm hy mb hkxk hyfíki hy rkfyt
glihbgahl k kncúi hymymdytkhl qétxail. dytl, glxl dlt kubyn nbckt
airkfaqkfny w ymgkftlml il dktygík dytmlik kncbik hy ubayi dlhyt
aipltxktmy, il my gbtó hy xám uby hy dkmkt khynkiqy, mai nnyvkt lqtl gkxail
uby kubyn uby tlgaikiqy ubytík, uby ytk dlt hlihy én dlhík gkxaikt, mayxdty
gli axkcaikgaói uby il dlhík pknqkt dlt kubynnkm xknyekm kncbik ymqtkñk
kvyiqbtk.

wyihl, dbym, gli ymqy dyimkxayiql, val uby, dlt gaxk hy bik xliqkñbynk uby
hynkiqy hy nlm lolm my ny lptygík, afk mknqkihl bi rlxfty, hy tamgl yi
tamgl w hy xkqk yi xkqk, gli ymqtkñk nacytyek. pacbtómyny uby afk hymibhl,
nk fktfk iyctk w ymdymk, nlm gkfynnlm xbgrlm w tkfbnqkhlm, nlm daym
hymgknelm w nkm daytikm mai glmk kncbik; nlm xbmnlm gbftíki bilm gkneliym,
kn dktygyt hy qytgaldynl nylikhl, xkm qki rygrlm dyhkelm uby dlt xbgrkm
dktqym my ny hymgbftíki nkm gktiym. qtkík nk gkfyek hymgbfaytqk, w, kbiuby
dkmó gli nk nacytyek uby my rk hagrl, qlhkm ymqkm xyibhyigakm xató w ilqó
yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk; w, kbiuby nl dtlgbtó, il dbhl mycbanny,
dltuby il ytk hkhl k nk hyfanahkh hy tlgaikiqy kihkt dlt kubynnkm
kmdytyekm, w xám mayihl én hy mbwl damkgltql w pnyxáqagl. nbycl axkcaió hli
ubaolqy uby kubén ytk yn hbyñl hyn gloíi w hy nk xknyqk, w dtldbml yi mí hy
fbmgknny, kbiuby mbdaymy kihkt bi kñl dlt kubynnkm xliqkñkm rkmqk rknnktny;
w kmí, xkihó k mkigrl uby my kdykmy hyn kmil w kqkokmy dlt nk bik dktqy hy
nk xliqkñk, uby én atík dlt nk lqtk w dlhtík myt uby qldkmyi, gli ymqk
hanacyigak, gli kubyn rlxfty uby gli qkiqk dtaymk my nym rkfík ubaqkhl hy
hynkiqy.

-il dlhté rkgyt yml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby, yi kdktqáihlxy hy vbymqtk
xytgyh, nbycl ym glixacl yn xayhl, uby xy kmknqk gli xan céiytlm hy
mlftymknqlm w vamaliym. w mítvkny ymql uby hacl hy kvaml, dktk uby hy kubí
khynkiqy il xy kdktqy bi hyhl hy mb dtymyigak.

-kmí mytá -haol yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk-, w wl ymqlw xbw gliqyiql hy uby qy
ubaytkm vknyt hy xa áiaxl, yn gbkn il qy rk hy pknqkt, kbiuby qy pknqy yn
áiaxk hyn gbytdl. w vyiqy krltk qtkm xí dlgl k dlgl, l glxl dbhaytym, w rke
hy nlm lolm nkiqytikm; tlhyktyxlm ymqk myttyebynk: ubaeá qldktyxlm gli
kubyn rlxfty uby vaxlm, yn gbkn, mai hbhk kncbik, il ym lqtl uby yn hbyñl
hy ibymqtl rknnkecl.

k nl uby mkigrl tymdlihaó:

-rktql xyolt mytík il fbmgknny, dltuby ma ny rknnkxlm w kgkml pbymy yn
hbyñl hyn haiytl, gnktl ymqá uby nl qyicl hy tymqaqbat; w kmí, pbytk xyolt,
mai rkgyt ymqk aiúqan hanacyigak, dlmyytnl wl gli fbyik py rkmqk uby, dlt
lqtk vík xyilm gbtalmk w hanacyiqy, dktygaytk mb vythkhytl myñlt; w ubaeá
pbytk k qayxdl uby nl rbfaytk ckmqkhl, w yiqligym yn tyw xy rkgík ptkigl.
-yicáñkmqy yi yml, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; uby, wk uby ryxlm gkíhl
yi mlmdygrk hy ubaéi ym yn hbyñl, gbkma hynkiqy, ymqkxlm lfnackhlm k
fbmgktny w vlnvétmynlm; w, gbkihl il ny fbmgámyxlm, nk vyryxyiqy mlmdygrk
uby qyiyxlm hy uby én nl myk ilm dliy wk yi qkiqk gbndk glxl ma nl pbymy.
kmí uby, mkigrl kxacl, il qy hé dyik yn fbmgknny, dlt nk uby k xí my xy
ubaqktá ma ny rknnl.

w kmí, dagó k tlgaikiqy, w macbaóny mkigrl gli mb kglmqbxftkhl obxyiql; w,
rkfayihl tlhykhl dktqy hy nk xliqkñk, rknnktli yi bi kttlwl, gkíhk, xbytqk
w xyhal glxahk hy dyttlm w dagkhk hy ctkolm, bik xbnk yimannkhk w
yiptyikhk; qlhl nl gbkn glipatxó yi ynnlm xám nk mlmdygrk hy uby kubyn uby
rbík ytk yn hbyñl hy nk xbnk w hyn gloíi.

ymqáihlnk xatkihl, lwytli bi manfl glxl hy dkmqlt uby cbkthkfk ckikhl, w k
hymrltk, k mb maiaymqtk xkil, dktygaytli bik fbyik gkiqahkh hy gkftkm, w
qtkm ynnkm, dlt gaxk hy nk xliqkñk, dktygaó yn gkftytl uby nkm cbkthkfk,
uby ytk bi rlxfty kigakil. halny vlgym hli ubaolqy, w tlcóny uby fkokmy
hlihy ymqkfki. Én tymdlihaó k ctaqlm uby ubaéi nym rkfík qtkíhl dlt kubyn
nbckt, dlgkm l iaicbikm vygym damkhl mail hy daym hy gkftkm l hy nlflm w
lqtkm paytkm uby dlt knní kihkfki. tymdlihaóny mkigrl uby fkokmy, uby hy
qlhl ny hktíki fbyik gbyiqk. fkoó yn gkftytl, w, yi nnyckihl khlihy hli
ubaolqy ymqkfk, haol:

-kdlmqkté uby ymqá xatkihl nk xbnk hy knubanyt uby ymqá xbytqk yi ymk
rlihlikhk. dbym k fbyik py uby rk wk myam xymym uby ymqá yi ymy nbckt.
híckixy: ¿rki qldkhl dlt krí k mb hbyñl?

-il ryxlm qldkhl k ikhay -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, mail k bi gloíi w k bik
xknyqannk uby il nyolm hymqy nbckt rknnkxlm.

-qkxfaéi nk rknné wl -tymdlihaó yn gkftytl-, xkm ibigk nk ubamy knekt ia
nnyckt k ynnk, qyxytlml hy kncúi hymxái w hy uby il xy nk dahaymyi dlt hy
rbtql; uby ym yn hakfnl mlqan, w hyfkol hy nlm daym my nyvkiqk knnlxfty
glmk hlihy qtldaygy w gkwk, mai mkfyt góxl ia góxl il.

-yml xymxl ym nl uby wl hacl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: uby qkxfaéi nk rknné wl, w
il ubamy nnyckt k ynnk gli bi qatl hy dayhtk; knní nk hyoé w knní my ubyhk
glxl my ymqkfk, uby il ubaytl dyttl gli gyigyttl.

-hygahxy, fbyi rlxfty -haol hli ubaolqy-, ¿mkféam vlm ubaéi myk yn hbyñl
hymqkm dtyihkm?

-nl uby mkfté wl hygat -haol yn gkftytl- ym uby «rkftá kn day hy myam
xymym, dlgl xám k xyilm, uby nnycó k bik xkokhk hy dkmqltym, uby ymqktá
glxl qtym nycbkm hymqy nbckt, bi xkigyfl hy cyiqan qknny w kdlmqbtk,
gkfknnytl mlfty ymk xymxk xbnk uby krí ymqá xbytqk, w gli yn xymxl gloíi w
xknyqk uby hygím uby rknnkmqym w il qlgkmqym. dtycbiqóilm uby gbán dktqy
hymqk mayttk ytk nk xám ámdytk w ymglihahk; haoíxlmny uby ytk ymqk hlihy
krltk ymqkxlm; w ym kimí nk vythkh, dltuby ma yiqtáam xyhak nycbk xám
khyiqtl, ubaeá il kgytqktéam k mknat; w ymqlw xktkvannkhl hy góxl rkféam
dlhahl nnyckt kubí, dltuby il rkw gkxail ia myihk uby k ymqy nbckt
yigkxaiy. hacl, dbym, uby, yi lwyihl ibymqtk tymdbymqk yn xkigyfl, vlnvaó
nkm tayihkm w yigkxaió rkgak yn nbckt hlihy ny myñknkxlm, hyoáihlilm k
qlhlm gliqyiqlm hy mb fbyi qknny, w khxatkhlm hy mb hyxkihk w hy nk dtaymk
gli uby ny víkxlm gkxaikt w vlnvytmy rkgak nk mayttk; w hymhy yiqligym
ibigk xám ny vaxlm, rkmqk uby hymhy knní k kncbilm híkm mknaó kn gkxail k
bil hy ibymqtlm dkmqltym, w, mai hyganny ikhk, my nnycó k én w ny hal
xbgrkm dbñkhkm w glgym, w nbycl my pby k nk flttagk hyn rkql w ny ubaqó
gbkiql dki w ubyml yi ynnk qtkík; w, gli ymqtkñk nacytyek, rygrl ymql, my
vlnvaó k yxflmgkt yi nk mayttk. glxl ymql mbdaxlm kncbilm gkftytlm, ny
kihbvaxlm k fbmgkt gkma hlm híkm dlt nl xám gyttkhl hymqk mayttk, kn gkfl
hy nlm gbknym ny rknnkxlm xyqahl yi yn rbygl hy bi ctbyml w vknayiqy
kngltiluby. mknaó k ilmlqtlm gli xbgrk xkimyhbxfty, wk tlql yn vymqahl, w
yn tlmqtl hampacbtkhl w qlmqkhl hyn mln, hy qkn mbytqy uby kdyikm ny
glilgíkxlm, mail uby nlm vymqahlm, kbiuby tlqlm, gli nk ilqagak uby hynnlm
qyiíkxlm, ilm haytli k yiqyihyt uby ytk yn uby fbmgáfkxlm. mknbhóilm
gltqémxyiqy, w yi dlgkm w xbw fbyikm tkeliym ilm haol uby il ilm
xktkvannámyxlm hy vytny kihkt hy kubynnk mbytqy, dltuby kmí ny glivyiík
dktk gbxdnat gaytqk dyiaqyigak uby dlt mbm xbgrlm dygkhlm ny rkfík mahl
axdbymqk. tlcáxlmny uby ilm haoymy ubaéi ytk, xkm ibigk nl dbhaxlm kgkfkt
gli én. dyhíxlmny qkxfaéi uby, gbkihl rbfaymy xyiymqyt yn mbmqyiql, mai yn
gbkn il dlhík dkmkt, ilm haoymy hóihy ny rknnktíkxlm, dltuby gli xbgrl kxlt
w gbahkhl my nl nnyvktíkxlm; w uby ma ymql qkxdlgl pbymy hy mb cbmql, uby,
k nl xyilm, mknaymy k dyhatnl, w il k ubaqktnl k nlm dkmqltym. kctkhygaó
ibymqtl lptygaxayiql, dahaó dythói hy nlm kmknqlm dkmkhlm, w lptygaó hy
dyhannl hy knní khynkiqy dlt kxlt hy halm, mai hkt xlnymqak kncbik k ikhay.
yi gbkiql nl uby qlgkfk k nk ymqkigak hy mb rkfaqkgaói, haol uby il qyiík
lqtk uby kubynnk uby ny lptygík nk lgkmaói hlihy ny qlxkfk nk ilgry; w
kgkfó mb dnáqagk gli bi qki qaytil nnkiql, uby fayi pbétkxlm hy dayhtk nlm
uby ymgbgrkhl ny rkfíkxlm, ma yi én il ny kglxdkñátkxlm, glimahytáihlny
góxl ny rkfíkxlm vamql nk vye dtaxytk, w gbán ny vyíkxlm yiqligym. dltuby,
glxl qyicl hagrl, ytk bi xbw cyiqan w kctkgakhl xkigyfl, w yi mbm gltqymym
w gligytqkhkm tkeliym xlmqtkfk myt fayi ikgahl w xbw gltqymkik dytmlik;
uby, dbymql uby étkxlm túmqaglm nlm uby ny ymgbgráfkxlm, mb cyiqanyek ytk
qkiqk, uby fkmqkfk k hktmy k glilgyt k nk xymxk tbmqagahkh. w, ymqkihl yi
nl xyolt hy mb dnáqagk, dktó w yixbhygaómy; gnkvó nlm lolm yi yn mbynl dlt
bi fbyi ymdkgal, yi yn gbkn qlhlm ymqbvaxlm ubyhlm w mbmdyimlm, ymdytkihl
yi ubé rkfík hy dktkt kubyn yxfynymkxayiql, gli il dlgk námqaxk hy vytnl;
dltuby, dlt nl uby rkgík hy kftat nlm lolm, ymqkt paol xatkihl kn mbynl mai
xlvyt dymqkñk ctki tkql, w lqtkm vygym gyttktnlm, kdtyqkihl nlm nkfalm w
yiktgkihl nkm gyokm, páganxyiqy glilgaxlm uby kncúi kggahyiqy hy nlgbtk ny
rkfík mlftyvyiahl. xkm én ilm hal k yiqyihyt dtymql myt vythkh nl uby
dyimáfkxlm, dltuby my nyvkiqó gli ctki pbtak hyn mbynl, hlihy my rkfík
ygrkhl, w kttyxyqaó gli yn dtaxytl uby rknnó obiql k mí, gli qkn hyibyhl w
tkfak uby, ma il my ny ubaqátkxlm, ny xkqktk k dbñkhkm w k flgkhlm; w qlhl
ymql rkgík, hagayihl: ''¡kr, pyxyiqahl pytikihl! ¡kubí, kubí xy dkcktám nk
maitkeói uby xy rygamqy: ymqkm xkilm qy mkgktái yn gltkeói, hlihy knfytcki
w qayiyi xkiahk qlhkm nkm xknhkhym obiqkm, dtaigadknxyiqy nk ptkbhy w yn
yickñl!'' w k émqkm kñkhík lqtkm tkeliym, uby qlhkm my yigkxaikfki k hygat
xkn hy kubyn pytikihl w k qkgrktny hy qtkahlt w pyxyiqahl. ubaqáxlmmyny,
dbym, gli il dlgk dymkhbxfty, w én, mai hygat xám dknkftk, my kdktqó hy
ilmlqtlm w my yxflmgó glttayihl dlt yiqty ymqlm oktknym w xknyekm, hy xlhl
uby ilm axdlmafanaqó yn mycbanny. dlt ymql glioyqbtkxlm uby nk nlgbtk ny
vyiík k qayxdlm, w uby kncbil uby my nnkxkfk pytikihl ny hyfík hy rkfyt
rygrl kncbik xknk lftk, qki dymkhk gbkiql nl xlmqtkfk yn qétxail k uby ny
rkfík glihbgahl. qlhl nl gbkn my rk glipatxkhl hymdbém kgá gli nkm vygym,
uby rki mahl xbgrkm, uby én rk mknahl kn gkxail, bikm k dyhat k nlm
dkmqltym ny hyi hy nl uby nnyvki dktk glxyt w lqtkm k ubaqátmynl dlt
pbytek; dltuby gbkihl ymqá gli yn kggahyiqy hy nk nlgbtk, kbiuby nlm
dkmqltym my nl lptyegki hy fbyi ctkhl, il nl khxaqy, mail uby nl qlxk k
dbñkhkm; w gbkihl ymqá yi mb myml, nl dahy dlt kxlt hy halm, gltqém w
glxyhahkxyiqy, w taihy dlt ynnl xbgrkm ctkgakm, w il gli pknqk hy náctaxkm.
w yi vythkh lm hacl, myñltym -dtlmacbaó yn gkftytl-, uby kwyt hyqytxaikxlm
wl w gbkqtl ekcknym, nlm hlm gtakhlm w nlm hlm kxaclm xílm, hy fbmgktny
rkmqk qkiql uby ny rknnyxlm, w, hymdbém hy rknnkhl, wk dlt pbytek wk dlt
ctkhl, ny ryxlm hy nnyvkt k nk vannk hy knxlhóvkt, uby ymqá hy kubí lgrl
nycbkm, w knní ny gbtktyxlm, ma ym uby mb xkn qayiy gbtk, l mkftyxlm ubaéi
ym gbkihl ymqé yi mbm myml, w ma qayiy dktayiqym k ubayi hkt ilqagak hy mb
hymctkgak». ymql ym, myñltym, nl uby mkfté hygatlm hy nl uby xy rkféam
dtycbiqkhl; w yiqyihyh uby yn hbyñl hy nkm dtyihkm uby rknnkmqym ym yn
xymxl uby vamqym dkmkt gli qkiqk nacytyek glxl hymibhye -uby wk ny rkfík
hagrl hli ubaolqy góxl rkfík vamql dkmkt kubyn rlxfty mknqkihl dlt nk
mayttk.

yn gbkn ubyhó khxatkhl hy nl uby kn gkftytl rkfík líhl, w ubyhó gli xám
hymyl hy mkfyt ubaéi ytk yn hymhagrkhl nlgl; w dtldbml yi mí nl xymxl uby
wk qyiík dyimkhl: hy fbmgknny dlt qlhk nk xliqkñk, mai hyokt taigói ia
gbyvk yi ynnk uby il xatkmy, rkmqk rknnktny. dytl ríelnl xyolt nk mbytqy hy
nl uby én dyimkfk ia ymdytkfk, dltuby yi kubyn xymxl aimqkiqy dktygaó, dlt
yiqty bik ubyftkhk hy bik mayttk uby mkník hlihy ynnlm ymqkfki, yn xkigyfl
uby fbmgkfk, yn gbkn vyiík rkfnkihl yiqty mí glmkm uby il dlhíki myt
yiqyihahkm hy gytgk, gbkiql xám hy nyolm. mb qtkoy ytk gbkn my rk daiqkhl,
mónl uby, nnyckihl gytgk, val hli ubaolqy uby bi glnyql rygrl dyhkelm uby
mlfty mí qtkík ytk hy áxfkt; dlt hlihy kgkfó hy yiqyihyt uby dytmlik uby
qknym ráfaqlm qtkík il hyfík hy myt hy íipaxk gknahkh.

yi nnyckihl yn xkigyfl k ynnlm, nym mknbhó gli bik vle hymyiqlikhk w
ftligk, dytl gli xbgrk gltqymík. hli ubaolqy ny vlnvaó nkm mknbhym gli il
xyilm glxyhaxayiql, w, kdyáihlmy hy tlgaikiqy, gli cyiqan gliqaiyiqy w
hlikaty, ny pby k kftkekt w ny qbvl bi fbyi ymdkgal ymqtygrkxyiqy yiqty mbm
ftkelm, glxl ma hy nbyiclm qayxdlm ny rbfaytk glilgahl. yn lqtl, k ubayi
dlhyxlm nnkxkt yn tlql hy nk xknk pacbtk -glxl k hli ubaolqy yn hy nk
qtamqy-, hymdbém hy rkfytmy hyokhl kftkekt, ny kdktqó bi dlgl hy mí, w,
dbymqkm mbm xkilm yi nlm rlxftlm hy hli ubaolqy, ny ymqbvl xatkihl, glxl
uby ubytík vyt ma ny glilgík; il xyilm khxatkhl ubaeá hy vyt nk pacbtk,
qknny w ktxkm hy hli ubaolqy, uby hli ubaolqy nl ymqkfk hy vytny k én. yi
tymlnbgaói, yn dtaxytl uby rkfnó hymdbém hyn kftkekxayiql pby yn tlql, w
haol nl uby my hatá khynkiqy.





gkdíqbnl zzav. hlihy my dtlmacby nk kvyiqbtk hy nk mayttk xltyik


hagy nk ramqltak uby ytk ctkihímaxk nk kqyigaói gli uby hli ubaolqy
ymgbgrkfk kn kmqtlml gkfknnytl hy nk mayttk, yn gbkn, dtlmacbayihl mb
dnáqagk, haol:

-dlt gaytql, myñlt, ubayiubaytk uby myáam, uby wl il lm glilegl, wl lm
kctkhyegl nkm xbymqtkm w nk gltqymík uby glixacl rkféam bmkhl; w ubamaytk
wl rknnktxy yi qétxailm uby gli xám uby nk vlnbiqkh dbhaytk mytvat nk uby
rkféam xlmqtkhl qyiytxy yi yn fbyi kglcaxayiql uby xy rkféam rygrl, xkm il
ubayty xa mbytqy hktxy lqtk glmk gli uby glttymdlihk k nkm fbyikm lftkm uby
xy rkgyi, uby fbyilm hymylm hy mkqampkgytnkm.

-nlm uby wl qyicl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- mli hy mytvatlm; qkiql, uby qyiík
hyqytxaikhl hy il mknat hymqkm mayttkm rkmqk rknnktlm w mkfyt hy vlm ma yn
hlnlt uby yi nk ymqtkñyek hy vbymqtk vahk xlmqtáam qyiyt my dlhík rknnkt
kncúi céiytl hy tyxyhal; w ma pbytk xyiymqyt fbmgktny, fbmgktny gli nk
hanacyigak dlmafny. w, gbkihl vbymqtk hymvyiqbtk pbytk hy kubynnkm uby
qayiyi gyttkhkm nkm dbytqkm k qlhl céiytl hy glimbynl, dyimkfk kwbhktlm k
nnltktnk w dnkñatnk glxl xyolt dbhaytk, uby qlhkvík ym glimbynl yi nkm
hymctkgakm rknnkt ubayi my hbynk hynnkm. w, ma ym uby xa fbyi aiqyiql
xytygy myt kctkhygahl gli kncúi céiytl hy gltqymík, wl lm mbdnagl, myñlt,
dlt nk xbgrk uby vyl uby yi vlm my yigayttk, w obiqkxyiqy lm gliobtl dlt nk
glmk uby yi ymqk vahk xám rkféam kxkhl l kxáam, uby xy hacáam ubaéi mlam w
nk gkbmk uby lm rk qtkíhl k vavat w k xltat yiqty ymqkm mlnyhkhym glxl
ftbql kiaxkn, dbym xltáam yiqty ynnlm qki koyil hy vlm xamxl gbkn nl
xbymqtk vbymqtl qtkoy w dytmlik. w obtl -kñkhaó hli ubaolqy-, dlt nk lthyi
hy gkfknnytík uby tygyfí, kbiuby aihacil w dygkhlt, w dlt nk dtlpymaói hy
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, uby ma yi ymql, myñlt, xy glxdnkgéam, hy mytvatlm gli
nkm vytkm k uby xy lfnack yn myt ubayi mlw: ltk tyxyhakihl vbymqtk
hymctkgak, ma qayiy tyxyhal, ltk kwbháihllm k nnltktnk, glxl lm nl ry
dtlxyqahl.

yn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby, uby hy qkn xkiytk lwó rkfnkt kn hy nk qtamqy
pacbtk, il rkgík mail xatktny, w tyxatktny w qltiktny k xatkt hy kttafk
kfkol; w, hymdbém uby ny rbfl fayi xatkhl, ny haol:

-ma qayiyi kncl uby hktxy k glxyt, dlt kxlt hy halm uby xy nl hyi; uby,
hymdbém hy rkfyt glxahl, wl rkté qlhl nl uby my xy xkihk, yi kctkhygaxayiql
hy qki fbyilm hymylm glxl kubí my xy rki xlmqtkhl.

nbycl mkgktli, mkigrl hy mb glmqkn w yn gkftytl hy mb ebttói, gli uby
mkqampael yn tlql mb rkxfty, glxayihl nl uby ny haytli glxl dytmlik
kqliqkhk, qki kdtaymk uby il hkfk ymdkgal hy bi flgkhl kn lqtl, dbym kiqym
nlm yicbnník uby qtkckfk; w, yi qkiql uby glxík, ia én ia nlm uby ny
xatkfki rkfnkfki dknkftk. glxl kgkfó hy glxyt, nym rael hy myñkm uby ny
macbaymyi, glxl nl ragaytli, w én nlm nnyvó k bi vythy dtkhygannl uby k nk
vbynqk hy bik dyñk dlgl hymvakhk hy knní ymqkfk. yi nnyckihl k én my qyihaó
yi yn mbynl, yigaxk hy nk wytfk, w nlm hyxám ragaytli nl xamxl; w qlhl ymql
mai uby iaicbil rkfnkmy, rkmqk uby yn tlql, hymdbém hy rkfytmy kglxlhkhl yi
mb kmayiql, haol:

-ma cbmqáam, myñltym, uby lm hack yi ftyvym tkeliym nk aixyimahkh hy xam
hymvyiqbtkm, rkféamxy hy dtlxyqyt hy uby gli iaicbik dtycbiqk, ia lqtk
glmk, il aiqyttlxdytéam yn ranl hy xa qtamqy ramqltak; dltuby yi yn dbiql
uby nl rkcáam, yi émy my ubyhktá nl uby pbyty gliqkihl.

ymqkm tkeliym hyn tlql qtboytli k nk xyxltak k hli ubaolqy yn gbyiql uby ny
rkfík gliqkhl mb ymgbhytl, gbkihl il kgytqó yn iúxytl hy nkm gkftkm uby
rkfíki dkmkhl yn tíl w my ubyhó nk ramqltak dyihayiqy. dytl, vlnvayihl kn
tlql, dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-ymqk dtyvyigaói uby rkcl ym dltuby ubyttík dkmkt ftyvyxyiqy dlt yn gbyiql
hy xam hymctkgakm; uby yn qtkytnkm k nk xyxltak il xy matvy hy lqtk glmk
uby kñkhat lqtkm hy ibyvl, w, xayiqtkm xyilm xy dtycbiqátyhym, xám dtymql
kgkfkté wl hy hygannkm, dbymql uby il hyokté dlt gliqkt glmk kncbik uby myk
hy axdltqkigak dktk il mkqampkgyt hyn qlhl k vbymqtl hymyl.

hli ubaolqy my nl dtlxyqaó, yi ilxfty hy nlm hyxám, w én, gli ymqy mycbtl,
glxyieó hymqk xkiytk:

-«xa ilxfty ym gkthyial; xa dkqtak, bik gabhkh hy nkm xyoltym hymqk
kihknbgík; xa naikoy, ilfny; xam dkhtym, taglm; xa hymvyiqbtk, qkiqk uby nk
hyfyi hy rkfyt nnltkhl xam dkhtym w myiqahl xa naikoy, mai dlhytnk knavakt
gli mb taubyek; uby dktk tyxyhakt hymhagrkm hyn gaynl dlgl mbynyi vknyt nlm
fayiym hy pltqbik. vavík yi ymqk xymxk qayttk bi gaynl, hlihy dbml yn kxlt
qlhk nk cnltak uby wl kgytqktk k hymyktxy: qkn ym nk rytxlmbtk hy nbmgaihk,
hligynnk qki ilfny w qki tagk glxl wl, dytl hy xám vyiqbtk w hy xyilm
patxyek hy nk uby k xam rlitkhlm dyimkxayiqlm my hyfík. k ymqk nbmgaihk
kxé, ubamy w khlté hymhy xam qaytilm w dtaxytlm kñlm, w ynnk xy ubaml k xí
gli kubynnk myigannye w fbyi áiaxl uby mb dlgk yhkh dytxaqík. mkfíki
ibymqtlm dkhtym ibymqtlm aiqyiqlm, w il nym dymkfk hynnl, dltuby fayi vyíki
uby, gbkihl dkmktki khynkiqy, il dlhíki qyiyt lqtl pai uby yn hy gkmktilm,
glmk uby gkma nk gligytqkfk nk acbknhkh hy ibymqtl naikoy w taubyekm.
gtygaó nk yhkh, w gli ynnk yn kxlt hy yiqtkxflm, uby kn dkhty hy nbmgaihk
ny dktygaó uby dlt fbyilm tymdyqlm ymqkfk lfnackhl k iycktxy nk yiqtkhk hy
mb gkmk, gkma axaqkihl yi ymql k nlm dkhtym hy kubynnk qamfy qki hygkiqkhk
hy nlm dlyqkm. w pby ymqk iyckgaói kñkhat nnkxk k nnkxk w hymyl k hymyl,
dltuby, kbiuby dbmaytli manyigal k nkm nyicbkm, il ny dbhaytli dliyt k nkm
dnbxkm, nkm gbknym, gli xám nafytqkh uby nkm nyicbkm, mbynyi hkt k yiqyihyt
k ubayi ubaytyi nl uby yi yn knxk ymqá yigyttkhl; uby xbgrkm vygym nk
dtymyigak hy nk glmk kxkhk qbtfk w yixbhygy nk aiqyigaói xám hyqytxaikhk w
nk nyicbk xám kqtyvahk. ¡kw gaynlm, w gbáiqlm fannyqym ny ymgtafí! ¡gbái
tycknkhkm w rliymqkm tymdbymqkm qbvy! ¡gbáiqkm gkigaliym glxdbmy w gbáiqlm
yikxltkhlm vytmlm, hlihy yn knxk hygnktkfk w qtkmnkhkfk mbm myiqaxayiqlm,
daiqkfk mbm yigyihahlm hymylm, yiqtyqyiík mbm xyxltakm w tygtykfk mb
vlnbiqkh!

»yi ypyql, vaéihlxy kdbtkhl, w uby xa knxk my glimbxík gli yn hymyl hy
vytnk, hyqytxaié dliyt dlt lftk w kgkfkt yi bi dbiql nl uby xy dktygaó uby
xám glivyiík dktk mknat gli xa hymykhl w xytygahl dtyxal; w pby yn
dyhítmynk k mb dkhty dlt nycíqaxk ymdlmk, glxl nl ragy; k nl uby én xy
tymdlihaó uby xy kctkhygík nk vlnbiqkh uby xlmqtkfk hy rlitknny, w hy
ubytyt rlitktxy gli dtyihkm mbwkm, dytl uby, mayihl xa dkhty vavl, k én
qlgkfk hy obmql hytygrl rkgyt kubynnk hyxkihk; dltuby, ma il pbymy gli
xbgrk vlnbiqkh w cbmql mbwl, il ytk nbmgaihk xboyt dktk qlxktmy ia hktmy k
rbtql.

»wl ny kctkhygí mb fbyi aiqyiql, dktygaéihlxy uby nnyvkfk tkeói yi nl uby
hygík, w uby xa dkhty vyihtík yi ynnl glxl wl my nl haoymy; w gli ymqy
aiqyiql, nbycl yi kubyn xamxl aimqkiqy, pba k hygatny k xa dkhty nl uby
hymykfk. w, kn qayxdl uby yiqté yi bi kdlmyiql hlihy ymqkfk, ny rknné gli
bik gktqk kfaytqk yi nk xkil, nk gbkn, kiqym uby wl ny haoymy dknkftk, xy
nk hal w xy haol: ''dlt ymk gktqk vytám, gkthyial, nk vlnbiqkh uby yn hbuby
tagkthl qayiy hy rkgytqy xytgyh''.» ymqy hbuby tagkthl, glxl wk vlmlqtlm,
myñltym, hyféam hy mkfyt, ym bi ctkihy hy ymdkñk uby qayiy mb ymqkhl yi nl
xyolt hymqk kihknbgík. «qlxé w nyí nk gktqk, nk gbkn vyiík qki yigktygahk
uby k xí xymxl xy dktygaó xkn ma xa dkhty hyokfk hy gbxdnat nl uby yi ynnk
my ny dyhík, uby ytk uby xy yivakmy nbycl hlihy én ymqkfk; uby ubytík uby
pbymy glxdkñytl, il gtakhl, hy mb raol yn xkwlt, w uby én qlxkfk k gktcl yn
dliytxy yi ymqkhl uby glttymdlihaymy k nk ymqaxkgaói yi uby xy qyiík. nyí
nk gktqk w yixbhygí nywéihlnk, w xám gbkihl lí uby xa dkhty xy hygík: ''hy
kubí k hlm híkm qy dktqatám, gkthyial, k rkgyt nk vlnbiqkh hyn hbuby; w hk
ctkgakm k halm uby qy vk kftayihl gkxail dlt hlihy kngkigym nl uby wl mé
uby xytygym''. kñkhaó k émqkm lqtkm tkeliym hy dkhty glimyoytl.
»nnycómy yn qétxail hy xa dktqahk, rkfné bik ilgry k nbmgaihk, híoyny qlhl
nl uby dkmkfk, w nl xymxl ragy k mb dkhty, mbdnagáihlny my yiqtyqbvaymy
kncbilm híkm w hankqkmy yn hktny ymqkhl rkmqk uby wl vaymy nl uby tagkthl
xy ubytík. Én xy nl dtlxyqaó w ynnk xy nl glipatxó gli xan obtkxyiqlm w xan
hymxkwlm. vaiy, yi pai, hlihy yn hbuby tagkthl ymqkfk. pba hén qki fayi
tygyfahl w qtkqkhl, uby hymhy nbycl glxyieó nk yivahak k rkgyt mb lpagal,
qyiaéihlxynk nlm gtakhlm kiqacblm, dktygaéihlnym uby nkm xbymqtkm uby yn
hbuby hkfk hy rkgytxy xytgyh rkfíki hy myt yi dytobagal mbwl. dytl yn uby
xám my rlncó gli xa ahk pby bi raol mycbihl hyn hbuby, nnkxkhl pytikihl,
xlel cknnkthl, cyiqanrlxfty, nafytkn w yikxltkhl, yn gbkn, yi dlgl qayxdl,
ubaml uby pbymy qki mb kxacl, uby hkfk uby hygat k qlhlm; w, kbiuby yn
xkwlt xy ubytík fayi w xy rkgík xytgyh, il nnycó kn ymqtyxl gli uby hli
pytikihl xy ubytík w qtkqkfk.

»ym, dbym, yn gkml uby, glxl yiqty nlm kxaclm il rkw glmk mygtyqk uby il my
glxbiauby, w nk dtavkiek uby wl qyiík gli hli pytikihl hyokhk hy mytnl dlt
myt kxamqkh, qlhlm mbm dyimkxayiqlm xy hygnktkfk, ymdygaknxyiqy bil
yikxltkhl, uby ny qtkík gli bi dlgl hy hymkmlmaycl. ubytík fayi k bik
nkftkhltk, vkmknnk hy mb dkhty (w ynnk nlm qyiík xbw taglm), w ytk qki
rytxlmk, tygkqkhk, hamgtyqk w rliymqk uby ikhay uby nk glilgík my
hyqytxaikfk yi gbán hymqkm glmkm qbvaymy xám yzgynyigak ia xám my
kvyiqkokmy. ymqkm qki fbyikm dktqym hy nk rytxlmk nkftkhltk tyhboytli k qkn
qétxail nlm hymylm hy hli pytikihl, uby my hyqytxaió, dktk dlhyt kngkiektnl
w gliubamqkt nk yiqytyek hy nk nkftkhltk, hktny dknkftk hy myt mb ymdlml,
dltuby hy lqtk xkiytk ytk dtlgbtkt nl axdlmafny. wl, lfnackhl hy mb
kxamqkh, gli nkm xyoltym tkeliym uby mbdy w gli nlm xám vavlm yoyxdnlm uby
dbhy, dtlgbté ymqltfktny w kdktqktny hy qkn dtldómaql. dytl, vayihl uby il
kdtlvygrkfk, hyqytxaié hy hygatny yn gkml kn hbuby tagkthl, mb dkhty. xkm
hli pytikihl, glxl kmqbql w hamgtyql, my tygynó w qyxaó hymql, dlt
dktygytny uby ymqkfk wl lfnackhl, yi vye hy fbyi gtakhl, il qyiyt
yigbfaytqk glmk uby qki yi dytobagal hy nk rlitk hy xa myñlt yn hbuby
vyiík; w kmí, dlt havytqatxy w yickñktxy, xy haol uby il rknnkfk lqtl xyolt
tyxyhal dktk dlhyt kdktqkt hy nk xyxltak nk rytxlmbtk uby qki mboyql ny
qyiík, uby yn kbmyiqktmy dlt kncbilm xymym; w uby ubytík uby yn kbmyigak
pbymy uby nlm hlm ilm vaiaémyxlm yi gkmk hy xa dkhty, gli lgkmaói uby
hktíki kn hbuby uby vyiík k vyt w k pytakt bilm xbw fbyilm gkfknnlm uby yi
xa gabhkh rkfík, uby ym xkhty hy nlm xyoltym hyn xbihl.

»kdyikm ny lí wl hygat ymql, gbkihl, xlvahl hy xa kpagaói, kbiuby mb
hyqytxaikgaói il pbytk qki fbyik, nk kdtlfktk wl dlt bik hy nkm xám
kgytqkhkm uby my dlhíki axkcaikt, dlt vyt gbái fbyik lgkmaói w glwbiqbtk my
xy lptygík hy vlnvyt k vyt k xa nbmgaihk. gli ymqy dyimkxayiql w hymyl,
kdtlfé mb dktygyt w ympltgé mb dtldómaql, hagaéihlny uby nl dbmaymy dlt
lftk gli nk ftyvyhkh dlmafny, dltuby, yi ypyql, nk kbmyigak rkgík mb
lpagal, k dymkt hy nlm xám patxym dyimkxayiqlm. wk gbkihl én xy vail k
hygat ymql, mycúi hymdbém my mbdl, rkfík clekhl k nk nkftkhltk gli qíqbnl
hy ymdlml, w ymdytkfk lgkmaói hy hymgbftatmy k mb mknvl, qyxytlml hy nl uby
yn hbuby mb dkhty rktík gbkihl mbdaymy mb hamdktkqy.

»mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, glxl yn kxlt yi nlm xlelm, dlt nk xkwlt dktqy, il nl
ym, mail kdyqaql, yn gbkn, glxl qayiy dlt únqaxl pai yn hynyaqy, yi
nnyckihl k kngkiektny my kgkfk w rk hy vlnvyt kqtám kubynnl uby dktygík
kxlt, dltuby il dbyhy dkmkt khynkiqy hyn qétxail uby ny dbml ikqbtknyek, yn
gbkn qétxail il ny dbml k nl uby ym vythkhytl kxlt...; ubaytl hygat uby,
kmí glxl hli pytikihl cleó k nk nkftkhltk, my ny kdnkgktli mbm hymylm w my
tymptaktli mbm kríiglm; w ma dtaxytl paicík ubytytmy kbmyiqkt, dlt
tyxyhaktnlm, krltk hy vytkm dtlgbtkfk atmy, dlt il dliytnlm yi yoygbgaói.
halny yn hbuby nagyigak, w xkihóxy uby ny kglxdkñkmy. vyiaxlm k xa gabhkh,
tygafaóny xa dkhty glxl ubayi ytk; va wl nbycl k nbmgaihk, qltiktli k
vavat, kbiuby il rkfíki ymqkhl xbytqlm ia kxltqacbkhlm, xam hymylm, hy nlm
gbknym ha gbyiqk, dlt xa xkn, k hli pytikihl, dlt dktygytxy uby, yi nk nyw
hy nk xbgrk kxamqkh uby xlmqtkfk, il ny hyfík yigbftat ikhk. knkfény nk
rytxlmbtk, hlikaty w hamgtygaói hy nbmgaihk hy qkn xkiytk, uby xam
knkfkiekm xlvaytli yi én nlm hymylm hy ubytyt vyt hligynnk hy qkiqkm fbyikm
dktqym khltikhk. gbxdnímynlm wl, dlt xa gltqk mbytqy, yimyñáihlmynk bik
ilgry, k nk nbe hy bik vynk, dlt bik vyiqkik dlt hlihy nlm hlm mlníkxlm
rkfnktilm. valnk yi mkwl, qkn, uby qlhkm nkm fynnyekm rkmqk yiqligym dlt én
vamqkm nkm dbml yi lnvahl. yixbhygaó, dythaó yn myiqahl, ubyhó kfmltql w,
paiknxyiqy, qki yikxltkhl gbkn nl vytéam yi yn hamgbtml hyn gbyiql hy xa
hymvyiqbtk. w, dktk yigyihytny xám yn hymyl, uby k xí xy gynkfk w kn gaynl
k mlnkm hymgbftík, ubaml nk pltqbik uby rknnkmy bi hík bi fannyqy mbwl
dahaéihlxy uby nk dahaymy k mb dkhty dlt ymdlmk, qki hamgtyql, qki rliymql
w qki yikxltkhl uby, yi nywéihlnl, xy haol uby yi mlnk nbmgaihk my
yigyttkfki qlhkm nkm ctkgakm hy rytxlmbtk w hy yiqyihaxayiql uby yi nkm
hyxám xboytym hyn xbihl ymqkfki tydktqahkm.

»fayi ym vythkh uby ubaytl glipymkt krltk uby, dbymql uby wl vyík gli gbái
obmqkm gkbmkm hli pytikihl k nbmgaihk knkfkfk, xy dymkfk hy lít kubynnkm
knkfkiekm hy mb flgk, w glxyigé k qyxyt w k tygynktxy hén, dltuby il my
dkmkfk xlxyiql hlihy il ubamaymy uby qtkqámyxlm hy nbmgaihk, w én xlvík nk
dnáqagk, kbiuby nk qtboymy dlt nlm gkfynnlm; glmk uby hymdytqkfk yi xí bi
il mé ubé hy gynlm, il dltuby wl qyxaymy tyvém kncbil hy nk flihkh w hy nk
py hy nbmgaihk, dytl, gli qlhl yml, xy rkgík qyxyt xa mbytqy nl xymxl uby
ynnk xy kmycbtkfk. dtlgbtkfk mayxdty hli pytikihl nyyt nlm dkdynym uby wl k
nbmgaihk yivakfk w nlm uby ynnk xy tymdlihík, k qíqbnl uby hy nk hamgtygaói
hy nlm hlm cbmqkfk xbgrl. kgkygaó, dbym, uby, rkfaéihlxy dyhahl nbmgaihk bi
naftl hy gkfknnytíkm yi uby nyyt, hy ubayi ytk ynnk xbw kpagalikhk, uby ytk
yn hy kxkhím hy ckbnk...»

il rbfl fayi líhl hli ubaolqy ilxftkt naftl hy gkfknnytíkm, gbkihl haol:
-gli uby xy haoytk vbymqtk xytgyh, kn dtaigadal hy mb ramqltak, uby mb
xytgyh hy nk myñltk nbmgaihk ytk kpagalikhk k naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, il
pbytk xyiymqyt lqtk yzkcytkgaói dktk hktxy k yiqyihyt nk knqyek hy mb
yiqyihaxayiql, dltuby il ny qbvaytk qki fbyil glxl vlm, myñlt, ny rkféam
daiqkhl, ma gktygaytk hyn cbmql hy qki mkftlmk nywyihk: kmí uby, dktk
glixacl, il ym xyiymqyt ckmqkt xám dknkftkm yi hygnktktxy mb rytxlmbtk,
vknlt w yiqyihaxayiql; uby, gli mónl rkfyt yiqyihahl mb kpagaói, nk
glipatxl dlt nk xám rytxlmk w xám hamgtyqk xboyt hyn xbihl. w ubamaytk wl,
myñlt, uby vbymqtk xytgyh ny rbfaytk yivakhl obiql gli kxkhím hy ckbnk kn
fbyil hy hli tbcyn hy ctygak, uby wl mé uby cbmqktk nk myñltk nbmgaihk
xbgrl hy hktkahk w cytkwk, w hy nkm hamgtygaliym hyn dkmqlt hktaiyn w hy
kubynnlm khxatkfnym vytmlm hy mbm fbgónagkm, gkiqkhkm w tydtymyiqkhkm dlt
én gli qlhl hlikaty, hamgtygaói w hymyivlnqbtk. dytl qayxdl dlhtá vyiat yi
uby my yixayihy ymk pknqk, w il hbtk xám yi rkgytmy nk yixayihk hy gbkiql
ubaytk vbymqtk xytgyh myt mytvahl hy vyiatmy glixacl k xa knhyk, uby knní
ny dlhté hkt xám hy qtygayiqlm naftlm, uby mli yn tycknl hy xa knxk w yn
yiqtyqyiaxayiql hy xa vahk; kbiuby qyicl dktk xí uby wk il qyicl iaicbil,
xytgyh k nk xknagak hy xknlm w yivahalmlm yigkiqkhltym. w dythóiyxy vbymqtk
xytgyh yn rkfyt gliqtkvyiahl k nl uby dtlxyqaxlm hy il aiqyttlxdyt mb
dnáqagk, dbym, yi lwyihl glmkm hy gkfknnytíkm w hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, kmí
ym yi xa xkil hyokt hy rkfnkt yi ynnlm, glxl nl ym yi nk hy nlm tkwlm hyn
mln hyokt hy gknyiqkt, ia rbxyhygyt yi nlm hy nk nbik. kmí uby, dythói w
dtlmycbat, uby ym nl uby krltk rkgy xám kn gkml.

yi qkiql uby hli ubaolqy ymqkfk hagayihl nl uby ubyhk hagrl, my ny rkfík
gkíhl k gkthyial nk gkfyek mlfty yn dygrl, hkihl xbymqtkm hy ymqkt
dtlpbihkxyiqy dyimkqavl. w, dbymql uby hlm vygym ny haol hli ubaolqy uby
dtlmacbaymy mb ramqltak, ia knekfk nk gkfyek ia tymdlihík dknkftk; dytl, kn
gkfl hy bi fbyi ymdkgal, nk nyvkiqó w haol:

-il my xy dbyhy ubaqkt hyn dyimkxayiql, ia rkftá ubayi xy nl ubaqy yi yn
xbihl, ia ubayi xy hé k yiqyihyt lqtk glmk (w mytík bi xkokhytl yn uby nl
gliqtktal yiqyihaymy l gtywymy), mail uby kubyn fynnkglikel hyn xkymqtl
ynamkfkq ymqkfk kxkigyfkhl gli nk tyaik xkhémaxk.

-yml il, ¡vlql k qkn! -tymdlihaó gli xbgrk gónytk hli ubaolqy (w kttloóny,
glxl qyiík hy glmqbxfty)-; w émk ym bik xbw ctki xknagak, l fynnkubytík,
dlt xyolt hygat: nk tyaik xkhámaxk pby xbw dtaigadkn myñltk, w il my rk hy
dtymbxat uby qki knqk dtaigymk my rkfík hy kxkigyfkt gli bi mkgkdlqtkm; w
ubayi nl gliqtktal yiqyihayty, xayiqy glxl xbw ctki fynnkgl. w wl my nl
hkté k yiqyihyt, k day l k gkfknnl, ktxkhl l hymktxkhl, hy ilgry l hy hík,
l glxl xám cbmql ny hayty.

ymqáfkny xatkihl gkthyial xbw kqyiqkxyiqy, kn gbkn wk rkfík vyiahl yn
kggahyiqy hy mb nlgbtk w il ymqkfk dktk dtlmycbat mb ramqltak; ia qkxdlgl
hli ubaolqy my nk lwytk, mycúi ny rkfík hamcbmqkhl nl uby hy xkhámaxk ny
rkfík líhl. ¡ymqtkñl gkml; uby kmí vlnvaó dlt ynnk glxl ma vythkhytkxyiqy
pbytk mb vythkhytk w ikqbtkn myñltk: qkn ny qyiíki mbm hymglxbnckhlm
naftlm! hacl, dbym, uby, glxl wk gkthyial ymqkfk nlgl w my lwó qtkqkt hy
xyiqím w hy fynnkgl, gli lqtlm hyibymqlm myxyokiqym, dktygaóny xkn nk
fbtnk, w kneó bi cbaokttl uby rknnó obiql k mí, w hal gli én yi nlm dygrlm
qkn clndy k hli ubaolqy uby ny rael gkyt hy ymdknhkm. mkigrl dkiek, uby hy
qkn xlhl val dktkt k mb myñlt, kttyxyqaó kn nlgl gli yn dbñl gyttkhl; w yn
tlql ny tygafaó hy qkn mbytqy uby gli bik dbñkhk hal gli én k mbm daym, w
nbycl my mbfaó mlfty én w ny ftbxó nkm glmqannkm xbw k mb mkflt. yn
gkftytl, uby ny ubaml hypyihyt, glttaó yn xymxl dynactl. w, hymdbém uby nlm
qbvl k qlhlm tyihahlm w xlnahlm, nlm hyoó w my pby, gli cyiqan mlmaycl, k
yxflmgktmy yi nk xliqkñk.

nyvkiqómy mkigrl, w, gli nk tkfak uby qyiík hy vytmy kdlttykhl qki mai
xytygytnl, kgbhaó k qlxkt nk vyickiek hyn gkftytl, hagaéihlny uby én qyiík
nk gbndk hy il rkfytnym kvamkhl uby k kubyn rlxfty ny qlxkfk k qayxdlm nk
nlgbtk; uby, ma ymql mbdaytki, rbfaytki ymqkhl mlfty kvaml dktk dlhytmy
cbkthkt. tymdlihaó yn gkftytl uby wk nl rkfík hagrl, w uby ma én il nl
rkfík líhl, uby il ytk mbwk nk gbndk. tydnagó mkigrl dkiek, w qltió k
tydnagkt yn gkftytl, w pby yn pai hy nkm tédnagkm kmatmy hy nkm fktfkm w
hktmy qknym dbñkhkm uby, ma hli ubaolqy il nlm dbmaytk yi dke, my ragaytki
dyhkelm. hygík mkigrl, kmahl gli yn gkftytl:

-héoyxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, uby yi émqy,
uby ym vannkil glxl wl w il ymqá ktxkhl gkfknnytl, fayi dbyhl k xa mknvl
mkqampkgytxy hyn kctkval uby xy rk rygrl, dynykihl gli én xkil k xkil, glxl
rlxfty rlitkhl.

-kmí ym -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl wl mé uby én il qayiy iaicbik gbndk hy nl
mbgyhahl.

gli ymql nlm kdkgacbó, w hli ubaolqy vlnvaó k dtycbiqkt kn gkftytl ma mytík
dlmafny rknnkt k gkthyial, dltuby ubyhkfk gli ctkihímaxl hymyl hy mkfyt yn
pai hy mb ramqltak. híolny yn gkftytl nl uby dtaxytl ny rkfík hagrl, uby
ytk il mkfyt hy gaytql mb xkiahk; dytl uby, ma kihbvaymy xbgrl dlt kubynnlm
gliqltilm, il hyoktík hy rknnktny, l gbythl l nlgl.





gkdíqbnl zzv. uby qtkqk hy nkm ymqtkñkm glmkm uby yi mayttk xltyik
mbgyhaytli kn vknayiqy gkfknnytl hy nk xkigrk, w hy nk axaqkgaói uby rael k
nk dyiaqyigak hy fynqyiyftlm


hymdahaómy hyn gkftytl hli ubaolqy, w, mbfayihl lqtk vye mlfty tlgaikiqy,
xkihó k mkigrl uby ny macbaymy, yn gbkn nl rael, gli mb obxyiql, hy xbw
xknk ckik. Ífkimy dlgl k dlgl yiqtkihl yi nl xám ámdytl hy nk xliqkñk, w
mkigrl afk xbytql dlt tkelikt gli mb kxl, w hymykfk uby én glxyiekmy nk
dnáqagk, dlt il gliqtkvyiat k nl uby ny qyiík xkihkhl; xkm, il dbhayihl
mbptat qkiql manyigal, ny haol:

-myñlt hli ubaolqy, vbymqtk xytgyh xy ygry mb fyihagaói w xy hé nagyigak;
uby hymhy kubí xy ubaytl vlnvyt k xa gkmk, w k xa xboyt w k xam raolm, gli
nlm gbknym, dlt nl xyilm, rkfnkté w hydktqaté qlhl nl uby ubamayty; dltuby
ubytyt vbymqtk xytgyh uby vkwk gli én dlt ymqkm mlnyhkhym, hy hík w hy
ilgry, w uby il ny rkfny gbkihl xy hayty cbmql ym yiqyttktxy yi vahk. ma wk
ubamaytk nk mbytqy uby nlm kiaxknym rkfnktki, glxl rkfnkfki yi qayxdlm hy
cbamldyqy, pbytk xyilm xkn, dltuby hydktqaytk wl gli xa obxyiql nl uby xy
vaiaytk yi ckik, w gli ymql dkmktk xa xknk vyiqbtk; uby ym tygak glmk, w
uby il my dbyhy nnyvkt yi dkgayigak, kihkt fbmgkihl kvyiqbtkm qlhk nk vahk
w il rknnkt mail glgym w xkiqykxayiqlm, nkhtannkelm w dbñkhkm, w, gli qlhl
ymql, ilm ryxlm hy glmyt nk flgk, mai lmkt hygat nl uby yn rlxfty qayiy yi
mb gltkeói, glxl ma pbytk xbhl.

-wk qy yiqayihl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: qú xbytym dltuby qy kngy
yn yiqtyhagrl uby qy qyicl dbymql yi nk nyicbk. hkny dlt knekhl w ha nl uby
ubamaytym, gli glihagaói uby il rk hy hbtkt ymqy knekxayiql xám hy yi
gbkiql kihbvaétyxlm dlt ymqkm mayttkm.

-myk kimí -haol mkigrl-: rkfny wl krltk, uby hymdbém halm mkfy nl uby mytá;
w, glxyiekihl k clekt hy ymy mknvlglihbql, hacl uby ¿ubé ny afk k vbymqtk
xytgyh yi vlnvyt qkiql dlt kubynnk tyaik xkcaxkmk, l glxl my nnkxk? l, ¿ubé
rkgík kn gkml uby kubyn kfkh pbymy mb kxacl l il? uby, ma vbymqtk xytgyh
dkmktk gli ynnl, dbym il ytk mb obye, fayi gtyl wl uby yn nlgl dkmktk
khynkiqy gli mb ramqltak, w my rbfaytki krlttkhl yn clndy hyn cbaokttl, w
nkm glgym, w kbi xám hy myam qltiamgliym.

-k py, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby ma qú mbdaytkm, glxl wl nl mé,
gbái rlitkhk w gbái dtaigadkn myñltk ytk nk tyaik xkhámaxk, wl mé uby
haoytkm uby qbvy xbgrk dkgayigak, dbym il ubyfté nk flgk dlt hlihy qknym
fnkmpyxakm mknaytli; dltuby ym xbw ctki fnkmpyxak hygat ia dyimkt uby bik
tyaik ymqé kxkigyfkhk gli bi gatbokil. nk vythkh hyn gbyiql ym uby kubyn
xkymqtl ynamkfkq, uby yn nlgl haol, pby bi rlxfty xbw dtbhyiqy w hy xbw
mkilm glimyolm, w matvaó hy kwl w hy xéhagl k nk tyaik; dytl dyimkt uby
ynnk ytk mb kxack ym hamdktkqy hacil hy xbw ctki gkmqacl. w, dltuby vykm
uby gkthyial il mbdl nl uby haol, rkm hy khvytqat uby gbkihl nl haol wk
ymqkfk mai obagal.

-yml hacl wl -haol mkigrl-: uby il rkfík dktk ubé rkgyt gbyiqk hy nkm
dknkftkm hy bi nlgl, dltuby ma nk fbyik mbytqy il kwbhktk k vbymqtk xytgyh
w yigkxaiktk yn cbaokttl k nk gkfyek, glxl ny yigkxaió kn dygrl, fbyilm
ubyhátkxlm dlt rkfyt vbynql dlt kubynnk xa myñltk, uby halm glrlihk. dbym,
¡xliqkm uby il my naftktk gkthyial dlt nlgl!

-gliqtk gbythlm w gliqtk nlglm ymqá lfnackhl gbknubayt gkfknnytl kihkiqy k
vlnvyt dlt nk rlitk hy nkm xboytym, gbknymubaytk uby myki, gbkiql xám dlt
nkm tyaikm hy qki knqk cbamk w dtl glxl pby nk tyaik xkhámaxk, k ubayi wl
qyicl dktqagbnkt kpagaói dlt mbm fbyikm dktqym; dltuby, pbytk hy rkfyt mahl
pytxlmk, khyxám pby xbw dtbhyiqy w xbw mbptahk yi mbm gknkxahkhym, uby nkm
qbvl xbgrkm; w nlm glimyolm w glxdkñík hyn xkymqtl ynamkfkq ny pby w ny
pbytli hy xbgrl dtlvygrl w knaval dktk dlhyt nnyvkt mbm qtkfkolm gli
dtbhyigak w dkgayigak. w hy kubí qlxó lgkmaói yn vbncl aciltkiqy w xkn
aiqyigalikhl hy hygat w dyimkt uby ynnk ytk mb xkigyfk; w xayiqyi, hacl
lqtk vye, w xyiqatái lqtkm hlgayiqkm, qlhlm nlm uby qkn dyimktyi w haoytyi.
-ia wl nl hacl ia nl dayiml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: knná my nl rkwki; gli mb
dki my nl glxki. ma pbytli kxkigyfkhlm, l il, k halm rkftái hkhl nk gbyiqk.
hy xam vañkm vyicl, il mé ikhk; il mlw kxacl hy mkfyt vahkm koyikm; uby yn
uby glxdtk w xayiqy, yi mb flnmk nl mayiqy. gbkiql xám, uby hymibhl ikgí,
hymibhl xy rknnl: ia daythl ia ckil; xkm uby nl pbymyi, ¿ubé xy vk k xí? w
xbgrlm dayimki uby rkw qlgailm w il rkw ymqkgkm. xkm, ¿ubaéi dbyhy dliyt
dbytqkm kn gkxdl? gbkiql xám, uby hy halm haoytli.

-¡vánkxy halm -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ubé hy iygyhkhym vkm, mkigrl,
yimktqkihl! ¿ubé vk hy nl uby qtkqkxlm k nlm typtkiym uby yirankm? dlt qb
vahk, mkigrl, uby gknnym; w hy kubí khynkiqy, yiqtyxéqyqy yi ymdlnykt k qb
kmil, w hyok hy rkgynnl yi nl uby il qy axdltqk. w yiqayihy gli qlhlm qbm
gaigl myiqahlm uby qlhl gbkiql wl ry rygrl, rkcl y ragayty, vk xbw dbymql
yi tkeói w xbw glipltxy k nkm tycnkm hy gkfknnytík, uby nkm mé xyolt uby
gbkiqlm gkfknnytlm nkm dtlpymktli yi yn xbihl.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w ¿ym fbyik tycnk hy gkfknnytík uby kihyxlm
dythahlm dlt ymqkm xliqkñkm, mai myihk ia gkxail, fbmgkihl k bi nlgl, yn
gbkn, hymdbém hy rknnkhl, ubaeá ny vyihtá yi vlnbiqkh hy kgkfkt nl uby hyoó
glxyiekhl, il hy mb gbyiql, mail hy nk gkfyek hy vbymqtk xytgyh w hy xam
glmqannkm, kgkfáihlilmnkm hy tlxdyt hy qlhl dbiql?

-gknnk, qy hacl lqtk vye, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-; dltuby qy rkcl mkfyt
uby il mónl xy qtky dlt ymqkm dktqym yn hymyl hy rknnkt kn nlgl, gbkiql yn
uby qyicl hy rkgyt yi ynnkm bik rkekñk gli uby ry hy ckikt dytdyqbl ilxfty
w pkxk yi qlhl nl hymgbfaytql hy nk qayttk; w mytá qkn, uby ry hy ygrkt gli
ynnk yn mynnl k qlhl kubynnl uby dbyhy rkgyt dytpygql w pkxlml k bi kihkiqy
gkfknnytl.

-w ¿ym hy xbw ctki dynactl ymk rkekñk? -dtycbiqó mkigrl dkiek.

-il -tymdlihaó yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk-, dbymql uby hy qkn xkiytk dlhík
glttyt yn hkhl, uby ygrámyxlm kekt yi nbckt hy yigbyiqtl; dytl qlhl rk hy
ymqkt yi qb hanacyigak.

-¿yi xa hanacyigak? -haol mkigrl.

-mí -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby ma vbynvym dtymql hy khlihy dayiml yivaktqy,
dtymql my kgkfktá xa dyik w dtymql glxyiektá xa cnltak. w, dltuby il ym
fayi uby qy qyick xám mbmdyiml, ymdytkihl yi nl uby rki hy dktkt xam
tkeliym, ubaytl, mkigrl, uby mydkm uby yn pkxlml kxkhím hy ckbnk pby bil hy
nlm xám dytpygqlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym. il ry hagrl fayi pby bil: pby yn
mlnl, yn dtaxytl, yn úiagl, yn myñlt hy qlhlm gbkiqlm rbfl yi mb qayxdl yi
yn xbihl. xkn kñl w xkn xym dktk hli fynakiím w dktk qlhlm kubynnlm uby
haoytyi uby my ny acbknó yi kncl, dltuby my yickñki, obtl gaytql. hacl
kmaxamxl uby, gbkihl kncúi daiqlt ubayty mknat pkxlml yi mb ktqy, dtlgbtk
axaqkt nlm ltacaiknym hy nlm xám úiaglm daiqltym uby mkfy; w ymqk xymxk
tycnk gltty dlt qlhlm nlm xám lpagalm l yoytgagalm hy gbyiqk uby matvyi
dktk khltil hy nkm tydúfnagkm. w kmí nl rk hy rkgyt w rkgy yn uby ubayty
kngkiekt ilxfty hy dtbhyiqy w mbptahl, axaqkihl k bnamym, yi gbwk dytmlik w
qtkfkolm ilm daiqk rlxytl bi tyqtkql vavl hy dtbhyigak w hy mbptaxayiql;
glxl qkxfaéi ilm xlmqtó vatcanal, yi dytmlik hy yiykm, yn vknlt hy bi raol
dakhlml w nk mkckgahkh hy bi vknayiqy w yiqyihahl gkdaqái, il daiqáihlnl ia
hymgbftaéihlnl glxl ynnlm pbytli, mail glxl rkfíki hy myt, dktk ubyhkt
yoyxdnl k nlm vyiahytlm rlxftym hy mbm vatqbhym. hymqk xymxk mbytqy, kxkhím
pby yn iltqy, yn nbgytl, yn mln hy nlm vknayiqym w yikxltkhlm gkfknnytlm, k
ubayi hyfyxlm hy axaqkt qlhlm kubynnlm uby hyfkol hy nk fkihytk hy kxlt w
hy nk gkfknnytík xanaqkxlm. mayihl, dbym, ymql kimí, glxl nl ym, rknnl wl,
mkigrl kxacl, uby yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy uby xám ny axaqkty ymqktá xám gytgk
hy kngkiekt nk dytpygaói hy nk gkfknnytík. w bik hy nkm glmkm yi uby xám
ymqy gkfknnytl xlmqtó mb dtbhyigak, vknlt, vknyiqík, mbptaxayiql, patxyek w
kxlt, pby gbkihl my tyqató, hymhyñkhl hy nk myñltk ltakik, k rkgyt
dyiaqyigak yi nk dyñk dlfty, xbhkhl mb ilxfty yi yn hy fynqyiyftlm, ilxfty,
dlt gaytql, maciapagkqavl w dtldtal dktk nk vahk uby én hy mb vlnbiqkh
rkfík ymglcahl. kimí uby, xy ym k xí xám págan axaqktny yi ymql uby il yi
ryihyt cackiqym, hymgkfyekt mytdayiqym, xkqkt yihtakclm, hymfktkqkt
yoétgaqlm, ptkgkmkt ktxkhkm w hymrkgyt yigkiqkxyiqlm. w, dbym ymqlm nbcktym
mli qki kglxlhkhlm dktk myxyokiqym ypygqlm, il rkw dktk ubé my hyoy dkmkt
nk lgkmaói, uby krltk gli qkiqk glxlhahkh xy lptygy mbm cbyhyokm.

-yi ypygql -haol mkigrl-, ¿ubé ym nl uby vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty rkgyt yi
ymqy qki tyxlql nbckt?

-¿wk il qy ry hagrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby ubaytl axaqkt k kxkhím,
rkgayihl kubí hyn hymymdytkhl, hyn mkihal w hyn pbtalml, dlt axaqkt
obiqkxyiqy kn vknayiqy hli tlnhái, gbkihl rknnó yi bik pbyiqy nkm myñknym
hy uby kicénagk nk fynnk rkfík glxyqahl vanyek gli xyhltl, hy gbwk
dymkhbxfty my vlnvaó nlgl w kttkigó nlm átflnym, yiqbtfaó nkm kcbkm hy nkm
gnktkm pbyiqym, xkqó dkmqltym, hymqtbwó ckikhlm, kftkmó grlekm, hyttafó
gkmkm, kttkmqtó wycbkm w rael lqtkm gayi xan aimlnyigakm, hacikm hy yqytil
ilxfty w ymgtaqbtk? w, dbymql uby wl il dayiml axaqkt k tlnhái, l ltnkihl,
l tlqlnkihl (uby qlhlm ymqlm qtym ilxftym qyiík), dktqy dlt dktqy yi qlhkm
nkm nlgbtkm uby rael, haol w dyimó, rkté yn flmubyol, glxl xyolt dbhayty,
yi nkm uby xy dktygayty myt xám ymyigaknym. w dlhtá myt uby vaiaymy k
gliqyiqktxy gli mlnk nk axaqkgaói hy kxkhím, uby mai rkgyt nlgbtkm hy hkñl,
mail hy nnltlm w myiqaxayiqlm, kngkieó qkiqk pkxk glxl yn uby xám.
-dktégyxy k xí -haol mkigrl- uby nlm gkfknnytlm uby nl qkn pagaytli pbytli
dtlvlgkhlm w qbvaytli gkbmk dktk rkgyt ymkm iygyhkhym w dyiaqyigakm, dytl
vbymqtk xytgyh, ¿ubé gkbmk qayiy dktk vlnvytmy nlgl? ¿ubé hkxk ny rk
hymhyñkhl, l ubé myñknym rk rknnkhl uby ny hyi k yiqyihyt uby nk myñltk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml rk rygrl kncbik iañytík gli xltl l gtamqakil?

-krí ymqk yn dbiql -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- w émk ym nk paiyek hy xa
iyclgal; uby vlnvytmy nlgl bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy gli gkbmk, ia ctkhl ia
ctkgakm: yn qluby ymqá hymkqaikt mai lgkmaói w hkt k yiqyihyt k xa hkxk uby
ma yi mygl rkcl ymql, ¿ubé ragaytk yi xlokhl? gbkiql xám, uby rktqk lgkmaói
qyicl yi nk nktck kbmyigak uby ry rygrl hy nk mayxdty myñltk xík hbngaiyk
hyn qlflml; uby, glxl wk límqy hygat k kubyn dkmqlt hy xkttkm, kxftlmal:
ubayi ymqá kbmyiqy qlhlm nlm xknym qayiy w qyxy. kmí uby, mkigrl kxacl, il
ckmqym qayxdl yi kglimyoktxy uby hyoy qki tktk, qki pynagy w qki il vamqk
axaqkgaói. nlgl mlw, nlgl ry hy myt rkmqk qkiql uby qú vbynvkm gli nk
tymdbymqk hy bik gktqk uby gliqacl dayiml yivakt k xa myñltk hbngaiyk; w ma
pbyty qkn gbkn k xa py my ny hyfy, kgkfktmy rk xa mkihye w xa dyiaqyigak; w
ma pbyty kn gliqtktal, myté nlgl hy vytkm, w, maéihlnl, il myiqaté ikhk.
kimí uby, hy gbknubaytk xkiytk uby tymdlihk, mknhté hyn glipnaql w qtkfkol
yi uby xy hyoktym, clekihl yn fayi uby xy qtboytym, dlt gbythl, l il
maiqayihl yn xkn uby xy kdltqktym, dlt nlgl. dytl haxy, mkigrl, ¿qtkym fayi
cbkthkhl yn wynxl hy xkxftail?; uby wk va uby ny knekmqy hyn mbynl gbkihl
kubyn hymkctkhygahl ny ubaml rkgyt dyhkelm. dytl il dbhl, hlihy my dbyhy
ygrkt hy vyt nk paiyek hy mb qyxdny.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-vavy halm, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, uby il dbyhl mbptat ia
nnyvkt yi dkgayigak kncbikm glmkm uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, w uby dlt ynnkm
vyicl k axkcaikt uby qlhl gbkiql xy hagy hy gkfknnytíkm w hy kngkiekt
tyailm y axdytalm, hy hkt íimbnkm w hy rkgyt lqtkm xytgyhym w ctkihyekm,
glxl ym bml hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, uby qlhl hyfy hy myt glmk hy vayiql w
xyiqatk, w qlhl dkmqtkñk, l dkqtkñk, l glxl nl nnkxátyxlm. dltuby ubayi
lwyty hygat k vbymqtk xytgyh uby bik fkgík hy fktfytl ym yn wynxl hy
xkxftail, w uby il mknck hy ymqy yttlt yi xám hy gbkqtl híkm, ¿ubé rk hy
dyimkt, mail uby ubayi qkn hagy w kpatxk hyfy hy qyiyt cüytl yn obagal? nk
fkgík wl nk nnyvl yi yn glmqkn, qlhk kflnnkhk, w nnévlnk dktk khytyektnk yi
xa gkmk w rkgytxy nk fktfk yi ynnk, ma halm xy hayty qkiqk ctkgak uby kncúi
hík xy vyk gli xa xboyt w raolm.

-xatk, mkigrl, dlt yn xamxl uby hyikiqym obtkmqy, qy obtl -haol hli
ubaolqy- uby qayiym yn xám gltql yiqyihaxayiql uby qayiy ia qbvl ymgbhytl
yi yn xbihl. ¿uby ym dlmafny uby yi gbkiql rk uby kihkm glixacl il rkm
ygrkhl hy vyt uby qlhkm nkm glmkm hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym dktygyi
ubaxytkm, iygyhkhym w hymkqailm, w uby mli qlhkm rygrkm kn tyvém? w il
dltuby myk ynnl kimí, mail dltuby kihki yiqty ilmlqtlm mayxdty bik gkqytvk
hy yigkiqkhltym uby qlhkm ibymqtkm glmkm xbhki w qtbygki w nym vbynvyi
mycúi mb cbmql, w mycúi qayiyi nk ckik hy pkvltygytilm l hymqtbatilm; w
kmí, yml uby k qa qy dktygy fkgík hy fktfytl, xy dktygy k xí yn wynxl hy
xkxftail, w k lqtl ny dktygytá lqtk glmk. w pby tktk dtlvahyigak hyn mkfal
uby ym hy xa dktqy rkgyt uby dktyegk fkgík k qlhlm nl uby tykn w
vythkhytkxyiqy ym wynxl hy xkxftail, k gkbmk uby, mayihl én hy qkiqk
ymqaxk, qlhl yn xbihl xy dytmycbatá dlt ubaqátxyny; dytl, glxl vyi uby il
ym xám hy bi fkgíi hy fktfytl, il my gbtki hy dtlgbtknny, glxl my xlmqtó
fayi yi yn uby ubaml tlxdynny w ny hyoó yi yn mbynl mai nnyvktny; uby k py
uby ma ny glilgaytk, uby ibigk én ny hyoktk. cbáthkny, kxacl, uby dlt krltk
il ny ry xyiymqyt; uby kiqym xy qyicl hy ubaqkt qlhkm ymqkm ktxkm w ubyhkt
hymibhl glxl gbkihl ikgí, ma ym uby xy hk yi vlnbiqkh hy mycbat yi xa
dyiaqyigak xám k tlnhái uby k kxkhím.

nnycktli, yi ymqkm dnáqagkm, kn day hy bik knqk xliqkñk uby, gkma glxl
dyñói qkokhl, ymqkfk mlnk yiqty lqtkm xbgrkm uby nk tlhykfki. glttík dlt mb
pknhk bi xkiml kttlwbynl, w rkgíkmy dlt qlhk mb tyhlihye bi dtkhl qki vythy
w vagalml, uby hkfk gliqyiql k nlm lolm uby ny xatkfki. rkfík dlt knní
xbgrlm átflnym manvymqtym w kncbikm dnkiqkm w pnltym, uby rkgíki yn nbckt
kdkgafny. ymqy maqal ymglcaó yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk dktk rkgyt mb
dyiaqyigak; w kmí, yi vaéihlny, glxyieó k hygat yi vle knqk, glxl ma
ymqbvaytk mai obagal:

-Émqy ym yn nbckt, ¡lr gaynlm!, uby hadbql w ymglol dktk nnltkt nk
hymvyiqbtk yi uby vlmlqtlm xymxlm xy rkféam dbymql. Émqy ym yn maqal hlihy
yn rbxlt hy xam lolm kgtygyiqktá nkm kcbkm hymqy dyubyñl kttlwl, w xam
gliqailm w dtlpbihlm mlmdatlm xlvytái k nk gliqaik nkm rlokm hymqlm
xliqktkgym átflnym, yi qymqaxlial w myñkn hy nk dyik uby xa kmyihytykhl
gltkeói dkhygy. ¡lr vlmlqtlm, ubayiubaytk uby myáam, túmqaglm halmym uby yi
ymqy airkfaqkfny nbckt qyiéam vbymqtk xltkhk, líh nkm ubyokm hymqy
hymhagrkhl kxkiqy, k ubayi bik nbyick kbmyigak w bilm axkcaikhlm gynlm rki
qtkíhl k nkxyiqktmy yiqty ymqkm kmdytyekm, w k ubyoktmy hy nk hbtk
glihagaói hy kubynnk aictkqk w fynnk, qétxail w pai hy qlhk rbxkik
rytxlmbtk! ¡lr vlmlqtkm, ikdykm w htíkhkm, uby qyiéam dlt glmqbxfty hy
rkfaqkt yi nkm ymdymbtkm hy nlm xliqym, kmí nlm nacytlm w nkmgavlm máqatlm,
hy ubayi mlam, kbiuby yi vkil, kxkhkm, il dytqbtfyi okxám vbymqtl hbngy
mlmaycl, uby xy kwbhéam k nkxyiqkt xa hymvyiqbtk, l, k nl xyilm, il lm
gkiméam hy línnk! ¡lr hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, hík hy xa ilgry, cnltak hy xa
dyik, iltqy hy xam gkxailm, ymqtynnk hy xa vyiqbtk, kmí yn gaynl qy nk hé
fbyik yi gbkiql kgytqktym k dyhatny, uby glimahytym yn nbckt w yn ymqkhl k
uby qb kbmyigak xy rk glihbgahl, w uby gli fbyi qétxail glttymdlihkm kn uby
k xa py my ny hyfy! ¡lr mlnaqktalm átflnym, uby hymhy rlw yi khynkiqy
rkféam hy rkgyt glxdkñík k xa mlnyhkh, hkh aihagal, gli yn fnkihl
xlvaxayiql hy vbymqtkm tkxkm, uby il lm hymkctkhy xa dtymyigak! ¡lr qú,
ymgbhytl xíl, kctkhkfny glxdkñytl yi xám dtómdytlm w khvytmlm mbgymlm, qlxk
fayi yi nk xyxltak nl uby kubí xy vytám rkgyt, dktk uby nl gbyiqym w
tygyqym k nk gkbmk qlqkn hy qlhl ynnl!

w, hagayihl ymql, my kdyó hy tlgaikiqy, w yi bi xlxyiql ny ubaqó yn ptyil w
nk mannk; w, háihlny bik dknxkhk yi nkm kigkm, ny haol:

-nafytqkh qy hk yn uby mai ynnk ubyhk, ¡lr gkfknnl qki ymqtyxkhl dlt qbm
lftkm gbki hymhagrkhl dlt qb mbytqy! vyqy dlt hl ubamaytym, uby yi nk
ptyiqy nnyvkm ymgtaql uby il qy acbknó yi nacytyek yn radlctapl hy kmqlnpl,
ia yn ilxftkhl ptliqail, uby qki gktl ny glmqó k ftkhkxkiqy.

vayihl ymql mkigrl, haol:

-fayi rkwk ubayi ilm ubaqó krltk hyn qtkfkol hy hymyiknfkthkt kn tbgal; uby
k py uby il pknqktki dknxkhagkm uby hknny, ia glmkm uby hyganny yi mb
knkfkiek; dytl ma én kubí ymqbvaytk, il glimaiqaytk wl uby ikhay ny
hymknfkthktk, dbym il rkfík dktk ubé, uby k én il ny qlgkfki nkm cyiytknym
hy yikxltkhl ia hy hymymdytkhl, dbym il nl ymqkfk mb kxl, uby ytk wl,
gbkihl halm ubytík. w yi vythkh, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, uby
ma ym uby xa dktqahk w mb nlgbtk hy vbymqtk xytgyh vk hy vytkm, uby mytá
fayi qltikt k yimannkt k tlgaikiqy, dktk uby mbdnk nk pknqk hyn tbgal,
dltuby mytá krlttkt qayxdl k xa ahk w vbynqk; uby ma nk rkcl k day, il mé
gbáihl nnyckté ia gbáihl vlnvyté, dltuby, yi tymlnbgaói, mlw xkn gkxaikiqy.
-hacl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby myk glxl qú ubamaytym, uby il xy
dktygy xkn qb hymacial; w hacl uby hy kubí k qtym híkm qy dktqatám, dltuby
ubaytl uby yi ymqy qayxdl vykm nl uby dlt ynnk rkcl w hacl, dktk uby my nl
hackm.

-dbym, ¿ubé xám qyicl hy vyt -haol mkigrl- uby nl uby ry vamql?

-¡fayi ymqám yi yn gbyiql! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. krltk xy pknqk tkmckt
nkm vymqahbtkm, ymdktgat nkm ktxkm w hktxy hy gknkfkekhkm dlt ymqkm dyñkm,
gli lqtkm glmkm hymqy okye uby qy rki hy khxatkt.

-dlt kxlt hy halm -haol mkigrl-, uby xaty vbymqtk xytgyh góxl my hk ymkm
gknkfkekhkm; uby k qkn dyñk dlhtá nnyckt, w yi qkn dbiql, uby gli nk
dtaxytk my kgkfkmy nk xáubaik hymqk dyiaqyigak; w mytík wl hy dktygyt uby,
wk uby vbymqtk xytgyh ny dktygy uby mli kubí iygymktakm gknkfkekhkm w uby
il my dbyhy rkgyt ymqk lftk mai ynnkm, my gliqyiqkmy, dbym qlhl ymql ym
paicahl w glmk gliqtkrygrk w hy fbtnk, my gliqyiqkmy, hacl, gli hátmynkm yi
yn kcbk, l yi kncbik glmk fnkihk, glxl knclhói; w héoyxy k xí yn gktcl, uby
wl haté k xa myñltk uby vbymqtk xytgyh my nkm hkfk yi bik dbiqk hy dyñk xám
hbtk uby nk hy bi hakxkiqy.

-wl kctkhyegl qb fbyik aiqyigaói, kxacl mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, xkm
ubaétlqy rkgyt mkfahlt hy uby qlhkm ymqkm glmkm uby rkcl il mli hy fbtnkm,
mail xbw hy vytkm; dltuby hy lqtk xkiytk, mytík gliqtkvyiat k nkm óthyiym
hy gkfknnytík, uby ilm xkihki uby il hackxlm xyiqatk kncbik, dyik hy
tynkmlm, w yn rkgyt bik glmk dlt lqtk nl xymxl ym uby xyiqat. kimí uby, xam
gknkfkekhkm rki hy myt vythkhytkm, patxym w vknyhytkm, mai uby nnyvyi ikhk
hyn mlpímqagl ia hyn pkiqámqagl. w mytá iygymktal uby xy hyoym kncbikm
rankm dktk gbtktxy, dbym uby nk vyiqbtk ubaml uby ilm pknqkmy yn fánmkxl
uby dythaxlm.

-xám pby dythyt yn kmil -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dbym my dythaytli yi én nkm
rankm w qlhl. w tbéclny k vbymqtk xytgyh uby il my kgbythy xám hy kubyn
xknhaql ftyfkoy; uby yi mónl lítny xyiqkt my xy tyvbynvy yn knxk, il uby yn
ymqóxkcl. w xám ny tbycl: uby rkck gbyiqk uby mli wk dkmkhlm nlm qtym híkm
uby xy rk hkhl hy qétxail dktk vyt nkm nlgbtkm uby rkgy, uby wk nkm hlw dlt
vamqkm w dlt dkmkhkm yi glmk obeckhk, w haté xktkvannkm k xa myñltk; w
ymgtafk nk gktqk w hymdágryxy nbycl, dltuby qyicl ctki hymyl hy vlnvyt k
mkgkt k vbymqtk xytgyh hymqy dbtckqltal hlihy ny hyol.

-¿dbtckqltal ny nnkxkm, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy-. xyolt ragaytkm hy
nnkxktny aipaytil, w kbi dylt, ma rkw lqtk glmk uby nl myk.

-ubayi rk aipaytil -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ibnk ym tyqyigal, mycúi ry líhl
hygat.

-il yiqayihl ubé ubayty hygat tyqyigal -haol hli ubaolqy.

-tyqyigal ym -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby ubayi ymqá yi yn aipaytil ibigk mkny
hén, ia dbyhy. nl gbkn mytá kn tyvém yi vbymqtk xytgyh, l k xí xy kihktái
xkn nlm daym, ma ym uby nnyvl ymdbynkm dktk kvavkt k tlgaikiqy; w dóickxy
wl bik dlt bik yi yn qlflml, w hynkiqy hy xa myñltk hbngaiyk, uby wl ny
haté qknym glmkm hy nkm iygyhkhym w nlgbtkm, uby qlhl ym bil, uby vbymqtk
xytgyh rk rygrl w ubyhk rkgayihl, uby nk vyick k dliyt xám fnkihk uby bi
cbkiqy, kbiuby nk rknny xám hbtk uby bi kngltiluby; gli gbwk tymdbymqk
hbngy w xynapagkhk vlnvyté dlt nlm katym, glxl ftbol, w mkgkté k vbymqtk
xytgyh hymqy dbtckqltal, uby dktygy aipaytil w il nl ym, dbym rkw ymdytkiek
hy mknat hén, nk gbkn, glxl qyicl hagrl, il nk qayiyi hy mknat nlm uby
ymqái yi yn aipaytil, ia gtyl uby vbymqtk xytgyh hatá lqtk glmk.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk-; dytl, ¿ubé rktyxlm dktk
ymgtafat nk gktqk?

-w nk naftkiek dlnnaiymgk qkxfaéi -kñkhaó mkigrl.

-qlhl atá aimytql -haol hli ubaolqy-; w mytík fbyil, wk uby il rkw dkdyn,
uby nk ymgtafaémyxlm, glxl rkgíki nlm kiqacblm, yi rlokm hy átflnym, l yi
bikm qkfnaqkm hy gytk; kbiuby qki hapagbnqlml mytá rknnktmy yml krltk glxl
yn dkdyn. xkm wk xy rk vyiahl k nk xyxltak hóihy mytá fayi, w kbi xám uby
fayi, ymgtafannk: uby ym yi yn naftannl hy xyxltak uby pby hy gkthyial; w
qú qyihtám gbahkhl hy rkgytnk qtkmnkhkt yi dkdyn, hy fbyik nyqtk, yi yn
dtaxyt nbckt uby rknnktym, hlihy rkwk xkymqtl hy ymgbynk hy xbgrkgrlm, l ma
il, gbknubaytk mkgtamqái qy nk qtkmnkhktá; w il my nk hym k qtkmnkhkt k
iaicúi ymgtafkil, uby rkgyi nyqtk dtlgymkhk, uby il nk yiqyihytá mkqkiám.
-dbym, ¿ubé my rk hy rkgyt hy nk patxk? -haol mkigrl.

-ibigk nkm gktqkm hy kxkhím my patxki -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-ymqá fayi -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl nk naftkiek pltelmkxyiqy my rk hy
patxkt, w émk, ma my qtkmnkhk, hatái uby nk patxk ym pknmk w ubyhktéxy mai
dlnnailm.

-nk naftkiek atá yi yn xymxl naftannl patxkhk; uby, yi vaéihlnk, xa mlftaik
il dlihtá hapagbnqkh yi gbxdnannk. w, yi nl uby qlgk k nk gktqk hy kxltym,
dlihtám dlt patxk: "vbymqtl rkmqk nk xbytqy, yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy
pacbtk". w rktá dlgl kn gkml uby vkwk hy xkil koyik, dltuby, k nl uby wl xy
mé kglthkt, hbngaiyk il mkfy ymgtafat ia nyyt, w yi qlhk mb vahk rk vamql
nyqtk xík ia gktqk xík, dltuby xam kxltym w nlm mbwlm rki mahl mayxdty
dnkqóiaglm, mai ymqyihytmy k xám uby k bi rliymql xatkt. w kbi ymql qki hy
gbkihl yi gbkihl, uby lmkté obtkt gli vythkh uby yi hlgy kñlm uby rk uby nk
ubaytl xám uby k nk nbxfty hymqlm lolm uby rki hy glxyt nk qayttk, il nk ry
vamql gbkqtl vygym; w kbi dlhtá myt uby hymqkm gbkqtl vygym il rbfaymy ynnk
ygrkhl hy vyt nk bik uby nk xatkfk: qkn ym yn tygkql w yigyttkxayiql gli
uby mbm dkhtym, nltyiel gltgrbynl, w mb xkhty, knhliek ilcknym, nk rki
gtakhl.

-¡qk, qk! -haol mkigrl-. ¿uby nk raok hy nltyiel gltgrbynl ym nk myñltk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, nnkxkhk dlt lqtl ilxfty knhliek nltyiel?

-Émk ym -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ym nk uby xytygy myt myñltk hy qlhl yn
biavytml.

-fayi nk glilegl -haol mkigrl-, w mé hygat uby qatk qki fayi bik fkttk glxl
yn xám pltebhl ekckn hy qlhl yn dbyfnl. ¡vavy yn hkhlt, uby ym xlek hy
grkdk, rygrk w hytygrk w hy dynl yi dygrl, w uby dbyhy mkgkt nk fktfk hyn
nlhl k gbknubayt gkfknnytl kihkiqy, l dlt kihkt, uby nk qbvayty dlt myñltk!
¡lr rahydbqk, ubé tyol uby qayiy, w ubé vle! mé hygat uby my dbml bi hík
yigaxk hyn gkxdkiktal hyn knhyk k nnkxkt bilm ekcknym mbwlm uby kihkfki yi
bi fktfygrl hy mb dkhty, w, kbiuby ymqkfki hy knní xám hy xyhak nycbk, kmí
nk lwytli glxl ma ymqbvaytki kn day hy nk qltty. w nl xyolt uby qayiy ym
uby il ym ikhk xynaihtlmk, dltuby qayiy xbgrl hy gltqymkik: gli qlhlm my
fbtnk w hy qlhl rkgy xbygk w hlikaty. krltk hacl, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nk
qtamqy pacbtk, uby il mlnkxyiqy dbyhy w hyfy vbymqtk xytgyh rkgyt nlgbtkm
dlt ynnk, mail uby, gli obmql qíqbnl, dbyhy hymymdytktmy w krltgktmy; uby
ikhay rkftá uby nl mydk uby il hack uby rael hyxkmakhl hy fayi, dbymql uby
ny nnyvy yn hakfnl. w ubyttík wk vytxy yi gkxail, mónl dlt vynnk; uby rk
xbgrlm híkm uby il nk vyl, w hyfy hy ymqkt wk qtlgkhk, dltuby ckmqk xbgrl
nk pke hy nkm xboytym kihkt mayxdty kn gkxdl, kn mln w kn katy. w glipayml
k vbymqtk xytgyh bik vythkh, myñlt hli ubaolqy: uby rkmqk kubí ry ymqkhl yi
bik ctkihy aciltkigak; uby dyimkfk fayi w paynxyiqy uby nk myñltk hbngaiyk
hyfík hy myt kncbik dtaigymk hy ubayi vbymqtk xytgyh ymqkfk yikxltkhl, l
kncbik dytmlik qkn, uby xytygaymy nlm taglm dtymyiqym uby vbymqtk xytgyh ny
rk yivakhl: kmí yn hyn vaegkíil glxl yn hy nlm cknylqym, w lqtlm xbgrlm uby
hyfyi myt, mycúi hyfyi hy myt xbgrkm nkm vaqltakm uby vbymqtk xytgyh rk
ckikhl w ckió yi yn qayxdl uby wl kúi il ytk mb ymgbhytl. dytl, fayi
glimahytkhl, ¿ubé my ny rk hy hkt k nk myñltk knhliek nltyiel, hacl, k nk
myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, hy uby my ny vkwki k raigkt hy tlhannkm hynkiqy
hynnk nlm vyigahlm uby vbymqtk xytgyh ny yivík w rk hy yivakt? dltuby
dlhtík myt uby, kn qayxdl uby ynnlm nnyckmyi, ymqbvaymy ynnk tkmqtannkihl
nail, l qtannkihl yi nkm ytkm, w ynnlm my glttaymyi hy vytnk, w ynnk my
taymy w yipkhkmy hyn dtymyiqy.

-wk qy qyicl hagrl kiqym hy kcltk xbgrkm vygym, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-,
uby ytym xbw ctkihy rkfnkhlt, w uby, kbiuby hy aicyial flql, xbgrkm vygym
hymdbiqkm hy kcbhl. xkm, dktk uby vykm gbái iygal ytym qú w gbái hamgtyql
mlw wl, ubaytl uby xy lwkm bi ftyvy gbyiql. «rkm hy mkfyt uby bik vabhk
rytxlmk, xlek, nafty w tagk, w, mlfty qlhl, hymyipkhkhk, my yikxltó hy bi
xlel xlqanói, tlnnael w hy fbyi qlxl. kngkieónl k mkfyt mb xkwlt, w bi hík
haol k nk fbyik vabhk, dlt vík hy ptkqytikn tydtyryimaói: ''xktkvannkhl
ymqlw, myñltk, w il mai xbgrk gkbmk, hy uby bik xboyt qki dtaigadkn, qki
rytxlmk w qki tagk glxl vbymqtk xytgyh, my rkwk yikxltkhl hy bi rlxfty qki
mlye, qki fkol w qki ahalqk glxl pbnkil, rkfayihl yi ymqk gkmk qkiqlm
xkymqtlm, qkiqlm dtymyiqkhlm w qkiqlm qyónlclm, yi ubayi vbymqtk xytgyh
dbhaytk ymglcyt glxl yiqty dytkm, w hygat: "Émqy ubaytl, kubémqy il
ubaytl"''. xkm ynnk ny tymdlihaó, gli xbgrl hlikaty w hymyivlnqbtk:
''vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, ymqá xbw yickñkhl, w dayimk xbw k nl kiqacbl
ma dayimk uby wl ry ymglcahl xkn yi pbnkil, dlt ahalqk uby ny dktygy, dbym,
dktk nl uby wl ny ubaytl, qkiqk panlmlpík mkfy, w xám, uby ktamqóqynym''».
kmí uby, mkigrl, dlt nl uby wl ubaytl k hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, qkiql vkny
glxl nk xám knqk dtaigymk hy nk qayttk. mí, uby il qlhlm nlm dlyqkm uby
knkfki hkxkm, hyfkol hy bi ilxfty uby ynnlm k mb knfyhtíl nym dliyi, ym
vythkh uby nkm qayiyi. ¿dayimkm qú uby nkm kxktanym, nkm panam, nkm
manvakm, nkm hakikm, nkm cknkqykm, nkm knahkm w lqtkm qknym hy uby nlm
naftlm, nlm tlxkigym, nkm qayihkm hy nlm fktfytlm, nlm qykqtlm hy nkm
glxyhakm, ymqái nnyilm, pbytli vythkhytkxyiqy hkxkm hy gktiy w rbyml, w hy
kubénnlm uby nkm gynyftki w gynyftktli? il, dlt gaytql, mail uby nkm xám my
nkm paicyi, dlt hkt mbfoyql k mbm vytmlm w dltuby nlm qyicki dlt yikxltkhlm
w dlt rlxftym uby qayiyi vknlt dktk mytnl. w kmí, fámqkxy k xí dyimkt w
gtyyt uby nk fbyik hy knhliek nltyiel ym rytxlmk w rliymqk; w yi nl hyn
naikoy axdltqk dlgl, uby il rki hy at k rkgyt nk aipltxkgaói hén dktk hktny
kncúi ráfaql, w wl xy rkcl gbyiqk uby ym nk xám knqk dtaigymk hyn xbihl.
dltuby rkm hy mkfyt, mkigrl, ma il nl mkfym, uby hlm glmkm mlnkm aigaqki k
kxkt xám uby lqtkm, uby mli nk xbgrk rytxlmbtk w nk fbyik pkxk; w ymqkm hlm
glmkm my rknnki glimbxkhkxyiqy yi hbngaiyk, dltuby yi myt rytxlmk iaicbik
ny acbknk, w yi nk fbyik pkxk, dlgkm ny nnycki. w dktk glignbat gli qlhl,
wl axkcail uby qlhl nl uby hacl ym kmí, mai uby mlfty ia pknqy ikhk; w
díiqlnk yi xa axkcaikgaói glxl nk hymyl, kmí yi nk fynnyek glxl yi nk
dtaigadknahkh, w ia nk nnyck ynyik, ia nk kngkiek nbgtygak, ia lqtk kncbik
hy nkm pkxlmkm xboytym hy nkm yhkhym dtyqétaqkm, ctayck, fátfktk l nkqaik.
w hack gkhk bil nl uby ubamayty; uby ma dlt ymql pbyty tydtyryihahl hy nlm
aciltkiqym, il myté gkmqackhl hy nlm tacbtlmlm.

-hacl uby yi qlhl qayiy vbymqtk xytgyh tkeói -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w uby wl
mlw bi kmil. xkm il mé wl dktk ubé ilxftl kmil yi xa flgk, dbym il my rk hy
xyiqkt nk mlck yi gkmk hyn krltgkhl. dytl vyick nk gktqk, w k halm, uby xy
xbhl.

mkgó yn naftl hy xyxltak hli ubaolqy, w, kdktqáihlmy k bik dktqy, gli xbgrl
mlmaycl glxyieó k ymgtafat nk gktqk; w, yi kgkfáihlnk, nnkxó k mkigrl w ny
haol uby my nk ubytík nyyt, dltuby nk qlxkmy hy xyxltak, ma kgkml my ny
dythaymy dlt yn gkxail, dltuby hy mb hymhagrk qlhl my dlhík qyxyt. k nl
gbkn tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-ymgtífknk vbymqtk xytgyh hlm l qtym vygym krí yi yn naftl w héxyny, uby wl
ny nnyvkté fayi cbkthkhl, dltuby dyimkt uby wl nk ry hy qlxkt yi nk xyxltak
ym hamdktkqy: uby nk qyicl qki xknk uby xbgrkm vygym my xy lnvahk góxl xy
nnkxl. dytl, gli qlhl yml, híckxynk vbymqtk xytgyh, uby xy rlnckté xbgrl hy
línnk, uby hyfy hy at glxl hy xlnhy.

-ymgbgrk, uby kmí hagy -haol hli ubaolqy:

gktqk hy hli ubaolqy k hbngaiyk hyn qlflml

mlfytkik w knqk myñltk:

yn pytahl hy dbiqk hy kbmyigak w yn nnkckhl hy nkm qynkm hyn gltkeói,
hbngímaxk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, qy yivík nk mknbh uby én il qayiy. ma qb
pytxlmbtk xy hymdtygak, ma qb vknlt il ym yi xa dtl, ma qbm hymhyiym mli yi
xa kpaigkxayiql, xkcbyt uby wl myk kmke hy mbptahl, xkn dlhté mlmqyiytxy yi
ymqk gbaqk, uby, khyxám hy myt pbytqy, ym xbw hbtkhytk. xa fbyi ymgbhytl
mkigrl qy hktá yiqytk tynkgaói, ¡lr fynnk aictkqk, kxkhk yiyxack xík!, hyn
xlhl uby dlt qb gkbmk ubyhl. ma cbmqktym hy kglttytxy, qbwl mlw; w ma il,
rke nl uby qy vaiayty yi cbmql; uby, gli kgkfkt xa vahk, rkfté mkqampygrl k
qb gtbynhkh w k xa hymyl.

qbwl rkmqk nk xbytqy,

yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk.

-dlt vahk hy xa dkhty -haol mkigrl yi lwyihl nk gktqk-, uby ym nk xám knqk
glmk uby okxám ry líhl. ¡dymak k xí, w góxl uby ny hagy vbymqtk xytgyh krí
qlhl gbkiql ubayty, w ubé fayi uby yigkok yi nk patxk yn gkfknnytl hy nk
qtamqy pacbtk! hacl hy vythkh uby ym vbymqtk xytgyh yn xymxl hakfnl, w uby
il rkwk glmk uby il mydk.

-qlhl ym xyiymqyt -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- dktk yn lpagal uby qtkwl.
-yk, dbym -haol mkigrl-, dlick vbymqtk xytgyh yi ymlqtk vbynqk nk géhbnk hy
nlm qtym dlnnailm w pítxynk gli xbgrk gnktahkh, dltuby nk glilegki yi
vaéihlnk.

-uby xy dnkgy -haol hli ubaolqy.

w, rkfaéihlnk ymgtaql,my nk nywó; uby hygík kimí:

xkihktá vbymqtk xytgyh, dlt ymqk dtaxytk hy dlnnailm, myñltk mlftaik, hkt k
mkigrl dkiek, xa ymgbhytl, qtym hy nlm gaigl uby hyoé yi gkmk w ymqái k
gktcl hy vbymqtk xytgyh. nlm gbknym qtym dlnnailm my nlm xkihl naftkt w
dkckt dlt lqtlm qkiqlm kubí tygyfahlm hy gliqkhl, uby glimqk, w gli mb
gktqk hy dkcl mytái fayi hkhlm. pygrk yi nkm yiqtkñkm hy mayttk xltyik, k
vyaiqy w hlm hy kclmql hymqy dtymyiqy kñl.

-fbyik ymqá -haol mkigrl-; pítxynk vbymqtk xytgyh.

-il ym xyiymqyt patxktnk -haol hli ubaolqy-, mail mlnkxyiqy dliyt xa
túftagk, uby ym nl xymxl uby patxk, w dktk qtym kmilm, w kbi dktk
qtygayiqlm, pbytk fkmqkiqy.

-wl xy glipíl hy vbymqtk xytgyh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. héoyxy, até k yimannkt
k tlgaikiqy, w kdktéoymy vbymqtk xytgyh k ygrktxy mb fyihagaói, uby nbycl
dayiml dktqatxy, mai vyt nkm mkihygym uby vbymqtk xytgyh rk hy rkgyt, uby
wl haté uby ny va rkgyt qkiqkm uby il ubaytk xám.

-dlt nl xyilm ubaytl, mkigrl, w dltuby ym xyiymqyt kimí, ubaytl, hacl, uby
xy vykm yi gbytlm, w rkgyt bik l hlm hlgyikm hy nlgbtkm, uby nkm rkté yi
xyilm hy xyhak rltk, dltuby, rkfaéihlnkm qú vamql dlt qbm lolm, dbyhkm
obtkt k qb mknvl yi nkm hyxám uby ubamaytym kñkhat; w kmycútlqy uby il
hatám qú qkiqkm gbkiqkm wl dayiml rkgyt.

-dlt kxlt hy halm, myñlt xíl, uby il vyk wl yi gbytlm k vbymqtk xytgyh, uby
xy hktá xbgrk námqaxk w il dlhté hyokt hy nnltkt; w qyicl qkn nk gkfyek,
hyn nnkiql uby kilgry ragy dlt yn tbgal, uby il ymqlw dktk xyqytxy yi
ibyvlm nnltlm; w ma ym uby vbymqtk xytgyh cbmqk hy uby wl vyk kncbikm
nlgbtkm, rácknkm vymqahl, ftyvym w nkm uby ny vaiaytyi xám k gbyiql. gbkiql
xám, uby dktk xí il ytk xyiymqyt ikhk hyml, w, glxl wk qyicl hagrl, pbytk
krlttkt yn gkxail hy xa vbynqk, uby rk hy myt gli nkm ibyvkm uby vbymqtk
xytgyh hymyk w xytygy. w ma il, kdktéoymy nk myñltk hbngaiyk; uby ma il
tymdlihy glxl ym tkeói, vlql rkcl mlnyiy k ubayi dbyhl uby ny qyicl hy
mkgkt nk fbyik tymdbymqk hyn ymqóxkcl k glgym w k flpyqliym. dltuby, ¿hóihy
my rk hy mbptat uby bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy, qki pkxlml glxl vbymqtk xytgyh,
my vbynvk nlgl, mai ubé ia dktk ubé, dlt bik...? il xy nl rkck hygat nk
myñltk, dltuby dlt halm uby hymdlqtauby w nl ygry qlhl k hlgy, kbiuby ibigk
my vyihk. ¡fliagl mlw wl dktk yml! ¡xkn xy glilgy! ¡dbym, k py uby ma xy
glilgaymy, uby xy kwbikmy!

-k py, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby, k nl uby dktygy, uby il ymqám qú xám
gbythl uby wl.

-il ymqlw qki nlgl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, xkm ymqlw xám glnétagl. dytl,
hyokihl ymql kdktqy, ¿ubé ym nl uby rk hy glxyt vbymqtk xytgyh yi qkiql uby
wl vbynvl? ¿rk hy mknat kn gkxail, glxl gkthyial, k ubaqátmynl k nlm
dkmqltym?

-il qy hé dyik ymy gbahkhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby, kbiuby qbvaytk,
il glxaytk lqtk glmk uby nkm wytfkm w ptbqlm uby ymqy dtkhl w ymqlm átflnym
xy haytyi, uby nk paiyek hy xa iyclgal ymqá yi il glxyt w yi rkgyt lqtkm
kmdytyekm yubavknyiqym.

-k halm, dbym. dytl, ¿mkfy vbymqtk xytgyh ubé qyxl? uby il qyicl hy kgytqkt
k vlnvyt k ymqy nbckt hlihy kcltk ny hyol, mycúi ymqá hy ymglihahl.
-qlxk fayi nkm myñkm, uby wl dtlgbtkté il kdktqktxy hymqlm gliqltilm -haol
hli ubaolqy-, w kbi qyihté gbahkhl hy mbfatxy dlt ymqlm xám knqlm tamglm,
dlt vyt ma qy hymgbftl gbkihl vbynvkm. gbkiql xám, uby nl xám kgytqkhl
mytá, dktk uby il xy wyttym w qy daythkm, uby gltqym kncbikm tyqkxkm hy nkm
xbgrkm uby dlt kubí rkw w nkm vkwkm dliayihl hy qtygrl k qtygrl, rkmqk
mknat k nl tkml, nkm gbknym qy mytvatái hy xloliym w myñknym dktk uby xy
rknnym gbkihl vbynvkm, k axaqkgaói hyn ranl hyn nkfytaiql hy qymyl.
-kmí nl rkté -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek.

w, gltqkihl kncbilm, dahaó nk fyihagaói k mb myñlt, w, il mai xbgrkm
náctaxkm hy yiqtkxflm, my hymdahaó hén. w, mbfayihl mlfty tlgaikiqy, k
ubayi hli ubaolqy yiglxyihó xbgrl, w uby xatkmy dlt én glxl dlt mb dtldtak
dytmlik, my dbml yi gkxail hyn nnkil, ymdktgayihl hy qtygrl k qtygrl nlm
tkxlm hy nk tyqkxk, glxl mb kxl my nl rkfík kglimyokhl. w kmí, my pby,
kbiuby qlhkvík ny axdltqbikfk hli ubaolqy uby ny vaymy maubaytk rkgyt hlm
nlgbtkm. xkm il rbfl kihkhl gayi dkmlm, gbkihl vlnvaó w haol:

-hacl, myñlt, uby vbymqtk xytgyh rk hagrl xbw fayi: uby, dktk uby dbyhk
obtkt mai gktcl hy gligayigak uby ny ry vamql rkgyt nlgbtkm, mytá fayi uby
vyk maubaytk bik, kbiuby fayi ctkihy nk ry vamql yi nk ubyhkhk hy vbymqtk
xytgyh.

-¿il qy nl hygík wl? -haol hli ubaolqy-. ymdétkqy, mkigrl, uby yi bi gtyhl
nkm rkté.

w, hymibháihlmy gli qlhk dtaymk nkm gkneliym, ubyhó yi gktiym w yi dkñknym,
w nbycl, mai xám ia xám, hal hlm ekdkqyqkm yi yn katy w hlm qbxfkm, nk
gkfyek kfkol w nlm daym yi knql, hymgbftayihl glmkm uby, dlt il vytnkm lqtk
vye, vlnvaó mkigrl nk tayihk k tlgaikiqy w my hal dlt gliqyiql w mkqampygrl
hy uby dlhík obtkt uby mb kxl ubyhkfk nlgl. w kmí, ny hyoktyxlm at mb
gkxail, rkmqk nk vbynqk, uby pby ftyvy.





gkdíqbnl zzva. hlihy my dtlmacbyi nkm paiyekm uby hy yikxltkhl rael hli
ubaolqy yi mayttk xltyik


w, vlnvayihl k gliqkt nl uby rael yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk hymdbém uby my val
mlnl, hagy nk ramqltak uby, kmí glxl hli ubaolqy kgkfó hy hkt nkm qbxfkm l
vbynqkm, hy xyhal kfkol hymibhl w hy xyhal kttafk vymqahl, w uby val uby
mkigrl my rkfík ahl mai ubytyt kcbkthkt k vyt xám mkihygym, my mbfaó mlfty
bik dbiqk hy bik knqk dyñk w knní qltió k dyimkt nl uby lqtkm xbgrkm vygym
rkfík dyimkhl, mai rkfytmy okxám tymbynql yi ynnl. w ytk uby gbán mytík
xyolt w ny ymqktík xám k gbyiql: axaqkt k tlnhái yi nkm nlgbtkm hymkpltkhkm
uby rael, l kxkhím yi nkm xknyigóiagkm. w, rkfnkihl yiqty mí xymxl, hygík:
-ma tlnhái pby qki fbyi gkfknnytl w qki vknayiqy glxl qlhlm hagyi, ¿ubé
xktkvannk?, dbym, kn pai, ytk yigkiqkhl w il ny dlhík xkqkt ikhay ma il ytk
xyqaéihlny bi knpanyt hy k fnkigk dlt nk dnkiqk hyn day, w én qtkík mayxdty
nlm ekdkqlm gli mayqy mbynkm hy rayttl. kbiuby il ny vknaytli qtyqkm gliqtk
fytikthl hyn gktdal, uby my nkm yiqyihaó w ny krlcó yiqty nlm ftkelm, yi
tligymvknnym. dytl, hyokihl yi én nl hy nk vknyiqík k bik dktqy, vyickxlm k
nl hy dythyt yn obagal, uby ym gaytql uby ny dythaó, dlt nkm myñknym uby
rknnó yi nk pliqkik w dlt nkm ibyvkm uby ny hal yn dkmqlt hy uby kicénagk
rkfík hltxahl xám hy hlm maymqkm gli xyhltl, bi xltannl hy gkfynnlm
yitaekhlm w dkoy hy kctkxkiqy; w ma én yiqyihaó uby ymql ytk vythkh w uby
mb hkxk ny rkfík glxyqahl hymkcbamkhl, il rael xbgrl yi vlnvytmy nlgl. dytl
wl, ¿góxl dbyhl axaqknny yi nkm nlgbtkm, ma il ny axaql yi nk lgkmaói
hynnkm? dltuby xa hbngaiyk hyn qlflml lmkté wl obtkt uby il rk vamql yi
qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk xltl kncbil, kimí glxl én ym, yi mb xamxl qtkoy,
w uby my ymqá rlw glxl nk xkhty uby nk dktaó; w rktíkny kctkval xkiapaymql
ma, axkcaikihl lqtk glmk hynnk, xy vlnvaymy nlgl hy kubyn céiytl hy nlgbtk
hy tlnhái yn pbtalml. dlt lqtk dktqy, vyl uby kxkhím hy ckbnk, mai dythyt
yn obagal w mai rkgyt nlgbtkm, kngkieó qkiqk pkxk hy yikxltkhl glxl yn uby
xám; dltuby nl uby rael, mycúi mb ramqltak, il pby xám hy uby, dlt vytmy
hymhyñkhl hy mb myñltk ltakik, uby ny rkfík xkihkhl uby il dktygaymy kiqy
mb dtymyigak rkmqk uby pbymy mb vlnbiqkh, hy uby my tyqató k nk dyñk dlfty
yi glxdkñík hy bi ytxaqkñl, w knní my rktqó hy nnltkt w hy yiglxyihktmy k
halm, rkmqk uby yn gaynl ny kglttaó, yi xyhal hy mb xkwlt gbaqk w
iygymahkh. w ma ymql ym vythkh, glxl nl ym, ¿dktk ubé ubaytl wl qlxkt
qtkfkol kcltk hy hymibhktxy hyn qlhl, ia hkt dymkhbxfty k ymqlm átflnym,
uby il xy rki rygrl xkn kncbil? ia qyicl dktk ubé yiqbtfakt yn kcbk gnktk
hymqlm kttlwlm, nlm gbknym xy rki hy hkt hy fyfyt gbkihl qyick ckik. vavk
nk xyxltak hy kxkhím, w myk axaqkhl hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk yi qlhl nl
uby dbhayty; hyn gbkn my hatá nl uby hyn lqtl my haol: uby ma il kgkfó
ctkihym glmkm, xbtaó dlt kglxyqynnkm; w ma wl il mlw hymygrkhl ia hymhyñkhl
hy hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, fámqkxy, glxl wk ry hagrl, ymqkt kbmyiqy hynnk. yk,
dbym, xkilm k nk lftk: vyiah k xa xyxltak, glmkm hy kxkhím, w yimyñkhxy dlt
hóihy qyicl hy glxyiekt k axaqktlm. xkm wk mé uby nl xám uby én rael pby
tyekt w yiglxyihktmy k halm; dytl, ¿ubé rkté hy tlmktal, uby il ny qyicl?
yi ymql ny vail kn dyimkxayiql góxl ny rktík, w pby uby tkmcó bik ctki qatk
hy nkm pknhkm hy nk gkxamk, uby kihkfki glnckihl, w halny ligy ñbhlm, yn
bil xám clthl uby nlm hyxám, w ymql ny matvaó hy tlmktal yn qayxdl uby knní
ymqbvl, hlihy tyeó bi xannói hy kvyxktíkm. w nl uby ny pkqackfk xbgrl ytk
il rknnkt dlt knní lqtl ytxaqkñl uby ny glipymkmy w gli ubayi glimlnktmy. w
kmí, my yiqtyqyiík dkmyáihlmy dlt yn dtkhygannl, ymgtafayihl w ctkfkihl dlt
nkm gltqyekm hy nlm átflnym w dlt nk xyibhk ktyik xbgrlm vytmlm, qlhlm
kglxlhkhlm k mb qtamqyek, w kncbilm yi knkfkiek hy hbngaiyk. xkm nlm uby my
dbhaytli rknnkt yiqytlm w uby my dbhaymyi nyyt, hymdbém uby k én knní ny
rknnktli, il pbytli xám uby ymqlm uby kubí my macbyi:

  Átflnym, wytfkm w dnkiqkm
  uby yi kubymqy maqal ymqáam,
  qki knqlm, vythym w qkiqkm,
  ma hy xa xkn il lm rlncáam,
  ymgbgrkh xam ubyokm mkiqkm.
  xa hlnlt il lm knfltlqy,
  kbiuby xám qyttafny myk,
  dbym, dlt dkcktlm ymglqy,
  kubí nnltó hli ubaolqy
  kbmyigakm hy hbngaiyk
  hyn qlflml.

  ym kubí yn nbckt khlihy
  yn kxkhlt xám nykn
  hy mb myñltk my ymglihy,
  w rk vyiahl k qkiql xkn
  mai mkfyt góxl l dlt hóihy.
  qtáyny kxlt kn ymqtaglqy,
  uby ym hy xbw xknk tknyk;
  w kmí, rkmqk ryigrat bi dadlqy,
  kubí nnltó hli ubaolqy
  kbmyigakm hy hbngaiyk
  hyn qlflml.

  fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm
  dlt yiqty nkm hbtkm dyñkm,
  xknhagayihl yiqtkñkm hbtkm,
  uby yiqty tamglm w yiqty ftyñkm
  rknnk yn qtamqy hymvyiqbtkm,
  rataóny kxlt gli mb kelqy,
  il gli mb fnkihk glttyk;
  w, yi qlgáihlny yn glclqy,
  kubí nnltó hli ubaolqy
  kbmyigakm hy hbngaiyk
  hyn qlflml.

il gkbmó dlgk tamk yi nlm uby rknnktli nlm vytmlm typytahlm yn kñkhahbtk
hyn qlflml kn ilxfty hy hbngaiyk, dltuby axkcaiktli uby hyfaó hy axkcaikt
hli ubaolqy uby ma, yi ilxftkihl k hbngaiyk, il hygík qkxfaéi hyn qlflml,
il my dlhtík yiqyihyt nk gldnk; w kmí pby nk vythkh, glxl én hymdbém
glipymó. lqtlm xbgrlm ymgtafaó, dytl, glxl my rk hagrl, il my dbhaytli
mkgkt yi naxdal, ia yiqytlm, xám hymqkm qtym gldnkm. yi ymql, w yi mbmdatkt
w yi nnkxkt k nlm pkbilm w manvkilm hy kubynnlm flmubym, k nkm iaipkm hy
nlm tílm, k nk hlnltlmk w rúxahk ygl, uby ny tymdlihaymy, glimlnkmyi w
ymgbgrkmyi, my yiqtyqyiík, w yi fbmgkt kncbikm wytfkm gli uby mbmqyiqktmy
yi qkiql uby mkigrl vlnvík; uby, ma glxl qkthó qtym híkm, qkthktk qtym
myxkikm, yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk ubyhktk qki hympacbtkhl uby il ny
glilgaytk nk xkhty uby nl dktaó.

w mytá fayi hyoknny, yivbynql yiqty mbm mbmdatlm w vytmlm, dlt gliqkt nl
uby ny kvail k mkigrl dkiek yi mb xkihkhytík. w pby uby, yi mknayihl kn
gkxail tykn, my dbml yi fbmgk hyn qlflml, w lqtl hík nnycó k nk vyiqk hlihy
ny rkfík mbgyhahl nk hymctkgak hy nk xkiqk; w il nk rbfl fayi vamql, gbkihl
ny dktygaó uby lqtk vye kihkfk yi nlm katym, w il ubaml yiqtkt hyiqtl,
kbiuby nnycó k rltk uby nl dbhaytk w hyfaytk rkgyt, dlt myt nk hyn glxyt w
nnyvkt yi hymyl hy cbmqkt kncl gknayiqy; uby rkfík ctkihym híkm uby qlhl
ytk pakxfty.

ymqk iygymahkh ny plteó k uby nnyckmy obiql k nk vyiqk, qlhkvík hbhlml ma
yiqtktík l il. w, ymqkihl yi ymql, mknaytli hy nk vyiqk hlm dytmlikm uby
nbycl ny glilgaytli; w haol yn bil kn lqtl:

-híckxy, myñlt nagyigakhl, kubyn hyn gkfknnl, ¿il ym mkigrl dkiek, yn uby
haol yn kxk hy ibymqtl kvyiqbtytl uby rkfík mknahl gli mb myñlt dlt
ymgbhytl?

-mí ym -haol yn nagyigakhl-; w kubén ym yn gkfknnl hy ibymqtl hli ubaolqy.
w glilgaétliny qki fayi glxl kubynnlm uby ytki yn gbtk w yn fktfytl hy mb
xamxl nbckt, w nlm uby ragaytli yn ymgtbqaial w kgql cyiytkn hy nlm naftlm.
nlm gbknym, kmí glxl kgkfktli hy glilgyt k mkigrl dkiek w k tlgaikiqy,
hymylmlm hy mkfyt hy hli ubaolqy, my pbytli k én; w yn gbtk ny nnkxó dlt mb
ilxfty, hagaéihlny:

-kxacl mkigrl dkiek, ¿khóihy ubyhk vbymqtl kxl?

glilgaónlm nbycl mkigrl dkiek, w hyqytxaió hy yigbftat yn nbckt w nk mbytqy
hlihy w glxl mb kxl ubyhkfk; w kmí, nym tymdlihaó uby mb kxl ubyhkfk
lgbdkhl yi gaytqk dktqy w yi gaytqk glmk uby ny ytk hy xbgrk axdltqkigak,
nk gbkn én il dlhík hymgbftat, dlt nlm lolm uby yi nk gktk qyiík.

-il, il -haol yn fktfytl-, mkigrl dkiek; ma vlm il ilm hygím hóihy ubyhk,
axkcaiktyxlm, glxl wk axkcaikxlm, uby vlm ny rkféam xbytql w tlfkhl, dbym
vyiím yigaxk hy mb gkfknnl. yi vythkh uby ilm rkféam hy hkt yn hbyñl hyn
tlgíi, l mlfty yml, xltyik.

-il rkw dktk ubé glixacl kxyikekm, uby wl il mlw rlxfty uby tlfl ia xkql k
ikhay: k gkhk bil xkqy mb vyiqbtk, l halm, uby ny rael. xa kxl ubyhk
rkgayihl dyiaqyigak yi nk xaqkh hymqk xliqkñk, xbw k mb mkflt.

w nbycl, hy glttahk w mai dktkt, nym gliqó hy nk mbytqy uby ubyhkfk, nkm
kvyiqbtkm uby ny rkfíki mbgyhahl w góxl nnyvkfk nk gktqk k nk myñltk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby ytk nk raok hy nltyiel gltgrbynl, hy ubayi ymqkfk
yikxltkhl rkmqk nlm ríckhlm.

ubyhktli khxatkhlm nlm hlm hy nl uby mkigrl dkiek nym gliqkfk; w, kbiuby wk
mkfíki nk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy w yn céiytl hynnk, mayxdty uby nk líki my
khxatkfki hy ibyvl. dahaétliny k mkigrl dkiek uby nym yimyñkmy nk gktqk uby
nnyvkfk k nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml. Én haol uby afk ymgtaqk yi bi
naftl hy xyxltak w uby ytk lthyi hy mb myñlt uby nk ragaymy qtkmnkhkt yi
dkdyn yi yn dtaxyt nbckt uby nnyckmy; k nl gbkn haol yn gbtk uby my nk
xlmqtkmy, uby én nk qtkmnkhktík hy xbw fbyik nyqtk. xyqaó nk xkil yi yn
myil mkigrl dkiek, fbmgkihl yn naftannl, dytl il ny rknnó, ia ny dlhík
rknnkt ma ny fbmgktk rkmqk kcltk, dltuby my rkfík ubyhkhl hli ubaolqy gli
én w il my ny rkfík hkhl, ia k én my ny kglthó hy dyhítmyny.

gbkihl mkigrl val uby il rknnkfk yn naftl, pbémyny dktkihl xltqkn yn
tlmqtl; w, qltiáihlmy k qyiqkt qlhl yn gbytdl xbw kdtaymk, qltió k ygrkt hy
vyt uby il ny rknnkfk; w, mai xám ia xám, my ygró yiqtkxflm dbñlm k nkm
fktfkm w my kttkigó nk xaqkh hy ynnkm, w nbycl, kdtaymk w mai gymkt, my hal
xyhak hlgyik hy dbñkhkm yi yn tlmqtl w yi nkm iktagym, uby my nkm fkñó
qlhkm yi mkicty. vamql nl gbkn dlt yn gbtk w yn fktfytl, ny haoytli uby ubé
ny rkfík mbgyhahl, uby qki xkn my dktkfk.

-¿ubé xy rk hy mbgyhyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mail yn rkfyt dythahl hy bik
xkil k lqtk, yi bi ymqkiqy, qtym dlnnailm, uby gkhk bil ytk glxl bi
gkmqannl?

-¿góxl ym yml? -tydnagó yn fktfytl.

-ry dythahl yn naftl hy xyxltak -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, hlihy vyiík gktqk dktk
hbngaiyk w bik géhbnk patxkhk hy mb myñlt, dlt nk gbkn xkihkfk uby mb
mlftaik xy haymy qtym dlnnailm, hy gbkqtl l gaigl uby ymqkfki yi gkmk.
w, gli ymql, nym gliqó nk déthahk hyn tbgal. glimlnóny yn gbtk, w híolny
uby, yi rknnkihl k mb myñlt, én ny rktík tyvknahkt nk xkihk w uby qltikmy k
rkgyt nk naftkiek yi dkdyn, glxl ytk bml w glmqbxfty, dltuby nkm uby my
rkgíki yi naftlm hy xyxltak okxám my kgyqkfki ia gbxdníki.

gli ymql my glimlnó mkigrl, w haol uby, glxl kubynnl pbymy kimí, uby il ny
hkfk xbgrk dyik nk déthahk hy nk gktqk hy hbngaiyk, dltuby én nk mkfík gkma
hy xyxltak, hy nk gbkn my dlhtík qtkmnkhkt hlihy w gbkihl ubamaymyi.
-hyganhl, mkigrl, dbym -haol yn fktfytl-, uby hymdbém nk qtkmnkhktyxlm.
dktómy mkigrl dkiek k tkmgkt nk gkfyek dktk qtkyt k nk xyxltak nk gktqk, w
wk my dliík mlfty bi day, w wk mlfty lqtl; bikm vygym xatkfk kn mbynl,
lqtkm kn gaynl; w, kn gkfl hy rkfytmy tlíhl nk xaqkh hy nk wyxk hy bi hyhl,
qyiayihl mbmdyimlm k nlm uby ymdytkfki uby wk nk haoymy, haol kn gkfl hy
ctkihímaxl tkql:

-dlt halm, myñlt nagyigakhl, uby nlm hakfnlm nnyvyi nk glmk uby hy nk gktqk
my xy kgbythk; kbiuby yi yn dtaigadal hygík: «knqk w mlfkokhk myñltk».
-il hatík -haol yn fktfytl- mlfkokhk, mail mlftyrbxkik l mlfytkik myñltk.
-kmí ym -haol mkigrl-. nbycl, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, dtlmycbík..., ma xkn il
xy kgbythl: «yn nnycl w pknql hy mbyñl, w yn pytahl fymk k vbymqtk xytgyh
nkm xkilm, aictkqk w xbw hymglilgahk rytxlmk», w il mé ubé hygík hy mknbh w
hy yipytxyhkh uby ny yivakfk, w dlt kubí afk ymgbttayihl, rkmqk uby kgkfkfk
yi «vbymqtl rkmqk nk xbytqy, yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk».

il dlgl cbmqktli nlm hlm hy vyt nk fbyik xyxltak hy mkigrl dkiek, w
knkfátlimynk xbgrl, w ny dahaytli uby haoymy nk gktqk lqtkm hlm vygym, dktk
uby ynnlm, kimaxymxl, nk qlxkmyi hy xyxltak dktk qtkmnkhknnk k mb qayxdl.
qltiónk k hygat mkigrl lqtkm qtym vygym, w lqtkm qkiqkm vlnvaó k hygat
lqtlm qtym xan hamdktkqym. qtkm ymql, gliqó kmaxymxl nkm glmkm hy mb kxl,
dytl il rkfnó dknkftk kgytgk hyn xkiqykxayiql uby ny rkfík mbgyhahl yi
kubynnk vyiqk, yi nk gbkn tyrbmkfk yiqtkt. haol qkxfaéi glxl mb myñlt, yi
qtkwyihl uby ny qtboymy fbyi hymdkgrl hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, my
rkfík hy dliyt yi gkxail k dtlgbtkt góxl myt yxdytkhlt, l, dlt nl xyilm,
xliktgk; uby kmí nl qyiíki gligytqkhl yiqty nlm hlm, w ytk glmk xbw págan
vyiat k mytnl, mycúi ytk yn vknlt hy mb dytmlik w nk pbytek hy mb ftkel; w
uby, yi maéihlnl, ny rkfík hy gkmkt k én, dltuby wk mytík vabhl, uby il
dlhík myt xyilm, w ny rkfík hy hkt dlt xboyt k bik hligynnk hy nk
yxdytkqtae, rytyhytk hy bi tagl w ctkihy ymqkhl hy qayttk patxy, mai
íimbnlm ia íimbnkm, uby wk il nkm ubytík.

hygík ymql mkigrl gli qkiql tydlml, naxdaáihlmy hy gbkihl yi gbkihl nkm
iktagym, w gli qki dlgl obagal, uby nlm hlm my khxatktli hy ibyvl,
glimahytkihl gbái vyryxyiqy rkfík mahl nk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy, dbym rkfík
nnyvkhl qtkm mí yn obagal hy kubyn dlfty rlxfty. il ubamaytli gkimktmy yi
mkgktny hyn yttlt yi uby ymqkfk, dktygaéihlnym uby, dbym il ny hkñkfk ikhk
nk gligayigak, xyolt ytk hyoktny yi én, w k ynnlm nym mytík hy xám cbmql
lít mbm iygyhkhym. w kmí, ny haoytli uby tlckmy k halm dlt nk mknbh hy mb
myñlt, uby glmk gliqaicyiqy w xbw kcafny ytk vyiat, gli yn hamgbtml hyn
qayxdl, k myt yxdytkhlt, glxl én hygík, l, dlt nl xyilm, ktelfamdl, l lqtk
haciahkh yubavknyiqy. k nl gbkn tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-myñltym, ma nk pltqbik tlhykmy nkm glmkm hy xkiytk uby k xa kxl ny vaiaymy
yi vlnbiqkh hy il myt yxdytkhlt, mail hy myt ktelfamdl, ubyttík wl mkfyt
kcltk ubé mbynyi hkt nlm ktelfamdlm kihkiqym k mbm ymgbhytlm.
-mbényinym hkt -tymdlihaó yn gbtk- kncúi fyiypagal, maxdny l gbtkhl, l
kncbik mkgtamqkiík, uby nym vkny xbgrl hy tyiqk tyiqkhk, kxéi hyn day hy
knqkt, uby my mbyny ymqaxkt yi lqtl qkiql.

-dktk yml mytá xyiymqyt -tydnagó mkigrl- uby yn ymgbhytl il myk gkmkhl w
uby mydk kwbhkt k xamk, dlt nl xyilm; w ma ymql ym kmí, ¡hymhagrkhl hy wl,
uby mlw gkmkhl w il mé nk dtaxytk nyqtk hyn kfg! ¿ubé mytá hy xí ma k xa
kxl ny hk kiqlol hy myt ktelfamdl, w il yxdytkhlt, glxl ym bml w glmqbxfty
hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym?

-il qyicáam dyik, mkigrl kxacl -haol yn fktfytl-, uby kubí tlcktyxlm k
vbymqtl kxl w my nl kglimyoktyxlm, w kbi my nl dlihtyxlm yi gkml hy
gligayigak, uby myk yxdytkhlt w il ktelfamdl, dltuby ny mytá xám págan, k
gkbmk hy uby én ym xám vknayiqy uby ymqbhakiqy.

-kmí xy rk dktygahl k xí -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, kbiuby mé hygat uby dktk qlhl
qayiy rkfanahkh. nl uby wl dayiml rkgyt hy xa dktqy ym tlcktny k ibymqtl
myñlt uby ny ygry k kubynnkm dktqym hlihy én xám my matvk w khlihy k xí xám
xytgyhym xy rkck.

-vlm nl hygím glxl hamgtyql -haol yn gbtk- w nl rktéam glxl fbyi gtamqakil.
xkm nl uby krltk my rk hy rkgyt ym hkt lthyi glxl mkgkt k vbymqtl kxl hy
kubynnk aiúqan dyiaqyigak uby hygím uby ubyhk rkgayihl; w, dktk dyimkt yn
xlhl uby ryxlm hy qyiyt, w dktk glxyt, uby wk ym rltk, mytá fayi ilm
yiqtyxlm yi ymqk vyiqk.

mkigrl haol uby yiqtkmyi ynnlm, uby én ymdytktík knní pbytk w uby hymdbém
nym hatík nk gkbmk dlt uby il yiqtkfk ia ny glivyiík yiqtkt yi ynnk; xkm
uby nym tlckfk uby ny mkgkmyi knní kncl hy glxyt uby pbymy glmk gknayiqy,
w, kimaxamxl, gyfkhk dktk tlgaikiqy. ynnlm my yiqtktli w ny hyoktli, w, hy
knní k dlgl, yn fktfytl ny mkgó hy glxyt. hymdbém, rkfayihl fayi dyimkhl
yiqty nlm hlm yn xlhl uby qyihtíki dktk glimycbat nl uby hymykfki, vail yn
gbtk yi bi dyimkxayiql xbw kglxlhkhl kn cbmql hy hli ubaolqy w dktk nl uby
ynnlm ubytíki. w pby uby haol kn fktfytl uby nl uby rkfík dyimkhl ytk uby
én my vymqatík yi ráfaql hy hligynnk kihkiqy, w uby én dtlgbtkmy dliytmy nl
xyolt uby dbhaymy glxl ymgbhytl, w uby kmí atíki khlihy hli ubaolqy ymqkfk,
paicayihl myt ynnk bik hligynnk kpnacahk w xyiymqytlmk, w ny dyhatík bi
hli, yn gbkn én il dlhtík hyoátmyny hy lqltckt, glxl vknytlml gkfknnytl
kihkiqy. w uby yn hli uby ny dyimkfk dyhat ytk uby my vaiaymy gli ynnk
hlihy ynnk ny nnyvkmy, k hympkgynny bi kctkval uby bi xkn gkfknnytl ny
qyiík pygrl; w uby ny mbdnagkfk, kimaxymxl, uby il nk xkihkmy ubaqkt mb
kiqapke, ia nk hyxkihkmy glmk hy mb pkgayihk, pkmqk uby nk rbfaymy pygrl
hytygrl hy kubyn xkn gkfknnytl; w uby gtywymy, mai hbhk, uby hli ubaolqy
vyihtík yi qlhl gbkiql ny dahaymy dlt ymqy qétxail; w uby hymqk xkiytk ny
mkgktíki hy knní w ny nnyvktíki k mb nbckt, hlihy dtlgbtktíki vyt ma qyiík
kncúi tyxyhal mb ymqtkñk nlgbtk.





gkdíqbnl zzvaa. hy góxl mknaytli gli mb aiqyigaói yn gbtk w yn fktfytl, gli
lqtkm glmkm hacikm hy uby my gbyiqyi yi ymqk ctkihy ramqltak


il ny dktygaó xkn kn fktfytl nk aivyigaói hyn gbtk, mail qki fayi, uby
nbycl nk dbmaytli dlt lftk. dahaétliny k nk vyiqytk bik mkwk w bikm qlgkm,
hyoáihlny yi dtyihkm bik mlqkik ibyvk hyn gbtk. yn fktfytl rael bik ctki
fktfk hy bik glnk tbgak l tlok hy fbyw, hlihy yn vyiqytl qyiík glnckhl yn
dyaiy. dtycbiqónym nk vyiqytk uby dktk ubé ny dyhíki kubynnkm glmkm. yn
gbtk ny gliqó yi ftyvym tkeliym nk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy, w góxl glivyiík
kubyn hamptke dktk mkgktny hy nk xliqkñk, hlihy k nk mkeói ymqkfk. gkwytli
nbycl yn vyiqytl w nk vyiqytk yi uby yn nlgl ytk mb rbémdyh, yn hyn
fánmkxl, w yn kxl hyn xkiqykhl ymgbhytl, w gliqktli kn gbtk qlhl nl uby gli
én nym rkfík dkmkhl, mai gknnkt nl uby qkiql gknnkfk mkigrl. yi tymlnbgaói,
nk vyiqytk vamqaó kn gbtk hy xlhl uby il rkfík xám uby vyt: dúmlny bik mkwk
hy dkñl, nnyik hy pkokm hy qytgaldynl iyctl hy bi dknxl yi kigrl, qlhkm
kgbgrannkhkm, w bilm gltdañlm hy qytgaldynl vythy, cbktiygahlm gli bilm
tafyqym hy tkml fnkigl, uby my hyfaytli hy rkgyt, ynnlm w nk mkwk, yi
qayxdl hyn tyw jkxfk. il glimaiqaó yn gbtk uby ny qlgkmyi, mail dúmlmy yi
nk gkfyek bi fattyqannl hy nayiel glngrkhl uby nnyvkfk dktk hltxat hy
ilgry, w gañómy dlt nk ptyiqy bik nack hy qkpyqái iyctl, w gli lqtk nack
rael bi kiqapke, gli uby my gbftaó xbw fayi nkm fktfkm w yn tlmqtl;
yigkmubyqómy mb mlxftytl, uby ytk qki ctkihy uby ny dlhík mytvat hy
ubaqkmln, w, gbftaéihlmy mb ryttytbynl, mbfaó yi mb xbnk k xboytayckm, w yn
fktfytl yi nk mbwk, gli mb fktfk uby ny nnyckfk k nk gaiqbtk, yiqty tlok w
fnkigk, glxl kubynnk uby, glxl my rk hagrl, ytk rygrk hy nk glnk hy bi fbyw
fkttlml.

hymdahaétlimy hy qlhlm, w hy nk fbyik hy xktaqltiym, uby dtlxyqaó hy tyekt
bi tlmktal, kbiuby dygkhltk, dltuby halm nym haymy fbyi mbgyml yi qki kthbl
w qki gtamqakil iyclgal glxl ytk yn uby rkfíki yxdtyihahl.

xkm, kdyikm rbfl mknahl hy nk vyiqk, gbkihl ny vail kn gbtk bi dyimkxayiql:
uby rkgík xkn yi rkfytmy dbymql hy kubynnk xkiytk, dlt myt glmk aihygyiqy
uby bi mkgythlqy my dbmaymy kmí, kbiuby ny pbymy xbgrl yi ynnl; w,
hagaéihlmynl kn fktfytl, ny tlcó uby qtlgkmyi qtkoym, dbym ytk xám obmql
uby én pbymy nk hligynnk xyiymqytlmk, w uby én rktík yn ymgbhytl, w uby kmí
my dtlpkikfk xyilm mb haciahkh; w uby ma il nl ubytík rkgyt, hyqytxaikfk hy
il dkmkt khynkiqy, kbiuby k hli ubaolqy my ny nnyvkmy yn hakfnl.

yi ymql, nnycó mkigrl, w hy vyt k nlm hlm yi kubyn qtkoy il dbhl qyiyt nk
tamk. yi ypyql, yn fktfytl vail yi qlhl kubynnl uby yn gbtk ubaml, w,
qtlgkihl nk aivyigaói, yn gbtk ny pby aipltxkihl yn xlhl uby rkfík hy qyiyt
w nkm dknkftkm uby rkfík hy hygat k hli ubaolqy dktk xlvytny w pltektny k
uby gli én my vaiaymy, w hyokmy nk ubytyigak hyn nbckt uby rkfík ymglcahl
dktk mb vkik dyiaqyigak. yn fktfytl tymdlihaó uby, mai uby my ny haymy
nagaói, én nl dlihtík fayi yi mb dbiql. il ubaml vymqatmy dlt yiqligym,
rkmqk uby ymqbvaymyi obiql hy hlihy hli ubaolqy ymqkfk; w kmí, hlfnó mbm
vymqahlm, w yn gbtk kglxlhó mb fktfk, w macbaytli mb gkxail, cbaáihlnlm
mkigrl dkiek; yn gbkn nym pby gliqkihl nl uby nym kgliqygaó gli yn nlgl uby
rknnktli yi nk mayttk, yigbftayihl, yxdytl, yn rknnkecl hy nk xknyqk w hy
gbkiql yi ynnk vyiík; uby, xkcbyt uby qliql, ytk bi dlgl glhagalml yn
xkigyfl.

lqtl hík nnycktli kn nbckt hlihy mkigrl rkfík hyokhl dbymqkm nkm myñknym hy
nkm tkxkm dktk kgytqkt yn nbckt hlihy rkfík hyokhl k mb myñlt; w, yi
tyglilgaéihlny, nym haol glxl kubénnk ytk nk yiqtkhk, w uby fayi my dlhíki
vymqat, ma ytk uby kubynnl rkgík kn gkml dktk nk nafytqkh hy mb myñlt;
dltuby ynnlm ny rkfíki hagrl kiqym uby yn at hy kubynnk mbytqy w vymqatmy
hy kubyn xlhl ytk qlhk nk axdltqkigak dktk mkgkt k mb kxl hy kubynnk xknk
vahk uby rkfík ymglcahl, w uby ny yigktckfki xbgrl uby il haoymy k mb kxl
ubayi ynnlm ytki, ia uby nlm glilgík; w uby ma ny dtycbiqkmy, glxl my nl
rkfík hy dtycbiqkt, ma hal nk gktqk k hbngaiyk, haoymy uby mí, w uby, dlt
il mkfyt nyyt, ny rkfík tymdlihahl hy dknkftk, hagaéihlny uby ny xkihkfk,
ml dyik hy nk mb hymctkgak, uby nbycl kn xlxyiql my vaiaymy k vyt gli ynnk,
uby ytk glmk uby ny axdltqkfk xbgrl; dltuby gli ymql w gli nl uby ynnlm
dyimkfki hygatny qyiíki dlt glmk gaytqk tyhbgatny k xyolt vahk, w rkgyt gli
én uby nbycl my dbmaymy yi gkxail dktk at k myt yxdytkhlt l xliktgk; uby yi
nl hy myt ktelfamdl il rkfík hy ubé qyxyt.

qlhl nl ymgbgró mkigrl, w nl qlxó xbw fayi yi nk xyxltak, w nym kctkhygaó
xbgrl nk aiqyigaói uby qyiíki hy kglimyokt k mb myñlt pbymy yxdytkhlt w il
ktelfamdl, dltuby én qyiík dktk mí uby, dktk rkgyt xytgyhym k mbm
ymgbhytlm, xám dlhíki nlm yxdytkhltym uby nlm ktelfamdlm kihkiqym. qkxfaéi
nym haol uby mytík fayi uby én pbymy hynkiqy k fbmgktny w hktny nk
tymdbymqk hy mb myñltk, uby wk mytík ynnk fkmqkiqy k mkgktny hy kubyn
nbckt, mai uby ynnlm my dbmaymyi yi qkiql qtkfkol. dktygaónym fayi nl uby
mkigrl dkiek hygík, w kmí, hyqytxaiktli hy kcbkthktny rkmqk uby vlnvaymy
gli nkm ibyvkm hyn rknnkecl hy mb kxl.

yiqtómy mkigrl dlt kubynnkm ubyftkhkm hy nk mayttk, hyokihl k nlm hlm yi
bik dlt hlihy glttík bi dyubyñl w xkiml kttlwl, k ubayi rkgíki mlxftk
kctkhkfny w ptymgk lqtkm dyñkm w kncbilm átflnym uby dlt knní ymqkfki. yn
gknlt, w yn hík uby knní nnycktli, ytk hy nlm hyn xym hy kclmql, uby dlt
kubynnkm dktqym mbyny myt yn kthlt xbw ctkihy; nk rltk, nkm qtym hy nk
qkthy: qlhl nl gbkn rkgík kn maqal xám kctkhkfny, w uby glivahkmy k uby yi
én ymdytkmyi nk vbynqk hy mkigrl, glxl nl ragaytli.

ymqkihl, dbym, nlm hlm knní, mlmyckhlm w k nk mlxftk, nnycó k mbm líhlm bik
vle uby, mai kglxdkñktnk mli hy kncúi lqtl aimqtbxyiql, hbngy w
tycknkhkxyiqy mlikfk, hy uby il dlgl my khxatktli, dlt dktygytnym uby kubén
il ytk nbckt hlihy dbhaymy rkfyt ubayi qki fayi gkiqkmy. dltuby, kbiuby
mbyny hygatmy uby dlt nkm mynvkm w gkxdlm my rknnki dkmqltym hy vlgym
ymqtyxkhkm, xám mli yigktygaxayiqlm hy dlyqkm uby vythkhym; w xám, gbkihl
khvatqaytli uby nl uby líki gkiqkt ytki vytmlm, il hy túmqaglm ckikhytlm,
mail hy hamgtyqlm gltqymkilm. w glipatxó ymqk vythkh rkfyt mahl nlm vytmlm
uby lwytli émqlm:

   ¿ubaéi xyilmgkfk xam fayiym?
   hymhyiym.
   w ¿ubaéi kbxyiqk xam hbynlm?
   nlm gynlm.
   w ¿ubaéi dtbyfk xa dkgayigak?
   kbmyigak.
   hy ymy xlhl, yi xa hlnyigak
   iaicúi tyxyhal my kngkiek,
   dbym xy xkqki nk ymdytkiek
   hymhyiym, gynlm w kbmyigak.
   ¿ubaéi xy gkbmk ymqy hlnlt?
   kxlt.
   w ¿ubaéi xa cnltak tydbcik?
   pltqbik.
   w ¿ubaéi glimayiqy yi xa hbynl?
   yn gaynl
   hy ymy xlhl, wl tygynl
   xltat hymqy xkn ymqtkñl,
   dbym my kbxyiqki yi xa hkñl,
   kxlt, pltqbik w yn gaynl.
   ¿ubaéi xyoltktá xa mbytqy?
   nk xbytqy.
   w yn fayi hy kxlt, ¿ubaéi ny kngkiek?
   xbhkiek.
   w mbm xknym, ¿ubaéi nlm gbtk?
   nlgbtk.
   hy ymy xlhl, il ym glthbtk
   ubytyt gbtkt nk dkmaói
   gbkihl nlm tyxyhalm mli
   xbytqy, xbhkiek w nlgbtk.

nk rltk, yn qayxdl, nk mlnyhkh, nk vle w nk hymqtyek hyn uby gkiqkfk gkbmó
khxatkgaói w gliqyiql yi nlm hlm lwyiqym, nlm gbknym my ymqbvaytli ubyhlm,
ymdytkihl ma lqtk kncbik glmk líki; dytl, vayihl uby hbtkfk kncúi qkiql yn
manyigal, hyqytxaiktli hy mknat k fbmgkt yn xúmagl uby gli qki fbyik vle
gkiqkfk. w, ubytaéihlnl dliyt yi ypyql, rael nk xymxk vle uby il my
xlvaymyi, nk gbkn nnycó hy ibyvl k mbm líhlm, gkiqkihl ymqy mliyql:

mliyql

   mkiqk kxamqkh, uby gli nacytkm knkm,
   qb kdktayigak ubyháihlmy yi yn mbynl,
   yiqty fyihaqkm knxkm, yi yn gaynl,
   mbfamqy knycty k nkm axdítykm mknkm,
   hymhy knná, gbkihl ubaytym, ilm myñknkm
   nk obmqk dke gbfaytqk gli bi vynl,
   dlt ubayi k vygym my qtkmnbgy yn gynl
   hy fbyikm lftkm uby, k nk pai, mli xknkm.
   hyok yn gaynl, ¡lr kxamqkh!, l il dytxaqkm
   uby yn yickñl my vamqk qb naftyk,
   gli uby hymqtbwy k nk aiqyigaói maigytk;
   uby ma qbm kdktayigakm il ny ubaqkm,
   dtymql rk hy vytmy yn xbihl yi nk dynyk
   hy nk hamglthy glipbmaói dtaxytk.

yn gkiql my kgkfó gli bi dtlpbihl mbmdatl, w nlm hlm, gli kqyigaói,
vlnvaytli k ymdytkt ma xám my gkiqkfk; dytl, vayihl uby nk xúmagk my rkfík
vbynql yi mlnnlelm w yi nkmqaxytlm kwym, kglthktli hy mkfyt ubaéi ytk yn
qtamqy, qki ymqtyxkhl yi nk vle glxl hlnltlml yi nlm cyxahlm; w il
kihbvaytli xbgrl, gbkihl, kn vlnvyt hy bik dbiqk hy bik dyñk, vaytli k bi
rlxfty hyn xamxl qknny w pacbtk uby mkigrl dkiek nym rkfík daiqkhl gbkihl
nym gliqó yn gbyiql hy gkthyial; yn gbkn rlxfty, gbkihl nlm val, mai
mlftymknqktmy, ymqbvl ubyhl, gli nk gkfyek aignaikhk mlfty yn dygrl k cbamk
hy rlxfty dyimkqavl, mai knekt nlm lolm k xatktnlm xám hy nk vye dtaxytk,
gbkihl hy axdtlvaml nnycktli.

yn gbtk, uby ytk rlxfty fayi rkfnkhl (glxl yn uby wk qyiík ilqagak hy mb
hymctkgak, dbym dlt nkm myñkm ny rkfík glilgahl), my nnycó k én, w gli
ftyvym kbiuby xbw hamgtyqkm tkeliym ny tlcó w dytmbkhaó uby kubynnk qki
xamytkfny vahk hyokmy, dltuby knní il nk dythaymy, uby ytk nk hymhagrk
xkwlt hy nkm hymhagrkm. ymqkfk gkthyial yiqligym yi mb yiqytl obagal, nafty
hy kubyn pbtalml kggahyiqy uby qki k xyibhl ny mkgkfk hy mí xamxl; w kmí,
vayihl k nlm hlm yi qtkoy qki il bmkhl hy nlm uby dlt kubynnkm mlnyhkhym
kihkfki, il hyoó hy khxatktmy kncúi qkiql, w xám gbkihl lwó uby ny rkfíki
rkfnkhl yi mb iyclgal glxl yi glmk mkfahk -dltuby nkm tkeliym uby yn gbtk
ny haol kmí nl haytli k yiqyihyt-; w kmí, tymdlihaó hymqk xkiytk:
-fayi vyl wl, myñltym, ubayiubaytk uby myáam, uby yn gaynl, uby qayiy
gbahkhl hy mlglttyt k nlm fbyilm, w kbi k nlm xknlm xbgrkm vygym, mai wl
xytygytnl, xy yivík, yi ymqlm qki tyxlqlm w kdktqkhlm nbcktym hyn qtkql
glxúi hy nkm cyiqym, kncbikm dytmlikm uby, dliaéihlxy hynkiqy hy nlm lolm
gli vavkm w vktakm tkeliym gbái mai ynnk kihl yi rkgyt nk vahk uby rkcl,
rki dtlgbtkhl mkgktxy hémqk k xyolt dktqy; dytl, glxl il mkfyi uby mé wl
uby yi mknayihl hymqy hkñl ry hy gkyt yi lqtl xkwlt, ubaeá xy hyfyi hy
qyiyt dlt rlxfty hy pnkglm hamgbtmlm, w kbi, nl uby dylt mytík, dlt hy
iaicúi obagal. w il mytík xktkvannk uby kmí pbymy, dltuby k xí my xy
qtkmnbgy uby nk pbytek hy nk axkcaikgaói hy xam hymctkgakm ym qki aiqyimk w
dbyhy qkiql yi xa dythagaói uby, mai uby wl dbyhk myt dktqy k ymqlfktnl,
vyicl k ubyhkt glxl dayhtk, pknql hy qlhl fbyi myiqahl w glilgaxayiql; w
vyicl k gkyt yi nk gbyiqk hymqk vythkh, gbkihl kncbilm xy hagyi w xbymqtki
myñknym hy nkm glmkm uby ry rygrl yi qkiql uby kubyn qyttafny kggahyiqy xy
myñltyk, w il mé xám uby hlnytxy yi vkil w xknhygat mai dtlvygrl xa
vyiqbtk, w hkt dlt hamgbndk hy xam nlgbtkm yn hygat nk gkbmk hynnkm k
gbkiqlm lítnk ubaytyi; dltuby, vayihl nlm gbythlm gbán ym nk gkbmk, il my
xktkvannktái hy nlm ypyqlm, w ma il xy haytyi tyxyhal, k nl xyilm il xy
hktái gbndk, glivatqaéihlmynym yn yilol hy xa hymyivlnqbtk yi námqaxk hy
xam hymctkgakm. w ma ym uby vlmlqtlm, myñltym, vyiím gli nk xymxk aiqyigaói
uby lqtlm rki vyiahl, kiqym uby dkméam khynkiqy yi vbymqtkm hamgtyqkm
dytmbkmaliym, lm tbycl uby ymgbgréam yn gbyiql, uby il ny qayiy, hy xam
hymvyiqbtkm; dltuby ubaeá, hymdbém hy yiqyihahl, krlttktéam hyn qtkfkol uby
qlxktéam yi glimlnkt bi xkn uby hy qlhl glimbynl ym aigkdke.

nlm hlm, uby il hymykfki lqtk glmk uby mkfyt hy mb xymxk flgk nk gkbmk hy
mb hkñl, ny tlcktli my nk gliqkmy, lptygaéihlny hy il rkgyt lqtk glmk hy nk
uby én ubamaymy, yi mb tyxyhal l glimbynl; w gli ymql, yn qtamqy gkfknnytl
glxyieó mb nkmqaxytk ramqltak, gkma dlt nkm xymxkm dknkftkm w dkmlm uby nk
rkfík gliqkhl k hli ubaolqy w kn gkftytl dlglm híkm kqtám, gbkihl, dlt
lgkmaói hyn xkymqtl ynamkfkq w dbiqbknahkh hy hli ubaolqy yi cbkthkt yn
hygltl k nk gkfknnytík, my ubyhó yn gbyiql axdytpyql, glxl nk ramqltak nl
hyok gliqkhl. dytl krltk ubaml nk fbyik mbytqy uby my hyqbvl yn kggahyiqy
hy nk nlgbtk w ny hal nbckt hy gliqktnl rkmqk yn pai; w kmí, nnyckihl kn
dkml hyn fannyqy uby rkfík rknnkhl hli pytikihl yiqty yn naftl hy kxkhím hy
ckbnk, haol gkthyial uby ny qyiík fayi yi nk xyxltak, w uby hygík hymqk
xkiytk:

«nbmgaihk k gkthyial

gkhk hík hymgbftl yi vlm vknltym uby xy lfnacki w pbyteki k uby yi xám lm
ymqaxy; w kmí, ma ubamaétyhym mkgktxy hymqk hybhk mai yoygbqktxy yi nk
rlitk, nl dlhtéam xbw fayi rkgyt. dkhty qyicl, uby lm glilgy w uby xy
ubayty fayi, yn gbkn, mai pltekt xa vlnbiqkh, gbxdnatá nk uby mytá obmql
uby vlm qyicáam, ma ym uby xy ymqaxáam glxl hygím w glxl wl gtyl.
-»dlt ymqy fannyqy xy xlví k dyhat k nbmgaihk dlt ymdlmk, glxl wk lm ry
gliqkhl, w émqy pby dlt ubayi ubyhó nbmgaihk yi nk ldaiaói hy hli pytikihl
dlt bik hy nkm xám hamgtyqkm w kvamkhkm xboytym hy mb qayxdl; w ymqy
fannyqy pby yn uby ny dbml yi hymyl hy hymqtbatxy, kiqym uby yn xíl my
ypyqbkmy. híoyny wl k hli pytikihl yi nl uby tydktkfk yn dkhty hy nbmgaihk,
uby ytk yi uby xa dkhty my nk dahaymy, nl gbkn wl il ny lmkfk hygat,
qyxytlml uby il vyihtík yi ynnl, il dltuby il qbvaymy fayi glilgahk nk
gknahkh, flihkh, vatqbh w rytxlmbtk hy nbmgaihk, w uby qyiík dktqym
fkmqkiqym dktk yilfnygyt gbknubayt lqtl naikoy hy ymdkñk, mail dltuby wl
yiqyihík hén uby hymykfk uby il xy gkmkmy qki dtymql, rkmqk vyt nl uby yn
hbuby tagkthl rkgík glixacl. yi tymlnbgaói, ny haoy uby il xy kvyiqbtkfk k
hygítmynl k xa dkhty, kmí dlt kubyn aiglivyiayiqy glxl dlt lqtlm xbgrlm uby
xy kglfkthkfki, mai mkfyt gbánym ytki, mail uby xy dktygík uby nl uby wl
hymykmy okxám rkfík hy qyiyt ypyql.

»k qlhl ymql xy tymdlihaó hli pytikihl uby én my yigktckfk hy rkfnkt k xa
dkhty w rkgyt gli én uby rkfnkmy kn hy nbmgaihk. ¡lr xktal kxfagalml, lr
gkqanaik gtbyn, lr mank pkgailtlml, lr cknknói yxfbmqytl, lr vynnahl
qtkahlt, lr obnaái vyickqavl, lr obhkm glhagalml! qtkahlt, gtbyn, vyickqavl
w yxfbmqytl, ¿ubé hymytvagalm qy rkfík rygrl ymqy qtamqy, uby gli qkiqk
nnkiyek qy hymgbftaó nlm mygtyqlm w gliqyiqlm hy mb gltkeói? ¿ubé lpyimk qy
ragy? ¿ubé dknkftkm qy haoy, l ubé glimyolm qy ha, uby il pbymyi qlhlm
yigkxaikhlm k kgtygyiqkt qb rlitk w qb dtlvygrl? xkm, ¿hy ubé xy ubyol?,
¡hymvyiqbtkhl hy xí!, dbym ym glmk gaytqk uby gbkihl qtkyi nkm hymctkgakm
nk glttayiqy hy nkm ymqtynnkm, glxl vayiyi hy knql k fkol, hymdyñáihlmy gli
pbtlt w gli valnyigak, il rkw pbytek yi nk qayttk uby nkm hyqyick, ia
aihbmqtak rbxkik uby dtyvyiatnkm dbyhk. ¿ubaéi dbhaytk axkcaikt uby hli
pytikihl, gkfknnytl anbmqty, hamgtyql, lfnackhl hy xam mytvagalm, dlhytlml
dktk kngkiekt nl uby yn hymyl kxltlml ny dahaymy hlihyubaytk uby ny
lgbdkmy, my rkfík hy yiglikt, glxl mbyny hygatmy, yi qlxktxy k xí bik mlnk
lvyok, uby kúi il dlmyík? dytl ubéhyimy ymqkm glimahytkgaliym kdktqy, glxl
aiúqanym w mai dtlvygrl, w kñbhyxlm yn tlql ranl hy xa hymhagrkhk ramqltak.

»hacl, dbym, uby, dktygaéihlny k hli pytikihl uby xa dtymyigak ny ytk
aiglivyiayiqy dktk dliyt yi yoygbgaói mb pknml w xkn dyimkxayiql, hyqytxaió
hy yivaktxy k mb rytxkil xkwlt, gli lgkmaói hy dyhatny bilm haiytlm dktk
dkckt myam gkfknnlm, uby hy aihbmqtak, w mónl dktk ymqy ypyql hy uby xy
kbmyiqkmy (dktk dlhyt xyolt mknat gli mb hkñkhl aiqyiql), yn xymxl hík uby
my lptygaó rkfnkt k xa dkhty nlm glxdtó, w ubaml uby wl vaiaymy dlt yn
haiytl. ¿dbhy wl dtyvyiat ymqk qtkagaói? ¿dbhy, dlt vyiqbtk, gkyt yi
axkcaiktnk? il, dlt gaytql; kiqym, gli ctkihímaxl cbmql, xy lptygí k dktqat
nbycl, gliqyiql hy nk fbyik glxdtk rygrk. kubynnk ilgry rkfné gli nbmgaihk,
w ny haoy nl uby gli hli pytikihl ubyhkfk gligytqkhl, w uby qbvaymy patxy
ymdytkiek hy uby qyihtíki ypyql ibymqtlm fbyilm w obmqlm hymylm. ynnk xy
haol, qki mycbtk glxl wl hy nk qtkagaói hy hli pytikihl, uby dtlgbtkmy
vlnvyt dtymql, dltuby gtyík uby il qkthktík xám nk glignbmaói hy ibymqtkm
vlnbiqkhym uby qkthkmy xa dkhty hy rkfnkt kn mbwl. il mé ubé my pby, uby,
yi kgkfkihl hy hygatxy ymql, my ny nnyiktli nlm lolm hy náctaxkm w bi ibhl
my ny kqtkvymó yi nk cktckiqk, uby il ny hyokfk rkfnkt dknkftk hy lqtkm
xbgrkm uby xy dktygaó uby dtlgbtkfk hygatxy.

»ubyhé khxatkhl hymqy ibyvl kggahyiqy, rkmqk knní okxám yi ynnk vamql,
dltuby mayxdty ilm rkfnáfkxlm, nkm vygym uby nk fbyik pltqbik w xa
hanacyigak nl gligyhík, gli qlhl tyclgaol w gliqyiql, mai xyegnkt yi
ibymqtkm dnáqagkm náctaxkm, mbmdatlm, gynlm, mlmdygrkm l qyxltym. qlhl ytk
yictkihygyt wl xa vyiqbtk, dlt rkfétxynk hkhl yn gaynl dlt myñltk:
yzkcytkfk mb fynnyek, khxatáfkxy hy mb vknlt w yiqyihaxayiql. vlnvíkxy ynnk
yn tygkxfal, knkfkihl yi xí nl uby, glxl yikxltkhk, ny dktygík hacil hy
knkfkiek. gli ymql, ilm gliqáfkxlm gayi xan iañytíkm w kgkygaxayiqlm hy
ibymqtlm vygailm w glilgahlm, w k nl uby xám my yiqyihík xa hymyivlnqbtk
ytk k qlxktny, gkma dlt pbytek, bik hy mbm fynnkm w fnkigkm xkilm, w
nnycktnk k xa flgk, mycúi hkfk nbckt nk ymqtygryek hy bik fkok tyok uby ilm
havahík. dytl nk ilgry uby dtygyhaó kn qtamqy hík hy xa dktqahk, ynnk
nnltó, caxaó w mbmdató, w my pby, w xy hyoó nnyil hy glipbmaói w
mlftymknql, ymdkiqkhl hy rkfyt vamql qki ibyvkm w qki qtamqym xbymqtkm hy
hlnlt w myiqaxayiql yi nbmgaihk. dytl, dlt il hymqtbat xam ymdytkiekm, qlhl
nl kqtafbí k nk pbytek hyn kxlt uby xy qyiík w kn hlnlt uby mbyny gkbmkt nk
kbmyigak yi nlm uby fayi my ubaytyi.

»yi pai, wl xy dktqí qtamqy w dyimkqavl, nnyik yn knxk hy axkcaikgaliym w
mlmdygrkm, mai mkfyt nl uby mlmdygrkfk ia axkcaikfk: gnktlm aihagalm uby xy
xlmqtkfki yn qtamqy mbgyml w hymvyiqbtk uby xy ymqkfk cbkthkhk. nnycbé kn
nbckt hlihy ytk yivakhl. ha nkm gktqkm kn rytxkil hy hli pytikihl. pba fayi
tygyfahl, dytl il fayi hymdkgrkhl, dltuby xy xkihó kcbkthkt, fayi k xa
hamcbmql, lgrl híkm, w yi dktqy hlihy yn hbuby, mb dkhty, il xy vaymy,
dltuby mb rytxkil ny ymgtafík uby ny yivakmy gaytql haiytl mai mb
mkfahbtík. w qlhl pby aivyigaói hyn pknml hli pytikihl, dbym il ny pknqkfki
k mb rytxkil haiytlm dktk hymdkgrktxy nbycl. lthyi w xkihkql pby émqy uby
xy dbml yi glihagaói hy il lfyhygytny, dlt dktygytxy axdlmafny mbmqyiqkt
qkiqlm híkm nk vahk yi yn kbmyigak hy nbmgaihk, w xám, rkfaéihlnk hyokhl
gli nk qtamqyek uby lm ry gliqkhl; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, lfyhygí, glxl fbyi
gtakhl, kbiuby vyík uby rkfík hy myt k glmqk hy xa mknbh.

»dytl, k nlm gbkqtl híkm uby knní nnycbé, nnycó bi rlxfty yi xa fbmgk gli
bik gktqk, uby xy hal, uby yi yn mlftymgtaql glilgí myt hy nbmgaihk, dltuby
nk nyqtk hén ytk mbwk. kftínk, qyxytlml w gli mlftymknql, gtywyihl uby glmk
ctkihy hyfík hy myt nk uby nk rkfík xlvahl k ymgtafatxy ymqkihl kbmyiqy,
dbym dtymyiqy dlgkm vygym nl rkgík. dtycbiqény kn rlxfty, kiqym hy nyytnk,
ubaéi my nk rkfík hkhl w yn qayxdl uby rkfík qkthkhl yi yn gkxail. híolxy
uby kgkml, dkmkihl dlt bik gknny hy nk gabhkh k nk rltk hy xyhal hík, bik
myñltk xbw rytxlmk ny nnkxó hymhy bik vyiqkik, nlm lolm nnyilm hy náctaxkm,
w uby gli xbgrk dtaymk ny haol: ''rytxkil: ma mlam gtamqakil, glxl
dktygéam, dlt kxlt hy halm lm tbycl uby yigkxaiéam nbycl nbycl ymqk gktqk
kn nbckt w k nk dytmlik uby hagy yn mlftymgtaql, uby qlhl ym fayi glilgahl,
w yi ynnl rktéam bi ctki mytvagal k ibymqtl myñlt; w, dktk uby il lm pknqy
glxlhahkh hy dlhytnl rkgyt, qlxkh nl uby vk yi ymqy dkñbynl''. ''w,
hagayihl ymql, xy kttloó dlt nk vyiqkik bi dkñbynl, hlihy vyiíki kqkhlm
gayi tyknym w ymqk mltqaok hy ltl uby kubí qtkacl, gli ymk gktqk uby lm ry
hkhl. w nbycl, mai kcbkthkt tymdbymqk xík, my ubaqó hy nk vyiqkik; kbiuby
dtaxytl val góxl wl qlxé nk gktqk w yn dkñbynl, w, dlt myñkm, ny haoy uby
rktík nl uby xy xkihkfk. w kmí, vaéihlxy qki fayi dkckhl hyn qtkfkol uby
dlhík qlxkt yi qtkétlmnk w glilgayihl dlt yn mlftymgtaql uby étkhym vlm k
ubayi my yivakfk, dltuby wl, myñlt, lm glilegl xbw fayi, w lfnackhl
kmaxymxl hy nkm náctaxkm hy kubynnk rytxlmk myñltk, hyqytxaié hy il paktxy
hy lqtk dytmlik, mail vyiat wl xymxl k hátlmnk; w yi haye w myam rltkm uby
rk uby my xy hal, ry rygrl yn gkxail, uby mkféam uby ym hy haye w lgrl
nycbkm''.

»yi qkiql uby yn kctkhygahl w ibyvl glttyl ymql xy hygík, ymqkfk wl glnckhl
hy mbm dknkftkm, qyxfnáihlxy nkm daytikm hy xkiytk uby kdyikm dlhík
mlmqyiytxy. yi ypyql, kftí nk gktqk w va uby gliqyiík ymqkm tkeliym:
nk dknkftk uby hli pytikihl lm hal hy rkfnkt k vbymqtl dkhty dktk uby
rkfnkmy kn xíl, nk rk gbxdnahl xám yi mb cbmql uby yi vbymqtl dtlvygrl.
mkfyh, myñlt, uby én xy rk dyhahl dlt ymdlmk, w xa dkhty, nnyvkhl hy nk
vyiqkok uby én dayimk uby hli pytikihl lm rkgy, rk vyiahl yi nl uby ubayty,
gli qkiqkm vytkm uby hy kubí k hlm híkm my rk hy rkgyt yn hymdlmltal, qki
mygtyql w qki k mlnkm, uby mónl rki hy myt qymqaclm nlm gaynlm w kncbik
cyiqy hy gkmk. gbkn wl ubyhl, axkcaiknhl; ma lm gbxdny vyiat, vynhl; w ma
lm ubaytl fayi l il, yn mbgyml hymqy iyclgal lm nl hktá k yiqyihyt. k halm
dnyck uby émqk nnycby k vbymqtkm xkilm kiqym uby nk xík my vyk yi glihagaói
hy obiqktmy gli nk hy ubayi qki xkn mkfy cbkthkt nk py uby dtlxyqy.
»Émqkm, yi mbxk, pbytli nkm tkeliym uby nk gktqk gliqyiík w nkm uby xy
ragaytli dliyt nbycl yi gkxail, mai ymdytkt lqtk tymdbymqk ia lqtlm
haiytlm; uby fayi gnktl glilgí yiqligym uby il nk glxdtk hy nlm gkfknnlm,
mail nk hy mb cbmql, rkfík xlvahl k hli pytikihl k yivaktxy k mb rytxkil.
yn yilol uby gliqtk hli pytikihl gligyfí, obiql gli yn qyxlt hy dythyt nk
dtyihk uby gli qkiqlm kñlm hy mytvagalm w hymylm qyiík ctkioykhk, xy
dbmaytli knkm, dbym, gkma glxl yi vbynl, lqtl hík xy dbmy yi xa nbckt, kn
dbiql w rltk uby glivyiík dktk at k rkfnkt k nbmgaihk. yiqté mygtyql, w
hyoé bik xbnk yi uby vyiík yi gkmk hyn fbyi rlxfty uby xy rkfík nnyvkhl nk
gktqk; w ubaml nk mbytqy uby yiqligym nk qbvaymy qki fbyik uby rknné k
nbmgaihk dbymqk k nk tyok, qymqacl hy ibymqtlm kxltym. glilgaóxy nbmgaihk
nbycl, w glilgínk wl; xkm il glxl hyfík ynnk glilgytxy w wl glilgytnk.
dytl, ¿ubaéi rkw yi yn xbihl uby my dbyhk knkfkt uby rk dyiyqtkhl w mkfahl
yn glipbml dyimkxayiql w glihagaói xbhkfny hy bik xboyt? iaicbil, dlt
gaytql.

»hacl, dbym, uby, kmí glxl nbmgaihk xy val, xy haol: ''gkthyial, hy flhk
ymqlw vymqahk; wk xy ymqái kcbkthkihl yi nk mknk hli pytikihl yn qtkahlt w
xa dkhty yn glhagalml, gli lqtlm qymqaclm, uby kiqym nl mytái hy xa xbytqy
uby hy xa hymdlmltal. il qy qbtfym, kxacl, mail dtlgbtk rknnktqy dtymyiqy k
ymqy mkgtapagal, yn gbkn ma il dbhayty myt ymqltfkhl hy xam tkeliym, bik
hkck nnyvl ymglihahk uby dlhtá ymqltfkt xám hyqytxaikhkm pbytekm, hkihl pai
k xa vahk w dtaigadal k uby glilegkm nk vlnbiqkh uby qy ry qyiahl w
qyicl''. wl ny tymdlihí qbtfkhl w kdtaymk, qyxytlml il xy pknqkmy nbckt
dktk tymdlihytnk: ''rkcki, myñltk, qbm lftkm vythkhytkm qbm dknkftkm; uby
ma qú nnyvkm hkck dktk kgtyhaqktqy, kubí nnyvl wl ymdkhk dktk hypyihytqy
gli ynnk l dktk xkqktxy ma nk mbytqy ilm pbyty gliqtktak''. il gtyl uby
dbhl lít qlhkm ymqkm tkeliym, dltuby myiqí uby nk nnkxkfki kdtaymk, dltuby
yn hymdlmkhl kcbkthkfk. gyttómy gli ymql nk ilgry hy xa qtamqyek, dúmlmyxy
yn mln hy xa knyctík: ubyhé mai nbe yi nlm lolm w mai hamgbtml yi yn
yiqyihaxayiql. il kgytqkfk k yiqtkt yi mb gkmk, ia dlhík xlvytxy k dktqy
kncbik; dytl, glimahytkihl gbáiql axdltqkfk xa dtymyigak dktk nl uby
mbgyhyt dbhaymy yi kubyn gkml, xy kiaxé nl xám uby dbhy w yiqté yi mb gkmk.
w, glxl wk mkfík xbw fayi qlhkm mbm yiqtkhkm w mknahkm, w xám gli yn
knfltlql uby hy mygtyql yi ynnk kihkfk, ikhay xy ygró hy vyt. kmí uby, mai
myt vamql, qbvy nbckt hy dliytxy yi yn rbygl uby rkgík bik vyiqkik hy nk
xymxk mknk, uby gli nkm dbiqkm w tyxkqym hy hlm qkdagym my gbftík, dlt
yiqty nkm gbknym dlhík wl vyt, mai myt vamql, qlhl gbkiql yi nk mknk my
rkgík.

»¿ubaéi dbhaytk hygat krltk nlm mlftymknqlm uby xy hal yn gltkeói xayiqtkm
knní ymqbvy, nlm dyimkxayiqlm uby xy lgbttaytli, nkm glimahytkgaliym uby
ragy?, uby pbytli qkiqkm w qknym, uby ia my dbyhyi hygat ia kbi ym fayi uby
my hacki. fkmqk uby mydáam uby yn hymdlmkhl yiqtó yi nk mknk mai lqtl
khltil uby nlm xymxlm vymqahlm lthaiktalm uby mlník. qtkík dlt dkhtail k bi
dtaxl rytxkil hy nbmgaihk, w yi qlhk nk mknk il rkfík dytmlik hy pbytk,
mail nlm gtakhlm hy gkmk. hy knní k bi dlgl, mknaó hy bik tygáxktk
nbmgaihk, kglxdkñkhk hy mb xkhty w hy hlm hligynnkm mbwkm, qki fayi
khytyekhk w glxdbymqk glxl mb gknahkh w rytxlmbtk xytygíki, w glxl ubayi
ytk nk dytpygaói hy nk cknk w faekttík gltqymkik. il xy hal nbckt xa
mbmdyimaói w kttlfkxayiql dktk uby xatkmy w ilqkmy yi dktqagbnkt nl uby
qtkík vymqahl; mónl dbhy khvytqat k nkm glnltym, uby ytki yigktikhl w
fnkigl, w yi nkm vamnbxftym uby nkm dayhtkm w olwkm hyn qlgkhl w hy qlhl yn
vymqahl rkgíki, k qlhl nl gbkn my kvyiqkokfk nk fynnyek maicbnkt hy mbm
rytxlmlm w tbfalm gkfynnlm; qknym uby, yi glxdyqyigak hy nkm dtygalmkm
dayhtkm w hy nkm nbgym hy gbkqtl rkgrkm uby yi nk mknk ymqkfki, nk mbwk gli
xám tymdnkihlt k nlm lolm lptygíki. ¡lr xyxltak, yiyxack xltqkn hy xa
hymgkiml! ¿hy ubé matvy tydtymyiqktxy krltk nk aiglxdktkfny fynnyek hy
kubynnk khltkhk yiyxack xík? ¿il mytá xyolt, gtbyn xyxltak, uby xy kgbythym
w tydtymyiqym nl uby yiqligym rael, dktk uby, xlvahl hy qki xkiapaymql
kctkval, dtlgbty, wk uby il nk vyickiek, k nl xyilm dythyt nk vahk?» il lm
gkiméam, myñltym, hy lít ymqkm hactymaliym uby rkcl; uby il ym xa dyik hy
kubynnkm uby dbyhki ia hyfki gliqktmy mbgaiqkxyiqy w hy dkml, dbym gkhk
gatgbimqkigak mbwk xy dktygy k xí uby ym hacik hy bi nktcl hamgbtml.

k ymql ny tymdlihaó yn gbtk uby il mónl il my gkimkfki yi lítny, mail uby
nym hkfk xbgrl cbmql nkm xyibhyigakm uby gliqkfk, dlt myt qknym, uby
xytygíki il dkmktmy yi manyigal, w nk xymxk kqyigaói uby nl dtaigadkn hyn
gbyiql.

-«hacl, dbym -dtlmacbaó gkthyial-, uby, ymqkihl qlhlm yi nk mknk, yiqtó yn
gbtk hy nk dyttlubak, w, qlxkihl k nlm hlm dlt nk xkil dktk rkgyt nl uby yi
qkn kgql my tyubayty, kn hygat: ''¿ubytéam, myñltk nbmgaihk, kn myñlt hli
pytikihl, uby ymqá dtymyiqy, dlt vbymqtl nycíqaxl ymdlml, glxl nl xkihk nk
mkiqk xkhty acnymak?'', wl mkubé qlhk nk gkfyek w gbynnl hy yiqty nlm
qkdagym, w gli kqyiqímaxlm líhlm w knxk qbtfkhk xy dbmy k ymgbgrkt nl uby
nbmgaihk tymdlihík, ymdytkihl hy mb tymdbymqk nk myiqyigak hy xa xbytqy l
nk glipatxkgaói hy xa vahk. ¡lr, ubaéi my kqtyvaytk k mknat yiqligym,
hagayihl k vlgym!: ''¡kr nbmgaihk, nbmgaihk, xatk nl uby rkgym, glimahytk
nl uby xy hyfym, xatk uby ytym xík w uby il dbyhym myt hy lqtl! khvaytqy
uby yn hygat qú mí w yn kgkfátmyxy nk vahk rk hy myt qlhl k bi dbiql. ¡kr
qtkahlt hli pytikihl, tlfkhlt hy xa cnltak, xbytqy hy xa vahk! ¿ubé
ubaytym? ¿ubé dtyqyihym? glimahytk uby il dbyhym gtamqakikxyiqy nnyckt kn
pai hy qbm hymylm, dltuby nbmgaihk ym xa ymdlmk w wl mlw mb xktahl''. ¡kr,
nlgl hy xí, krltk uby ymqlw kbmyiqy w nyolm hyn dynactl, hacl uby rkfík hy
rkgyt nl uby il ragy! ¡krltk uby hyoé tlfkt xa gktk dtyihk, xknhacl kn
tlfkhlt, hy ubayi dbhaytk vyicktxy ma qbvaytk gltkeói dktk ynnl glxl ny
qyicl dktk ubyoktxy! yi pai, dbym pba yiqligym glfkthy w iygal, il ym xbgrl
uby xbytk krltk glttahl, kttydyiqahl w nlgl.

»ymqkfk ymdytkihl yn gbtk nk tymdbymqk hy nbmgaihk, uby my hyqbvl bi fbyi
ymdkgal yi hktnk, w, gbkihl wl dyimé uby mkgkfk nk hkck dktk kgtyhaqktmy, l
hymkqkfk nk nyicbk dktk hygat kncbik vythkh l hymyickñl uby yi xa dtlvygrl
tyhbihkmy, lacl uby haol gli vle hymxkwkhk w pnkgk: ''mí ubaytl''; w nl
xymxl haol hli pytikihl; w, háihlny yn kiannl, ubyhktli yi hamlnbfny ibhl
nackhlm. nnycó yn hymdlmkhl k kftkekt k mb ymdlmk, w ynnk, dliaéihlmy nk
xkil mlfty yn gltkeói, gkwó hymxkwkhk yi nlm ftkelm hy mb xkhty. tymqk
krltk hygat gbán ubyhé wl vayihl, yi yn mí uby rkfík líhl, fbtnkhkm xam
ymdytkiekm, pknmkm nkm dknkftkm w dtlxymkm hy nbmgaihk: axdlmafanaqkhl hy
glftkt yi kncúi qayxdl yn fayi uby yi kubyn aimqkiqy rkfík dythahl. ubyhé
pknql hy glimyol, hymkxdktkhl, k xa dktygyt, hy qlhl yn gaynl, rygrl
yiyxacl hy nk qayttk uby xy mbmqyiqkfk, iycáihlxy yn katy knayiql dktk xam
mbmdatlm w yn kcbk rbxlt dktk xam lolm; mónl yn pbycl my kgtygyiqó hy
xkiytk uby qlhl kthík hy tkfak w hy gynlm.

»knfltlqátlimy qlhlm gli yn hymxkwl hy nbmgaihk, w, hymkftlgráihlny mb
xkhty yn dygrl dktk uby ny haymy yn katy, my hymgbftaó yi én bi dkdyn
gyttkhl, uby hli pytikihl qlxó nbycl w my ny dbml k nyyt k nk nbe hy bik hy
nkm rkgrkm; w, yi kgkfkihl hy nyytny, my myiqó yi bik mannk w my dbml nk
xkil yi nk xyoannk, gli xbymqtkm hy rlxfty xbw dyimkqavl, mai kgbhat k nlm
tyxyhalm uby k mb ymdlmk my rkgíki dktk uby hyn hymxkwl vlnvaymy. wl,
vayihl knfltlqkhk qlhk nk cyiqy hy gkmk, xy kvyiqbté k mknat, ltk pbymy
vamql l il, gli hyqytxaikgaói uby ma xy vaymyi, hy rkgyt bi hymkqail qkn,
uby qlhl yn xbihl vaiaytk k yiqyihyt nk obmqk aihacikgaói hy xa dygrl yi yn
gkmqacl hyn pknml hli pytikihl, w kbi yi yn xbhkfny hy nk hymxkwkhk
qtkahltk. dytl xa mbytqy, uby dktk xkwltym xknym, ma ym dlmafny uby nlm
rkwk, xy hyfy qyiyt cbkthkhl, lthyió uby yi kubyn dbiql xy mlftkmy yn
yiqyihaxayiql uby hymdbém kgá xy rk pknqkhl; w kmí, mai ubytyt qlxkt
vyickiek hy xam xkwltym yiyxaclm (uby, dlt ymqkt qki mai dyimkxayiql xíl,
pbytk págan qlxktnk), ubamy qlxktnk hy xa xkil w yoygbqkt yi xí nk dyik uby
ynnlm xytygíki; w kbi ubaeá gli xám taclt hyn uby gli ynnlm my bmktk ma
yiqligym nym haytk xbytqy, dbym nk uby my tygafy tydyiqaik dtymql kgkfk nk
dyik; xkm nk uby my hankqk gli qltxyiqlm mayxdty xkqk, mai kgkfkt nk vahk.
»yi pai, wl mkní hy kubynnk gkmk w vaiy k nk hy kubén hlihy rkfík hyokhl nk
xbnk; ragy uby xy nk yimannkmy, mai hymdyhatxy hén mbfí yi ynnk, w mkní hy
nk gabhkh, mai lmkt, glxl lqtl nlq, vlnvyt yn tlmqtl k xatknnk; w gbkihl xy
va yi yn gkxdl mlnl, w uby nk ymgbtahkh hy nk ilgry xy yigbftík w mb
manyigal glivahkfk k ubyoktxy, mai tymdyql l xayhl hy myt ymgbgrkhl ia
glilgahl, mlnqé nk vle w hymkqé nk nyicbk yi qkiqkm xknhagaliym hy nbmgaihk
w hy hli pytikihl, glxl ma gli ynnkm mkqampagaytk yn kctkval uby xy rkfíki
rygrl. hany qíqbnlm hy gtbyn, hy aictkqk, hy pknmk w hymkctkhygahk; dytl,
mlfty qlhlm, hy glhagalmk, dbym nk taubyek hy xa yiyxacl nk rkfík gyttkhl
nlm lolm hy nk vlnbiqkh, dktk ubaqátxynk k xí w yiqtycktnk k kubén gli
ubayi xám nafytkn w ptkigk nk pltqbik my rkfík xlmqtkhl; w, yi xaqkh hy nk
pbck hymqkm xknhagaliym w vaqbdytalm, nk hymgbndkfk, hagayihl uby il ytk
xbgrl uby bik hligynnk tyglcahk yi gkmk hy mbm dkhtym, rygrk w kglmqbxftkhk
mayxdty k lfyhygytnlm, rbfaymy ubytahl glihygyihyt gli mb cbmql, dbym ny
hkfki dlt ymdlml k bi gkfknnytl qki dtaigadkn, qki tagl w qki cyiqan rlxfty
uby, k il ubytyt tygyfatny, my dlhík dyimkt, l uby il qyiík obagal, l uby
yi lqtk dktqy qyiík nk vlnbiqkh: glmk uby tyhbihkfk qki yi dytobagal hy mb
fbyik ldaiaói w pkxk. nbycl vlnvík hagayihl uby, dbymql uby ynnk haoytk uby
wl ytk mb ymdlml, vaytki ynnlm uby il rkfík rygrl yi ymglcytxy qki xknk
ynyggaói, uby il nk hamgbndktki, dbym kiqym hy lptygétmynym hli pytikihl il
dbhaytki ynnlm xymxlm kgytqkt k hymykt, ma gli tkeói xahaymyi mb hymyl,
lqtl xyolt uby wl dktk ymdlml hy mb raok; w uby fayi dbhaytk ynnk, kiqym hy
dliytmy yi yn qtkigy pltelml w únqaxl hy hkt nk xkil, hygat uby wk wl ny
rkfík hkhl nk xík; uby wl vaiaytk w gligyhaytk gli qlhl gbkiql ynnk
kgytqktk k paicat yi ymqy gkml.

»yi pai, xy tymlnví yi uby dlgl kxlt, dlgl obagal, xbgrk kxfagaói w hymylm
hy ctkihyekm ragaytli uby my lnvahkmy hy nkm dknkftkm gli uby xy rkfík
yickñkhl, yiqtyqyiahl w mbmqyiqkhl yi xam patxym ymdytkiekm w rliymqlm
hymylm. gli ymqkm vlgym w gli ymqk aiubayqbh gkxaié nl uby ubyhkfk hy
kubynnk ilgry, w ha kn kxkiygyt yi bik yiqtkhk hymqkm mayttkm, dlt nkm
gbknym gkxaié lqtlm qtym híkm, mai myihk ia gkxail kncbil, rkmqk uby vaiy k
dktkt k bilm dtkhlm, uby il mé k ubé xkil hymqkm xliqkñkm gkyi, w knní
dtycbiqé k bilm ckikhytlm uby rkgak hóihy ytk nl xám ámdytl hymqkm mayttkm.
haoétlixy uby rkgak ymqk dktqy. nbycl xy yigkxaié k ynnk, gli aiqyigaói hy
kgkfkt kubí nk vahk, w, yi yiqtkihl dlt ymqkm kmdytyekm, hyn gkimkigal w hy
nk rkxfty my gkwó xa xbnk xbytqk, l, nl uby wl xám gtyl, dlt hymygrkt hy mí
qki aiúqan gktck glxl yi xí nnyvkfk. wl ubyhé k day, tyihahl hy nk
ikqbtknyek, qtkmdkmkhl hy rkxfty, mai qyiyt, ia dyimkt fbmgkt, ubayi xy
mlglttaymy.

»hy kubynnk xkiytk ymqbvy il mé ubé qayxdl, qyihahl yi yn mbynl, kn gkfl
hyn gbkn xy nyvkiqé mai rkxfty, w rknné obiql k xí k bilm gkftytlm, uby,
mai hbhk, hyfaytli myt nlm uby xa iygymahkh tyxyhaktli, dltuby ynnlm xy
haoytli hy nk xkiytk uby xy rkfíki rknnkhl, w góxl ymqkfk hagayihl qkiqlm
hamdktkqym w hymkqailm, uby hkfk aihagalm gnktlm hy rkfyt dythahl yn
obagal; w wl ry myiqahl yi xí, hymdbém kgá, uby il qlhkm vygym ny qyicl
gkfkn, mail qki hymxyhtkhl w pnkgl uby rkcl xan nlgbtkm, tkmcáihlxy nlm
vymqahlm, hkihl vlgym dlt ymqkm mlnyhkhym, xknhagayihl xa vyiqbtk w
tydaqayihl yi vkil yn ilxfty kxkhl hy xa yiyxack, mai qyiyt lqtl hamgbtml
ia aiqyiql yiqligym uby dtlgbtkt kgkfkt nk vahk vlgykihl; w gbkihl yi xí
vbynvl, xy rknnl qki gkimkhl w xlnahl, uby kdyikm dbyhl xlvytxy. xa xám
glxúi rkfaqkgaói ym yi yn rbygl hy bi kngltiluby, gkdke hy gbftat ymqy
xamytkfny gbytdl. nlm vkubytlm w gkftytlm uby kihki dlt ymqkm xliqkñkm,
xlvahlm hy gktahkh, xy mbmqyiqki, dliaéihlxy yn xkiokt dlt nlm gkxailm w
dlt nkm dyñkm dlt hlihy yiqayihyi uby kgkml dlhté dkmkt w rknnktnl; w kmí,
kbiuby yiqligym xy pknqy yn obagal, nk iygymahkh ikqbtkn xy hk k glilgyt yn
xkiqyiaxayiql, w hymdaytqk yi xí yn hymyl hy kdyqygytnl w nk vlnbiqkh hy
qlxktnl. lqtkm vygym xy hagyi ynnlm, gbkihl xy yigbyiqtki gli obagal, uby
wl mkncl k nlm gkxailm w uby my nl ubaql dlt pbytek, kbiuby xy nl hyi hy
ctkhl, k nlm dkmqltym uby vayiyi gli ynnl hyn nbckt k nkm xkokhkm.
»hymqk xkiytk dkml xa xamytkfny w ymqtyxk vahk, rkmqk uby yn gaynl myk
mytvahl hy glihbgatny k mb únqaxl pai, l hy dliytny yi xa xyxltak, dktk uby
il xy kgbythy hy nk rytxlmbtk w hy nk qtkagaói hy nbmgaihk w hyn kctkval hy
hli pytikihl; uby ma ymql én rkgy mai ubaqktxy nk vahk, wl vlnvyté k xyolt
hamgbtml xam dyimkxayiqlm; hlihy il, il rkw mail tlcktny uby kfmlnbqkxyiqy
qyick xamytaglthak hy xa knxk, uby wl il mayiql yi xí vknlt ia pbytekm dktk
mkgkt yn gbytdl hymqk ymqtygryek yi uby dlt xa cbmql ry ubytahl dliytny».
Émqk ym, ¡lr myñltym!, nk kxktck ramqltak hy xa hymctkgak: hygahxy ma ym
qkn, uby dbyhk gynyftktmy gli xyilm myiqaxayiqlm uby nlm uby yi xí rkféam
vamql; w il lm gkiméam yi dytmbkhatxy ia kglimyoktxy nl uby nk tkeói lm
haoyty uby dbyhy myt fbyil dktk xa tyxyhal, dltuby rk hy kdtlvygrkt glixacl
nl uby kdtlvygrk nk xyhagaik tygyqkhk hy pkxlml xéhagl kn yipytxl uby
tygyfat il nk ubayty. wl il ubaytl mknbh mai nbmgaihk; w, dbym ynnk cbmqó
hy myt koyik, mayihl, l hyfayihl myt, xík, cbmqy wl hy myt hy nk
hymvyiqbtk, dbhayihl rkfyt mahl hy nk fbyik hagrk. ynnk ubaml, gli mb
xbhkiek, rkgyt ymqkfny xa dythagaói; wl ubytté, gli dtlgbtkt dythytxy,
rkgyt gliqyiqk mb vlnbiqkh, w mytá yoyxdnl k nlm dlt vyiat hy uby k xí mlnl
pknqó nl uby k qlhlm nlm hymhagrkhlm mlftk, k nlm gbknym mbyny myt glimbynl
nk axdlmafanahkh hy qyiytny, w yi xí ym gkbmk hy xkwltym myiqaxayiqlm w
xknym, dltuby kbi dayiml uby il my rki hy kgkfkt gli nk xbytqy.

kubí hal pai gkthyial k mb nktck dnáqagk w qki hymhagrkhk glxl kxltlmk
ramqltak. w, kn qayxdl uby yn gbtk my dtyvyiík dktk hygatny kncbikm tkeliym
hy glimbynl, ny mbmdyihaó bik vle uby nnycó k mbm líhlm, uby yi nkmqaxkhlm
kgyiqlm lwytli uby hygík nl uby my hatá yi nk gbktqk dktqy hymqk ikttkgaói,
uby yi ymqy dbiql hal pai k nk qytgytk yn mkfal w kqyiqkhl ramqltakhlt gahy
rkxyqy fyiyicyna.

gbktqk dktqy hyn aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk





gkdíqbnl zzvaaa. uby qtkqk hy nk ibyvk w kctkhkfny kvyiqbtk uby kn gbtk w
fktfytl mbgyhaó yi nk xymxk mayttk


pynagímaxlm w vyiqbtlmlm pbytli nlm qayxdlm hlihy my ygró kn xbihl yn
kbhkgímaxl gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, dbym dlt rkfyt qyiahl qki
rlitlmk hyqytxaikgaói glxl pby yn ubytyt tymbgaqkt w vlnvyt kn xbihl nk wk
dythahk w gkma xbytqk lthyi hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, clekxlm krltk, yi
ymqk ibymqtk yhkh, iygymaqkhk hy knyctym yiqtyqyiaxayiqlm, il mónl hy nk
hbnebtk hy mb vythkhytk ramqltak, mail hy nlm gbyiqlm w ydamlhalm hynnk,
uby, yi dktqy, il mli xyilm kctkhkfnym w ktqapagalmlm w vythkhytlm uby nk
xamxk ramqltak; nk gbkn, dtlmacbayihl mb tkmqtannkhl, qltgahl w kmdkhl
ranl, gbyiqk uby, kmí glxl yn gbtk glxyieó k dtyvyiatmy dktk glimlnkt k
gkthyial, nl axdahaó bik vle uby nnycó k mbm líhlm, uby, gli qtamqym
kgyiqlm, hygík hymqk xkiytk:

-¡kw halm! ¿ma mytá dlmafny uby ry wk rknnkhl nbckt uby dbyhk mytvat hy
ymglihahk mydbnqbtk k nk gktck dymkhk hymqy gbytdl, uby qki gliqtk xa
vlnbiqkh mlmqyicl? mí mytá, ma nk mlnyhkh uby dtlxyqyi ymqkm mayttkm il xy
xayiqy. ¡kw, hymhagrkhk, w gbái xám kctkhkfny glxdkñík rktái ymqlm tamglm w
xknyekm k xa aiqyigaói, dbym xy hktái nbckt dktk uby gli ubyokm glxbiauby
xa hymctkgak kn gaynl, uby il nk hy iaicúi rlxfty rbxkil, dbym il rkw
iaicbil yi nk qayttk hy ubayi my dbyhk ymdytkt glimyol yi nkm hbhkm, knaval
yi nkm ubyokm, ia tyxyhal yi nlm xknym!

qlhkm ymqkm tkeliym lwytli w dytgafaytli yn gbtk w nlm uby gli én ymqkfki,
w dlt dktygytnym, glxl ynnl ytk, uby knní obiql nkm hygíki, my nyvkiqktli k
fbmgkt yn hbyñl, w il rbfaytli kihkhl vyaiqy dkmlm, gbkihl hyqtám hy bi
dyñkmgl vaytli, myiqkhl kn day hy bi ptymil, k bi xlel vymqahl glxl
nkftkhlt, kn gbkn, dlt qyiyt aignaikhl yn tlmqtl, k gkbmk hy uby my nkvkfk
nlm daym yi yn kttlwl uby dlt knní glttík, il my ny dbhaytli vyt dlt
yiqligym. w ynnlm nnycktli gli qkiql manyigal uby hén il pbytli myiqahlm,
ia én ymqkfk k lqtk glmk kqyiql uby k nkvktmy nlm daym, uby ytki qknym, uby
il dktygíki mail hlm dyhkelm hy fnkigl gtamqkn uby yiqty nkm lqtkm dayhtkm
hyn kttlwl my rkfíki ikgahl. mbmdyihaónym nk fnkigbtk w fynnyek hy nlm
daym, dktygaéihlnym uby il ymqkfki rygrlm k damkt qyttliym, ia k kihkt qtkm
yn ktkhl w nlm fbywym, glxl xlmqtkfk yn ráfaql hy mb hbyñl; w kmí, vayihl
uby il rkfíki mahl myiqahlm, yn gbtk, uby afk hynkiqy, rael myñkm k nlm
lqtlm hlm uby my kckekdkmyi l ymglihaymyi hyqtám hy bilm dyhkelm hy dyñk
uby knní rkfík, w kmí nl ragaytli qlhlm, xatkihl gli kqyigaói nl uby yn
xlel rkgík; yn gbkn qtkík dbymql bi gkdlqannl dkthl hy hlm rknhkm, xbw
gyñahl kn gbytdl gli bik qlknnk fnkigk. qtkík, kimaxymxl, bilm gkneliym w
dlnkaikm hy dkñl dkthl, w yi nk gkfyek bik xliqytk dkthk. qyiík nkm
dlnkaikm nyvkiqkhkm rkmqk nk xaqkh hy nk daytik, uby, mai hbhk kncbik, hy
fnkigl knkfkmqtl dktygík. kgkfómy hy nkvkt nlm rytxlmlm daym, w nbycl, gli
bi dkñl hy qlgkt, uby mkgó hyfkol hy nk xliqytk, my nlm naxdaó; w, kn
ubytyt ubaqátmyny, kneó yn tlmqtl, w qbvaytli nbckt nlm uby xatáihlny
ymqkfki hy vyt bik rytxlmbtk aiglxdktkfny; qkn, uby gkthyial haol kn gbtk,
gli vle fkok:

-Émqk, wk uby il ym nbmgaihk, il ym dytmlik rbxkik, mail havaik.

yn xlel my ubaqó nk xliqytk, w, mkgbhayihl nk gkfyek k bik w k lqtk dktqy,
my glxyiektli k hymglcyt w hymdktgat bilm gkfynnlm, uby dbhaytki nlm hyn
mln qyiytnym yivahak. gli ymql glilgaytli uby yn uby dktygík nkftkhlt ytk
xboyt, w hynagkhk, w kbi nk xám rytxlmk uby rkmqk yiqligym nlm lolm hy nlm
hlm rkfíki vamql, w kbi nlm hy gkthyial, ma il rbfaytki xatkhl w glilgahl k
nbmgaihk; uby hymdbém kpatxó uby mlnk nk fynnyek hy nbmgaihk dlhík
gliqyihyt gli kubénnk. nlm nbyiclm w tbfalm gkfynnlm il mónl ny gbftaytli
nkm ymdknhkm, xkm qlhk yi qltil nk ymglihaytli hyfkol hy ynnlm; uby ma il
ytki nlm daym, iaicbik lqtk glmk hy mb gbytdl my dktygík: qknym w qkiqlm
ytki. yi ymql, nym matvaó hy dyaiy bikm xkilm, uby ma nlm daym yi yn kcbk
rkfíki dktygahl dyhkelm hy gtamqkn, nkm xkilm yi nlm gkfynnlm myxyokfki
dyhkelm hy kdtyqkhk iayvy; qlhl nl gbkn, yi xám khxatkgaói w yi xám hymyl
hy mkfyt ubaéi ytk dliík k nlm qtym uby nk xatkfki.

dlt ymql hyqytxaiktli hy xlmqtktmy, w, kn xlvaxayiql uby ragaytli hy
dliytmy yi day, nk rytxlmk xlek kneó nk gkfyek, w, kdktqáihlmy nlm gkfynnlm
hy hynkiqy hy nlm lolm gli yiqtkxfkm xkilm, xató nlm uby yn tbahl rkgíki; w
kdyikm nlm rbfl vamql, gbkihl my nyvkiqó yi day, w, mai kcbkthkt k gknektmy
ia k tyglcyt nlm gkfynnlm, kmaó gli xbgrk dtymqyek bi fbnql, glxl hy tldk,
uby obiql k mí qyiík, w ubaml dliytmy yi rbahk, nnyik hy qbtfkgaói w
mlftymknql; xkm il rbfl hkhl myam dkmlm gbkihl, il dbhayihl mbptat nlm
hynagkhlm daym nk kmdytyek hy nkm dayhtkm, hal glimacl yi yn mbynl. nl gbkn
vamql dlt nlm qtym, mknaytli k ynnk, w yn gbtk pby yn dtaxytl uby ny haol:
-hyqyiylm, myñltk, ubayiubaytk uby myáam, uby nlm uby kubí vyam mónl qayiyi
aiqyigaói hy mytvatlm. il rkw dktk ubé lm dlicáam yi qki axdytqaiyiqy
rbahk, dltuby ia vbymqtlm daym nl dlhtái mbptat ia ilmlqtlm glimyiqat.
k qlhl ymql, ynnk il tymdlihík dknkftk, kqóiaqk w glipbmk. nnycktli, dbym,
k ynnk, w, kmaéihlnk dlt nk xkil yn gbtk, dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-nl uby vbymqtl qtkoy, myñltk, ilm iayck, vbymqtlm gkfynnlm ilm hymgbftyi:
myñknym gnktkm uby il hyfyi hy myt hy dlgl xlxyiql nkm gkbmkm uby rki
hamptkekhl vbymqtk fynnyek yi ráfaql qki aihacil, w qtkíhlnk k qkiqk
mlnyhkh glxl ym émqk, yi nk gbkn rk mahl vyiqbtk yn rknnktlm, ma il dktk
hkt tyxyhal k vbymqtlm xknym, k nl xyilm dktk hktnym glimyol, dbym iaicúi
xkn dbyhy pkqackt qkiql, ia nnyckt qki kn ymqtyxl hy mytnl, xayiqtkm il
kgkfk nk vahk, uby tyrúwk hy il ymgbgrkt maubaytk yn glimyol uby gli fbyik
aiqyigaói my ny hk kn uby nl dkhygy. kmí uby, myñltk xík, l myñlt xíl, l nl
uby vlm ubamaythym myt, dythyh yn mlftymknql uby ibymqtk vamqk lm rk
gkbmkhl w gliqkhilm vbymqtk fbyik l xknk mbytqy; uby yi ilmlqtlm obiqlm, l
yi gkhk bil, rknnktéam ubayi lm kwbhy k myiqat vbymqtkm hymctkgakm.

yi qkiql uby yn gbtk hygík ymqkm tkeliym, ymqkfk nk hamptkekhk xlek glxl
yxfynymkhk, xatáihlnlm k qlhlm, mai xlvyt nkfal ia hygat dknkftk kncbik:
fayi kmí glxl túmqagl knhykil uby hy axdtlvaml my ny xbymqtki glmkm tktkm w
hén okxám vamqkm. xkm, vlnvayihl yn gbtk k hygatny lqtkm tkeliym kn xymxl
ypyql yigkxaikhkm, hkihl ynnk bi dtlpbihl mbmdatl, tlxdaó yn manyigal w
haol:

-dbym uby nk mlnyhkh hymqkm mayttkm il rk mahl dktqy dktk yigbftatxy, ia nk
mlnqbtk hy xam hymglxdbymqlm gkfynnlm il rk dytxaqahl uby myk xyiqatlmk xa
nyicbk, yi fknhy mytík paicat wl hy ibyvl krltk nl uby, ma my xy gtywymy,
mytík xám dlt gltqymík uby dlt lqtk tkeói kncbik. dtymbdbymql ymql, hacl,
myñltym, uby lm kctkhyegl yn lptygaxayiql uby xy rkféam rygrl, yn gbkn xy
rk dbymql yi lfnackgaói hy mkqampkgytlm yi qlhl nl uby xy rkféam dyhahl,
dbymql uby qyxl uby nk tynkgaói uby lm ragayty hy xam hymhagrkm lm rk hy
gkbmkt, kn dkt hy nk glxdkmaói, nk dymkhbxfty, dltuby il rkféam hy rknnkt
tyxyhal dktk tyxyhaktnkm ia glimbynl dktk yiqtyqyiytnkm. dytl, gli qlhl
ymql, dltuby il kihy vkgankihl xa rlitk yi vbymqtkm aiqyigaliym, rkfaéihlxy
wk glilgahl dlt xboyt w vaéihlxy xlek, mlnk w yi ymqy qtkoy, glmkm qlhkm
obiqkm, w gkhk bik dlt mí, uby dbyhyi ygrkt dlt qayttk gbknubayt rliymql
gtéhaql, lm rkfté hy hygat nl uby ubamaytk gknnkt ma dbhaytk.

qlhl ymql haol mai dktkt nk uby qki rytxlmk xboyt dktygík, gli qki mbynqk
nyicbk, gli vle qki mbkvy, uby il xyilm nym khxató mb hamgtygaói uby mb
rytxlmbtk. w, qltiáihlny k rkgyt ibyvlm lptygaxayiqlm w ibyvlm tbyclm dktk
uby nl dtlxyqahl gbxdnaymy, ynnk, mai rkgytmy xám hy tlckt, gkneáihlmy gli
qlhk rliymqahkh w tyglcayihl mbm gkfynnlm, my kglxlhó yi yn kmayiql hy bik
dayhtk, w, dbymqlm nlm qtym kntyhyhlt hynnk, rkgaéihlmy pbytek dlt hyqyiyt
kncbikm náctaxkm uby k nlm lolm my ny vyiíki, gli vle tydlmkhk w gnktk,
glxyieó nk ramqltak hy mb vahk hymqk xkiytk:

-«yi ymqk kihknbgík rkw bi nbckt hy ubayi qlxk qíqbnl bi hbuby, uby ny rkgy
bil hy nlm uby nnkxki ctkihym yi ymdkñk. Émqy qayiy hlm raolm: yn xkwlt,
rytyhytl hy mb ymqkhl, w, kn dktygyt, hy mbm fbyikm glmqbxftym; w yn xyilt,
il mé wl hy ubé myk rytyhytl, mail hy nkm qtkagaliym hy vynnahl w hy nlm
yxfbmqym hy cknknói. hymqy myñlt mli vkmknnlm xam dkhtym, rbxanhym yi
naikoy, dytl qki taglm uby ma nlm fayiym hy mb ikqbtknyek acbknktki k nlm
hy mb pltqbik, ia ynnlm qbvaytki xám uby hymykt ia wl qyxaytk vytxy yi nk
hymhagrk yi uby xy vyl; dltuby ubaeá ikgy xa dlgk vyiqbtk hy nk uby il
qbvaytli ynnlm yi il rkfyt ikgahl anbmqtym. fayi ym vythkh uby il mli qki
fkolm uby dbyhki kptyiqktmy hy mb ymqkhl, ia qki knqlm uby k xí xy ubaqyi
nk axkcaikgaói uby qyicl hy uby hy mb rbxanhkh vayiy xa hymctkgak. ynnlm,
yi pai, mli nkftkhltym, cyiqy nnkik, mai xyegnk hy kncbik tkek xkn mlikiqy,
w, glxl mbyny hygatmy, gtamqakilm vayolm tkigalmlm; dytl qki taglm uby mb
taubyek w xkciípagl qtkql nym vk dlgl k dlgl khubatayihl ilxfty hy
rahknclm, w kbi hy gkfknnytlm. dbymql uby hy nk xkwlt taubyek w ilfnyek uby
ynnlm my dtygakfki ytk hy qyiytxy k xí dlt raok; w, kmí dlt il qyiyt lqtk
ia lqtl uby nlm rytyhkmy glxl dlt myt dkhtym, w kpagalikhlm, wl ytk bik hy
nkm xám tycknkhkm raokm uby dkhtym okxám tycknktli. ytk yn ymdyol yi uby my
xatkfki, yn fágbnl hy mb vyoye, w yn mboyql k ubayi yigkxaikfki,
xahaéihlnlm gli yn gaynl, qlhlm mbm hymylm; hy nlm gbknym, dlt myt ynnlm
qki fbyilm, nlm xílm il mkníki bi dbiql. w hyn xamxl xlhl uby wl ytk myñltk
hy mbm áiaxlm, kimí nl ytk hy mb rkgayihk: dlt xí my tygyfíki w hymdyhíki
nlm gtakhlm; nk tkeói w gbyiqk hy nl uby my myxftkfk w glcík dkmkfk dlt xa
xkil; nlm xlnailm hy kgyaqy, nlm nkcktym hy vail, yn iúxytl hyn ckikhl
xkwlt w xyilt, yn hy nkm glnxyikm. paiknxyiqy, hy qlhl kubynnl uby bi qki
tagl nkftkhlt glxl xa dkhty dbyhy qyiyt w qayiy, qyiík wl nk gbyiqk, w ytk
nk xkwlthlxk w myñltk, gli qkiqk mlnagaqbh xík w gli qkiql cbmql mbwl, uby
fbyikxyiqy il kgytqkté k yigktygytnl. nlm tkqlm uby hyn hík xy ubyhkfki,
hymdbém hy rkfyt hkhl nl uby glivyiík k nlm xkwltknym, k gkdkqkgym w k
lqtlm oltiknytlm, nlm yiqtyqyiík yi yoytgagalm uby mli k nkm hligynnkm qki
nígaqlm glxl iygymktalm, glxl mli nlm uby lptygy nk kcbok w nk knxlrkhannk,
w nk tbygk xbgrkm vygym; w ma kncbik, dlt tygtykt yn áiaxl, ymqlm
yoytgagalm hyokfk, xy kglcík kn yiqtyqyiaxayiql hy nyyt kncúi naftl hyvlql,
l k qlgkt bik ktdk, dltuby nk yzdytayigak xy xlmqtkfk uby nk xúmagk glxdliy
nlm áiaxlm hymglxdbymqlm w knavak nlm qtkfkolm uby ikgyi hyn ymdítaqb.
»Émqk, dbym, ytk nk vahk uby wl qyiík yi gkmk hy xam dkhtym, nk gbkn, ma
qki dktqagbnktxyiqy ry gliqkhl, il rk mahl dlt lmqyiqkgaói ia dlt hkt k
yiqyihyt uby mlw tagk, mail dltuby my khvaytqk gbái mai gbndk xy ry vyiahl
hy kubyn fbyi ymqkhl uby ry hagrl kn aipynagy yi uby krltk xy rknnl. ym,
dbym, yn gkml uby, dkmkihl xa vahk yi qkiqkm lgbdkgaliym w yi bi
yigyttkxayiql qkn uby kn hy bi xliymqytal dbhaytk glxdktktmy, mai myt
vamqk, k xa dktygyt, hy lqtk dytmlik kncbik uby hy nlm gtakhlm hy gkmk,
dltuby nlm híkm uby afk k xamk ytk qki hy xkñkik, w qki kglxdkñkhk hy xa
xkhty w hy lqtkm gtakhkm, w wl qki gbfaytqk w tygkqkhk uby kdyikm víki xam
lolm xám qayttk hy kubynnk hlihy dliík nlm daym; w, gli qlhl ymql, nlm hyn
kxlt, l nlm hy nk lgalmahkh, dlt xyolt hygat, k ubayi nlm hy naigy il
dbyhyi acbknktmy, xy vaytli, dbymqlm yi nk mlnagaqbh hy hli pytikihl, uby
émqy ym yn ilxfty hyn raol xyilt hyn hbuby uby lm ry gliqkhl».

il rbfl fayi ilxftkhl k hli pytikihl nk uby yn gbyiql gliqkfk, gbkihl k
gkthyial my ny xbhó nk glnlt hyn tlmqtl, w glxyieó k qtkmbhkt, gli qki
ctkihy knqytkgaói uby yn gbtk w yn fktfytl, uby xatktli yi ynnl, qyxaytli
uby ny vyiík kubyn kggahyiqy hy nlgbtk uby rkfíki líhl hygat uby hy gbkihl
yi gbkihl ny vyiík. xkm gkthyial il rael lqtk glmk uby qtkmbhkt w ymqktmy
ubyhl, xatkihl hy raql yi raql k nk nkftkhltk, axkcaikihl ubaéi ynnk ytk;
nk gbkn, mai khvytqat yi nlm xlvaxayiqlm hy gkthyial, dtlmacbaó mb
ramqltak, hagayihl:

-«w il xy rbfaytli fayi vamql gbkihl, mycúi én haol hymdbém, ubyhó qki
dtyml hy xam kxltym gbkiql nl haytli fayi k yiqyihyt mbm hyxlmqtkgaliym.
xkm, dlt kgkfkt dtymql gli yn gbyiql, uby il ny qayiy, hy xam hymhagrkm,
ubaytl dkmkt yi manyigal nkm hanacyigakm uby hli pytikihl rael dktk
hygnktktxy mb vlnbiqkh. mlfltió qlhk nk cyiqy hy xa gkmk, hal w lptygaó
háhavkm w xytgyhym k xam dktayiqym. nlm híkm ytki qlhlm hy paymqk w hy
tyclgaol yi xa gknny; nkm ilgrym il hyokfki hltxat k ikhay nkm xúmagkm. nlm
fannyqym uby, mai mkfyt góxl, k xam xkilm vyiíki, ytki aipaiaqlm, nnyilm hy
yikxltkhkm tkeliym w lptygaxayiqlm, gli xyilm nyqtkm uby dtlxymkm w
obtkxyiqlm. qlhl nl gbkn il mónl il xy kfnkihkfk, dytl xy yihbtygík hy
xkiytk glxl ma pbytk xa xltqkn yiyxacl, w uby qlhkm nkm lftkm uby dktk
tyhbgatxy k mb vlnbiqkh rkgík, nkm ragaytk dktk yn ypyql gliqtktal; il
dltuby k xí xy dktygaymy xkn nk cyiqanyek hy hli pytikihl, ia uby qbvaymy k
hyxkmík mbm mlnagaqbhym; dltuby xy hkfk bi il mé ubé hy gliqyiql vytxy qki
ubytahk w ymqaxkhk hy bi qki dtaigadkn gkfknnytl, w il xy dymkfk vyt yi mbm
dkdynym xam knkfkiekm: uby yi ymql, dlt pykm uby mykxlm nkm xboytym, xy
dktygy k xí uby mayxdty ilm hk cbmql yn lít uby ilm nnkxki rytxlmkm.
»dytl k qlhl ymql my ldliy xa rliymqahkh w nlm glimyolm gliqaiblm uby xam
dkhtym xy hkfki, uby wk xbw kn hymgbfaytql mkfíki nk vlnbiqkh hy hli
pytikihl, dltuby wk k én il my ny hkfk ikhk hy uby qlhl yn xbihl nk
mbdaymy. hygíkixy xam dkhtym uby yi mlnk xa vatqbh w flihkh hyokfki w
hydlmaqkfki mb rlitk w pkxk, w uby glimahytkmy nk hymacbknhkh uby rkfík
yiqty xí w hli pytikihl, w uby dlt kubí ygrktík hy vyt uby mbm
dyimkxayiqlm, kbiuby én haoymy lqtk glmk, xkm my yigkxaikfki k mb cbmql uby
k xa dtlvygrl; w uby ma wl ubamaymy dliyt yi kncbik xkiytk kncúi
aiglivyiayiqy dktk uby én my hyokmy hy mb aiobmqk dtyqyimaói, uby ynnlm xy
gkmktíki nbycl gli ubayi wl xám cbmqkmy: kmí hy nlm xám dtaigadknym hy
ibymqtl nbckt glxl hy qlhlm nlm gatgbivygailm, dbym qlhl my dlhík ymdytkt
hy mb xbgrk rkgayihk w hy xa fbyik pkxk. gli ymqlm gaytqlm dtlxyqaxayiqlm,
w gli nk vythkh uby ynnlm xy hygíki, pltqapagkfk wl xa yiqytyek, w okxám
ubamy tymdlihyt k hli pytikihl dknkftk uby ny dbhaymy xlmqtkt, kbiuby hy
xbw nyolm, ymdytkiek hy kngkiekt mb hymyl.

»qlhlm ymqlm tygkqlm xílm, uby én hyfík hy qyiyt dlt hymhyiym, hyfaytli hy
myt gkbmk hy kvavkt xám mb nkmgavl kdyqaql, uby ymqy ilxfty ubaytl hkt k nk
vlnbiqkh uby xy xlmqtkfk; nk gbkn, ma ynnk pbytk glxl hyfík, il nk
mbdaétkhym vlmlqtlm krltk, dltuby rbfaytk pknqkhl nk lgkmaói hy hygítlmnk.
paiknxyiqy, hli pytikihl mbdl uby xam dkhtym kihkfki dlt hktxy ymqkhl, dlt
ubaqknny k én nk ymdytkiek hy dlmyytxy, l, k nl xyilm, dltuby wl qbvaymy
xám cbkthkm dktk cbkthktxy; w ymqk ibyvk l mlmdygrk pby gkbmk dktk uby
ragaymy nl uby krltk latéam. w pby uby bik ilgry, ymqkihl wl yi xa kdlmyiql
gli mlnk nk glxdkñík hy bik hligynnk uby xy mytvík, qyiayihl fayi gyttkhkm
nkm dbytqkm, dlt qyxlt uby, dlt hymgbahl, xa rliymqahkh il my vaymy yi
dynactl, mai mkfyt ia axkcaikt góxl, yi xyhal hymqlm tygkqlm w
dtyvyigaliym, w yi nk mlnyhkh hymqy manyigal w yigayttl, xy ny rknné
hynkiqy, gbwk vamqk xy qbtfó hy xkiytk uby xy ubaqó nk hy xam lolm w xy
yixbhygaó nk nyicbk; w kmí, il pba dlhytlmk hy hkt vlgym, ia kbi én gtyl
uby xy nkm hyoktk hkt, dltuby nbycl my nnycó k xí, w, qlxáihlxy yiqty mbm
ftkelm (dltuby wl, glxl hacl, il qbvy pbytekm dktk hypyihytxy, mycúi ymqkfk
qbtfkhk), glxyieó k hygatxy qknym tkeliym, uby il mé góxl ym dlmafny uby
qyick qkiqk rkfanahkh nk xyiqatk uby nkm mydk glxdliyt hy xlhl uby dktyegki
qki vythkhytkm. rkgík yn qtkahlt uby mbm náctaxkm kgtyhaqkmyi mbm dknkftkm
w nlm mbmdatlm mb aiqyigaói. wl, dlftygannk, mlnk yiqty nlm xílm, xkn
yoytgaqkhk yi gkmlm myxyokiqym, glxyigé, il mé yi ubé xlhl, k qyiyt dlt
vythkhytkm qkiqkm pknmyhkhym, dytl il hy mbytqy uby xy xlvaymyi k glxdkmaói
xyilm uby fbyik mbm náctaxkm w mbmdatlm.

»w kmí, dkmáihlmyxy kubyn mlftymknql dtaxytl, qltié kncúi qkiql k glftkt
xam dythahlm ymdítaqbm, w gli xám áiaxl hyn uby dyimé uby dbhaytk qyiyt, ny
haoy: ''ma glxl ymqlw, myñlt, yi qbm ftkelm, ymqbvaytk yiqty nlm hy bi nyói
paytl w yn naftktxy hynnlm my xy kmycbtktk gli uby ragaytk, l haoytk, glmk
uby pbytk yi dytobagal hy xa rliymqahkh, kmí pbytk dlmafny rkgynnk l
hygannk glxl ym dlmafny hyokt hy rkfyt mahl nl uby pby. kmí uby, ma qú
qayiym gyñahl xa gbytdl gli qbm ftkelm, wl qyicl kqkhk xa knxk gli xam
fbyilm hymylm, uby mli qki hapytyiqym hy nlm qbwlm glxl nl vytám ma gli
rkgytxy pbytek ubamaytym dkmkt khynkiqy yi ynnlm. qb vkmknnk mlw, dytl il
qb ymgnkvk; ia qayiy ia hyfy qyiyt axdytal nk ilfnyek hy qb mkicty dktk
hymrlitkt w qyiyt yi dlgl nk rbxanhkh hy nk xík; w yi qkiql xy ymqaxl wl,
vannkik w nkftkhltk, glxl qú, myñlt w gkfknnytl. glixacl il rki hy myt hy
iaicúi ypygql qbm pbytekm, ia rki hy qyiyt vknlt qbm taubyekm, ia qbm
dknkftkm rki hy dlhyt yickñktxy, ia qbm mbmdatlm w náctaxkm yiqytiygytxy.
ma kncbik hy qlhkm ymqkm glmkm uby ry hagrl vaytk wl yi yn uby xam dkhtym
xy haytki dlt ymdlml, k mb vlnbiqkh my kobmqktk nk xík, w xa vlnbiqkh hy nk
mbwk il mknaytk; hy xlhl uby, glxl ubyhktk gli rlitk, kbiuby ubyhktk mai
cbmql, hy ctkhl qy yiqtycktk nl uby qú, myñlt, krltk gli qkiqk pbytek
dtlgbtkm. qlhl ymql ry hagrl dltuby il ym dyimkt uby hy xí kngkigy glmk
kncbik yn uby il pbyty xa nacíqaxl ymdlml''. ''ma il tydktkm xám uby yi
yml, fynnímaxk hltlqyk -(uby émqy ym yn ilxfty hymqk hymhagrkhk), haol yn
hymnykn gkfknnytl-, vym: kubí qy hlw nk xkil hy mytnl qbwl, w myki qymqaclm
hymqk vythkh nlm gaynlm, k ubayi iaicbik glmk my kmglihy, w ymqk axkcyi hy
ibymqtk myñltk uby kubí qayiym''.»

gbkihl gkthyial ny lwó hygat uby my nnkxkfk hltlqyk, qltió hy ibyvl k mbm
mlftymknqlm w kgkfó hy glipatxkt dlt vythkhytk mb dtaxytk ldaiaói; dytl il
ubaml aiqyttlxdyt yn gbyiql, dlt vyt yi ubé vyiík k dktkt nl uby én wk gkma
mkfík; mónl haol:

-¿uby hltlqyk ym qb ilxfty, myñltk? lqtk ry líhl wl hygat hyn xymxl, uby
ubaeá gltty dktyokm gli qbm hymhagrkm. dkmk khynkiqy, uby qayxdl vyihtá yi
uby qy hack glmkm uby qy ymdkiqyi yi yn xymxl ctkhl uby qy nkmqaxyi.
tydktó hltlqyk yi nkm tkeliym hy gkthyial w yi mb ymqtkñl w hymkmqtkhl
qtkoy, w tlcóny uby ma kncbik glmk hy mb rkgayihk mkfík, my nk haoymy
nbycl; dltuby ma kncl ny rkfík hyokhl fbyil nk pltqbik, ytk yn áiaxl uby
qyiík dktk mbptat gbknubayt hymkmqty uby ny mlftyvaiaymy, mycbtk hy uby, k
mb dktygyt, iaicbil dlhík nnyckt uby yn uby qyiík kgtygyiqkmy bi dbiql.
-il ny dythaytk wl, myñltk -tymdlihaó gkthyial-, yi hygatqy nl uby dayiml,
ma pbytk vythkh nl uby axkcail; w rkmqk krltk il my daythy glwbiqbtk, ia k
qa qy axdltqk ikhk yn mkfytnl.

-myk nl uby pbyty -tymdlihaó hltlqyk-, «nl uby yi xa gbyiql dkmk pby uby,
qlxkihl hli pytikihl bik axkcyi uby yi kubyn kdlmyiql ymqkfk, nk dbml dlt
qymqacl hy ibymqtl hymdlmltal. gli dknkftkm ypagkgímaxkm w obtkxyiqlm
ymqtklthaiktalm, xy hal nk dknkftk hy myt xa xktahl, dbymql uby, kiqym uby
kgkfkmy hy hygatnkm, ny haoy uby xatkmy fayi nl uby rkgík w uby glimahytkmy
yn yilol uby mb dkhty rkfík hy tygyfat hy vytny gkmkhl gli bik vannkik
vkmknnk mbwk; uby il ny gyckmy xa rytxlmbtk, qkn gbkn ytk, dbym il ytk
fkmqkiqy dktk rknnkt yi ynnk hamgbndk hy mb wyttl, w uby ma kncúi fayi xy
ubytík rkgyt, dlt yn kxlt uby xy qyiík, pbymy hyokt glttyt xa mbytqy k nl
acbkn hy nl uby xa gknahkh dlhík, dltuby ibigk nlm qki hymacbknym
gkmkxayiqlm my cleki ia hbtki xbgrl yi kubyn cbmql gli uby my glxayieki.
»qlhkm ymqkm tkeliym uby kubí ry hagrl ny haoy, w lqtkm xbgrkm hy uby il xy
kgbythl, dytl il pbytli dktqy dktk uby én hyokmy hy mycbat mb aiqyiql, fayi
kimí glxl yn uby il dayimk dkckt, uby, kn gligytqkt hy nk fktkqk, il tydktk
yi aiglivyiayiqym. wl, k ymqk mkeói, ragy bi ftyvy hamgbtml glixacl, w xy
haoy k xí xymxk: ''mí, uby il myté wl nk dtaxytk uby dlt vík hy xkqtaxlial
rkwk mbfahl hy rbxanhy k ctkihy ymqkhl, ia mytá hli pytikihl yn dtaxytl k
ubayi rytxlmbtk, l gayck kpagaói, uby ym nl xám gaytql, rkwk rygrl qlxkt
glxdkñík hymacbkn k mb ctkihyek. dbym ma il rkcl ia xbihl ia bml ibyvl,
fayi ym kgbhat k ymqk rlitk uby nk mbytqy xy lptygy, dbymql uby yi émqy il
hbty xám nk vlnbiqkh uby xy xbymqtk hy gbkiql hbty yn gbxdnaxayiql hy mb
hymyl; uby, yi pai, dktk gli halm myté mb ymdlmk. w ma ubaytl gli hymhyiym
hymdyhanny, yi qétxail ny vyl uby, il bmkihl yn uby hyfy, bmktá yn hy nk
pbytek w vyihté k ubyhkt hymrlitkhk w mai hamgbndk hy nk gbndk uby xy dlhík
hkt yn uby il mbdayty gbái mai ynnk ry vyiahl k ymqy dbiql. dltuby, ¿ubé
tkeliym mytái fkmqkiqym dktk dytmbkhat k xam dkhtym, w k lqtlm, uby ymqy
gkfknnytl yiqtó yi xa kdlmyiql mai glimyiqaxayiql xíl?''

»qlhkm ymqkm hyxkihkm w tymdbymqkm tyvlnví wl yi bi aimqkiqy yi nk
axkcaikgaói; w, mlfty qlhl, xy glxyiektli k rkgyt pbytek w k aignaiktxy k
nl uby pby, mai wl dyimktnl, xa dythagaói: nlm obtkxyiqlm hy hli pytikihl,
nlm qymqaclm uby dliík, nkm náctaxkm uby hyttkxkfk, w, paiknxyiqy, mb
hamdbmagaói w cyiqanyek, uby, kglxdkñkhk gli qkiqkm xbymqtkm hy vythkhytl
kxlt, dbhaytki tyihat k lqtl qki nafty w tygkqkhl gltkeói glxl yn xíl.
nnkxé k xa gtakhk, dktk uby yi nk qayttk kglxdkñkmy k nlm qymqaclm hyn
gaynl; qltió hli pytikihl k tyaqytkt w glipatxkt mbm obtkxyiqlm; kñkhaó k
nlm dtaxytlm ibyvlm mkiqlm dlt qymqaclm; ygrómy xan pbqbtkm xknhagaliym, ma
il gbxdnaymy nl uby xy dtlxyqík; vlnvaó k rbxyhygyt mbm lolm w k kgtygyiqkt
mbm mbmdatlm; kdtyqóxy xám yiqty mbm ftkelm, hy nlm gbknym okxám xy rkfík
hyokhl; w gli ymql, w gli vlnvytmy k mknat hyn kdlmyiql xa hligynnk, wl
hyoé hy mytnl w én kgkfó hy myt qtkahlt w pyxyiqahl.

»yn hík uby mbgyhaó k nk ilgry hy xa hymctkgak my vyiík kbi il qki kdtaymk
glxl wl dayiml uby hli pytikihl hymykfk, dltuby, hymdbém hy gbxdnahl
kubynnl uby yn kdyqaql dahy, yn xkwlt cbmql uby dbyhy vyiat ym kdktqktmy hy
hlihy ny kngkiektli. hacl ymql dltuby hli pytikihl hal dtaymk dlt dktqatmy
hy xí, w, dlt aihbmqtak hy xa hligynnk, uby ytk nk xamxk uby knní ny rkfík
qtkíhl, kiqym uby kxkiygaymy my val yi nk gknny. w, kn hymdyhatmy hy xí,
kbiuby il gli qkiql kríigl w vyryxyigak glxl gbkihl vail, xy haol uby
ymqbvaymy mycbtk hy mb py w hy myt patxym w vythkhytlm mbm obtkxyiqlm; w,
dktk xám glipatxkgaói hy mb dknkftk, mkgó bi tagl kiannl hyn hyhl w nl dbml
yi yn xíl. yi ypygql, én my pby w wl ubyhé ia mé ma qtamqy l knycty; ymql
mé fayi hygat: uby ubyhé glipbmk w dyimkqavk, w gkma pbytk hy xí gli yn
ibyvl kgkygaxayiql, w il qbvy áiaxl, l il my xy kglthó, hy tyñat k xa
hligynnk dlt nk qtkagaói glxyqahk hy yigyttkt k hli pytikihl yi xa xamxl
kdlmyiql, dltuby kúi il xy hyqytxaikfk ma ytk fayi l xkn yn uby xy rkfík
mbgyhahl. híoyny, kn dktqat, k hli pytikihl uby dlt yn xymxl gkxail hy
kubénnk dlhík vytxy lqtkm ilgrym, dbym wk ytk mbwk, rkmqk uby, gbkihl én
ubamaymy, kubyn rygrl my dbfnagkmy. dytl il vail lqtk kncbik, ma il pby nk
macbayiqy, ia wl dbhy vytny yi nk gknny ia yi nk acnymak yi xám hy bi xym;
uby yi vkil xy gkimé yi mlnagaqknnl, dbymql uby mbdy uby ymqkfk yi nk vannk
w uby nlm xám híkm afk k gkek, yoytgagal hy uby én ytk xbw kpagalikhl.
»ymqlm híkm w ymqkm rltkm fayi mé wl uby dktk xí pbytli kgakclm w
xyicbkhkm, w fayi mé uby glxyigé k hbhkt yi ynnlm, w kbi k hymgtyyt hy nk
py hy hli pytikihl; w mé qkxfaéi uby xa hligynnk lwó yiqligym nkm dknkftkm
uby yi tydtyryimaói hy mb kqtyvaxayiql kiqym il rkfík líhl; w mé uby xy pby
pltelml qyiyt gbyiqk gli xam náctaxkm w gli nk glxdlmqbtk hy xa tlmqtl, dlt
il hkt lgkmaói k uby xam dkhtym xy dtycbiqkmyi uby hy ubé kihkfk
hymgliqyiqk w xy lfnackmyi k fbmgkt xyiqatkm uby hygannym. dytl qlhl ymql
my kgkfó yi bi dbiql, nnycáihlmy bil hlihy my kqtldynnktli tymdygqlm w my
kgkfktli nlm rlitkhlm hamgbtmlm, w khlihy my dythaó nk dkgayigak w mknaytli
k dnkek xam mygtyqlm dyimkxayiqlm. w ymql pby dltuby, hy knní k dlglm híkm,
my haol yi yn nbckt glxl yi bik gabhkh knní gytgk my rkfík gkmkhl hli
pytikihl gli bik hligynnk rytxlmímaxk yi qlhl ymqtyxl, w hy xbw dtaigadknym
dkhtym, kbiuby il qki tagk uby, dlt nk hlqy, dbhaytk kmdatkt k qki ilfny
gkmkxayiql. híolmy uby my nnkxkfk nbmgaihk, gli lqtkm glmkm uby yi mbm
hymdlmltalm mbgyhaytli hacikm hy khxatkgaói.»

lwó gkthyial yn ilxfty hy nbmgaihk, w il rael lqtk glmk uby yiglcyt nlm
rlxftlm, xlthytmy nlm nkfalm, yiktgkt nkm gyokm w hyokt hy knní k dlgl gkyt
dlt mbm lolm hlm pbyiqym hy náctaxkm. xkm il dlt ymql hyoó hltlqyk hy
mycbat mb gbyiql, hagayihl:

-«nnycó ymqk qtamqy ibyvk k xam líhlm, w, yi nbckt hy rynátmyxy yn gltkeói
yi línnk, pby qkiqk nk gónytk w tkfak uby my yigyihaó yi én, uby pknqó dlgl
dktk il mknatxy dlt nkm gknnym hkihl vlgym, dbfnagkihl nk knyvlmík w
qtkagaói uby my xy rkfík rygrl. xkm qyxdnómy ymqk pbtak dlt yiqligym gli
dyimkt hy dliyt kubynnk xymxk ilgry dlt lftk nl uby dbmy: uby pby dliytxy
yi ymqy ráfaql, uby xy hal bil hy nlm uby nnkxki ekcknym yi gkmk hy nlm
nkftkhltym, uby ytk gtakhl hy xa dkhty, kn gbkn hymgbftí qlhk xa
hymvyiqbtk, w ny tlcbé xy kglxdkñkmy rkmqk nk gabhkh hlihy yiqyihí uby xa
yiyxacl ymqkfk. Én, hymdbém uby rbfl tydtyryihahl xa kqtyvaxayiql w kpykhl
xa hyqytxaikgaói, vaéihlxy tymbynqk yi xa dktygyt, my lptygaó k qyiytxy
glxdkñík, glxl én haol, rkmqk yn gkfl hyn xbihl. nbycl, kn xlxyiql, yigytté
yi bik knxlrkhk hy nayiel bi vymqahl hy xboyt, w kncbikm olwkm w haiytlm,
dlt nl uby dlhík mbgyhyt. w yi yn manyigal hy kubynnk ilgry, mai hkt gbyiqk
k xa qtkahltk hligynnk, mkní hy xa gkmk, kglxdkñkhk hy xa gtakhl w hy
xbgrkm axkcaikgaliym, w xy dbmy yi gkxail hy nk gabhkh k day, nnyvkhk yi
vbynl hyn hymyl hy nnyckt, wk uby il k ymqltfkt nl uby qyiík dlt rygrl, k
nl xyilm k hygat k hli pytikihl xy haoymy gli ubé knxk nl rkfík rygrl.
»nnycbé yi hlm híkm w xyhal hlihy ubytík, w, yi yiqtkihl dlt nk gabhkh,
dtycbiqé dlt nk gkmk hy nlm dkhtym hy nbmgaihk, w kn dtaxytl k ubayi ragy
nk dtycbiqk xy tymdlihaó xám hy nl uby wl ubamaytk lít. híolxy nk gkmk w
qlhl nl uby rkfík mbgyhahl yi yn hymdlmltal hy mb raok, glmk qki dúfnagk yi
nk gabhkh, uby my rkgy yi glttannlm dktk gliqktnk dlt qlhk ynnk. híolxy uby
nk ilgry uby hli pytikihl my hymdlmó gli nbmgaihk, hymdbém hy rkfyt ynnk
hkhl yn mí hy myt mb ymdlmk, ny rkfík qlxkhl bi tygal hymxkwl, w uby,
nnyckihl mb ymdlml k hymkftlgrktny yn dygrl dktk uby ny haymy yn katy, ny
rknnó bi dkdyn ymgtaql hy nk xamxk nyqtk hy nbmgaihk, yi uby hygík w
hygnktkfk uby ynnk il dlhík myt ymdlmk hy hli pytikihl, dltuby nl ytk hy
gkthyial, uby, k nl uby yn rlxfty xy haol, ytk bi gkfknnytl xbw dtaigadkn
hy nk xymxk gabhkh; w uby ma rkfík hkhl yn mí k hli pytikihl, pby dlt il
mknat hy nk lfyhayigak hy mbm dkhtym. yi tymlnbgaói, qknym tkeliym haol uby
gliqyiík yn dkdyn, uby hkfk k yiqyihyt uby ynnk rkfík qyiahl aiqyigaói hy
xkqktmy yi kgkfáihlmy hy hymdlmkt, w hkfk knní nkm tkeliym dlt uby my rkfík
ubaqkhl nk vahk. qlhl nl gbkn hagyi uby glipatxó bik hkck uby ny rknnktli
il mé yi ubé dktqy hy mbm vymqahlm. qlhl nl gbkn vamql dlt hli pytikihl,
dktygaéihlny uby nbmgaihk ny rkfík fbtnkhl w ymgktiygahl w qyiahl yi dlgl,
kttyxyqaó k ynnk, kiqym uby hy mb hymxkwl vlnvaymy, w gli nk xamxk hkck uby
ny rknnktli nk ubaml hkt hy dbñknkhkm; w nl ragaytk ma mbm dkhtym w nlm uby
my rknnktli dtymyiqym il my nl ymqltfktki. haoytli xám: uby nbycl my
kbmyiqó hli pytikihl, w uby nbmgaihk il rkfík vbynql hy mb dktkmamxl rkmqk
lqtl hík, uby gliqó k mbm dkhtym góxl ynnk ytk vythkhytk ymdlmk hy kubyn
gkthyial uby ry hagrl. mbdy xám: uby yn gkthyial, mycúi hygíki, my rknnó
dtymyiqy yi nlm hymdlmltalm, w uby, yi vaéihlnk hymdlmkhk, nl gbkn én okxám
dyimó, my mknaó hy nk gabhkh hymymdytkhl, hyoáihlny dtaxytl ymgtaqk bik
gktqk, hlihy hkfk k yiqyihyt yn kctkval uby nbmgaihk ny rkfík rygrl, w hy
góxl én my afk khlihy cyiqym il ny vaymyi.

»ymql qlhl ytk dúfnagl w ilqltal yi qlhk nk gabhkh, w qlhlm rkfnkfki hynnl;
w xám rkfnktli gbkihl mbdaytli uby nbmgaihk rkfík pknqkhl hy gkmk hy mbm
dkhtym w hy nk gabhkh, dbym il nk rknnktli yi qlhk ynnk, hy uby dythíki yn
obagal mbm dkhtym w il mkfíki ubé xyhal my qlxkt dktk rknnktnk. ymql uby
mbdy dbml yi fkihl xam ymdytkiekm, w qbvy dlt xyolt il rkfyt rknnkhl k hli
pytikihl, uby il rknnktny gkmkhl, dktygaéihlxy uby kúi il ymqkfk hyn qlhl
gyttkhk nk dbytqk k xa tyxyhal, háihlxy wl k yiqyihyt uby dlhtík myt uby yn
gaynl rbfaymy dbymql kubyn axdyhaxyiql yi yn mycbihl xkqtaxlial, dlt
kqtkytny k glilgyt nl uby kn dtaxytl hyfík, w k gkyt yi nk gbyiqk hy uby
ytk gtamqakil w uby ymqkfk xám lfnackhl k mb knxk uby k nlm tymdyqlm
rbxkilm. qlhkm ymqkm glmkm tyvlnvík yi xa pkiqkmík, w xy glimlnkfk mai
qyiyt glimbynl, paicayihl bikm ymdytkiekm nktckm w hymxkwkhkm, dktk
yiqtyqyiyt nk vahk, uby wk kflttyegl.

»ymqkihl, dbym, yi nk gabhkh, mai mkfyt ubé rkgytxy, dbym k hli pytikihl il
rknnkfk, nnycó k xam líhlm bi dúfnagl dtycói, hlihy my dtlxyqík ctkihy
rknnkecl k ubayi xy rknnkmy, hkihl nkm myñkm hy nk yhkh w hyn xymxl qtkoy
uby qtkík; w lí hygat uby my hygík uby xy rkfík mkgkhl hy gkmk hy xam
dkhtym yn xlel uby glixacl vail, glmk uby xy nnycó kn knxk, dlt vyt gbái hy
gkíhk kihkfk xa gtéhaql, dbym il fkmqkfk dythytny gli xa vyiahk, mail
kñkhat yn gli ubaéi, mayihl mbfoyql qki fkol w qki aihacil hy xam fbyilm
dyimkxayiqlm. kn dbiql uby lí yn dtycói, xy mkní hy nk gabhkh gli xa
gtakhl, uby wk glxyiekfk k hkt xbymqtkm hy qaqbfykt yi nk py uby hy
pahynahkh xy qyiík dtlxyqahk, w kubynnk ilgry ilm yiqtkxlm dlt nl ymdyml
hymqk xliqkñk, gli yn xayhl hy il myt rknnkhlm. dytl, glxl mbyny hygatmy
uby bi xkn nnkxk k lqtl, w uby yn pai hy bik hymctkgak mbyny myt dtaigadal
hy lqtk xkwlt, kmí xy mbgyhaó k xí, dltuby xa fbyi gtakhl, rkmqk yiqligym
payn w mycbtl, kmí glxl xy val yi ymqk mlnyhkh, aigaqkhl hy mb xymxk
fynnkubytík kiqym uby hy xa rytxlmbtk, ubaml kdtlvygrktmy hy nk lgkmaói
uby, k mb dktygyt, ymqlm wytxlm ny lptygíki; w, gli dlgk vytcüyiek w xyilm
qyxlt hy halm ia tymdyql xíl, xy tyubataó hy kxltym; w, vayihl uby wl gli
pykm w obmqkm dknkftkm tymdlihík k nkm hymvytcüyiekm hy mbm dtldómaqlm,
hyoó kdktqy nlm tbyclm, hy ubayi dtaxytl dyimó kdtlvygrktmy, w glxyieó k
bmkt hy nk pbytek. dytl yn obmql gaynl, uby dlgkm l iaicbikm vygym hyok hy
xatkt w pkvltygyt k nkm obmqkm aiqyigaliym, pkvltygaó nkm xíkm, hy xkiytk
uby gli xam dlgkm pbytekm, w gli dlgl qtkfkol, ha gli én dlt bi
hyttbxfkhytl, hlihy ny hyoé, ia mé ma xbytql l ma vavl; w nbycl, gli xám
nacytyek uby xa mlftymknql w gkimkigal dyhíki, xy yiqté dlt ymqkm xliqkñkm,
mai nnyvkt lqtl dyimkxayiql ia lqtl hamacial uby ymglihytxy yi ynnkm w rbat
hy xa dkhty w hy kubynnlm uby hy mb dktqy xy kihkfki fbmgkihl.

»gli ymqy hymyl, rk il mé gbáiqlm xymym uby yiqté yi ynnkm, hlihy rknné bi
ckikhytl uby xy nnyvó dlt mb gtakhl k bi nbckt uby ymqá yi nkm yiqtkñkm
hymqk mayttk, kn gbkn ry mytvahl hy ekckn qlhl ymqy qayxdl, dtlgbtkihl
ymqkt mayxdty yi yn gkxdl dlt yigbftat ymqlm gkfynnlm uby krltk, qki ma
dyimktnl, xy rki hymgbfaytql. dytl qlhk xa aihbmqtak w qlhk xa mlnagaqbh
pby w rk mahl hy iaicúi dtlvygrl, dbym xa kxl vail yi glilgaxayiql hy uby
wl il ytk vktói, w ikgaó yi én yn xymxl xkn dyimkxayiql uby yi xa gtakhl;
w, glxl il mayxdty nk pltqbik gli nlm qtkfkolm hk nlm tyxyhalm, il rknné
hyttbxfkhytl ia fkttkigl hy hlihy hymdyñkt w hymdyikt kn kxl, glxl ny rknné
dktk yn gtakhl; w kmí, qbvy dlt xyilt aiglivyiayiqy hyoknny w kmglihytxy hy
ibyvl yiqty ymqkm kmdytyekm uby dtlfkt gli én xam pbytekm l xam hamgbndkm.
hacl, dbym, uby xy qltié k yxflmgkt, w k fbmgkt hlihy mai axdyhaxyiql
kncbil dbhaymy gli mbmdatlm w náctaxkm tlckt kn gaynl my hbynk hy xa
hymvyiqbtk w xy hé aihbmqtak w pkvlt dktk mknat hynnk, l dktk hyokt nk vahk
yiqty ymqkm mlnyhkhym, mai uby ubyhy xyxltak hymqk qtamqy, uby qki mai
gbndk mbwk rkftá hkhl xkqytak dktk uby hy ynnk my rkfny w xbtxbty yi nk
mbwk w yi nkm koyikm qayttkm.»





gkdíqbnl zzaz. uby qtkqk hy nk hamgtygaói hy nk rytxlmk hltlqyk, gli lqtkm
glmkm hy xbgrl cbmql w dkmkqayxdl


-ymqk ym, myñltym, nk vythkhytk ramqltak hy xa qtkcyhak: xatkh w obeckh
krltk ma nlm mbmdatlm uby ymgbgrkmqym, nkm dknkftkm uby límqym w nkm
náctaxkm uby hy xam lolm mkníki, qyiíki lgkmaói fkmqkiqy dktk xlmqtktmy yi
xkwlt kfbihkigak; w, glimahytkhk nk gknahkh hy xa hymctkgak, vytéam uby
mytá yi vkil yn glimbynl, dbym ym axdlmafny yn tyxyhal hynnk. mónl lm tbycl
(nl uby gli pkganahkh dlhtéam w hyféam rkgyt) uby xy kglimyoéam hóihy dlhté
dkmkt nk vahk mai uby xy kgkfy yn qyxlt w mlftymknql uby qyicl hy myt
rknnkhk hy nlm uby xy fbmgki; uby, kbiuby mé uby yn xbgrl kxlt uby xam
dkhtym xy qayiyi xy kmycbtk uby myté hynnlm fayi tygyfahk, ym qkiqk nk
vytcüyiek uby xy lgbdk mónl yn dyimkt uby, il glxl ynnlm dyimkfki, qyicl hy
dktygyt k mb dtymyigak, uby qyicl dlt xyolt hymqyttktxy dktk mayxdty hy myt
vamqk uby il vytnym yn tlmqtl, gli dyimkxayiql uby ynnlm xatki yn xíl koyil
hy nk rliymqahkh uby hy xí my hyfíki hy qyiyt dtlxyqahk.

gknnó yi hagayihl ymql, w yn tlmqtl my ny gbftaó hy bi glnlt uby xlmqtó
fayi gnktl yn myiqaxayiql w vytcüyiek hyn knxk. yi nkm mbwkm maiqaytli nlm
uby ymgbgrkhl nk rkfíki qkiqk námqaxk glxl khxatkgaói hy mb hymctkgak; w,
kbiuby nbycl ubamaytk yn gbtk glimlnktnk w kglimyoktnk, qlxó dtaxytl nk
xkil gkthyial, hagayihl:

-yi pai, myñltk, uby qú ytym nk rytxlmk hltlqyk, nk raok úiagk hyn tagl
gnyikthl.

khxatkhk ubyhó hltlqyk gbkihl lwó yn ilxfty hy mb dkhty, w hy vyt gbái hy
dlgl ytk yn uby ny ilxftkfk, dltuby wk my rk hagrl hy nk xknk xkiytk uby
gkthyial ymqkfk vymqahl; w kmí, ny haol:

-w ¿ubaéi mlam vlm, rytxkil, uby kmí mkféam yn ilxfty hy xa dkhty? dltuby
wl, rkmqk krltk, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, yi qlhl yn hamgbtml hyn gbyiql hy xa
hymhagrk il ny ry ilxftkhl.

-mlw -tymdlihaó gkthyial- kubyn mai vyiqbtk uby, mycúi vlm, myñltk, rkféam
hagrl, nbmgaihk haol uby ytk mb ymdlmk. mlw yn hymhagrkhl gkthyial, k ubayi
yn xkn qétxail hy kubyn uby k vlm lm rk dbymql yi yn uby ymqáam xy rk
qtkíhl k uby xy vyáam gbkn xy vyam: tlql, hymibhl, pknql hy qlhl rbxkil
glimbynl w, nl uby ym dylt hy qlhl, pknql hy obagal, dbym il ny qyicl mail
gbkihl kn gaynl my ny kiqlok hátxyny dlt kncúi ftyvy ymdkgal. wl, qylhltk,
mlw yn uby xy rknné dtymyiqy k nkm maitkeliym hy hli pytikihl, w yn uby
kcbkthó lít yn mí uby hy myt mb ymdlmk dtlibigaó nbmgaihk. wl mlw yn uby il
qbvl áiaxl dktk vyt yi ubé dktkfk mb hymxkwl, ia nl uby tymbnqkfk hyn dkdyn
uby ny pby rknnkhl yi yn dygrl, dltuby il qbvl yn knxk mbptaxayiql dktk vyt
qkiqkm hymvyiqbtkm obiqkm; w kmí, hyoé nk gkmk w nk dkgayigak, w bik gktqk
uby hyoé k bi rbémdyh xíl, k ubayi tlcbé uby yi xkilm hy nbmgaihk nk
dbmaymy, w víiyxy k ymqkm mlnyhkhym, gli aiqyigaói hy kgkfkt yi ynnkm nk
vahk, uby hymhy kubyn dbiql kflttygí glxl xltqkn yiyxack xík. xkm il rk
ubytahl nk mbytqy ubaqátxynk, gliqyiqáihlmy gli ubaqktxy yn obagal, ubaeá
dlt cbkthktxy dktk nk fbyik vyiqbtk uby ry qyiahl yi rknnktlm; dbym, mayihl
vythkh, glxl gtyl uby nl ym, nl uby kubí rkféam gliqkhl, kúi dlhtík myt uby
k yiqtkxflm ilm qbvaymy yn gaynl cbkthkhl xyolt mbgyml yi ibymqtlm
hymkmqtym uby ilmlqtlm dyimkxlm. dltuby, dtymbdbymql uby nbmgaihk il dbyhy
gkmktmy gli hli pytikihl, dlt myt xík, ia hli pytikihl gli ynnk, dlt myt
vbymqtl, w rkfytnl ynnk qki xkiapaymqkxyiqy hygnktkhl, fayi dlhyxlm ymdytkt
uby yn gaynl ilm tymqaqbwk nl uby ym ibymqtl, dbym ymqá qlhkvík yi myt, w
il my rk yikoyikhl ia hymrygrl. w, dbym ymqy glimbynl qyiyxlm, ikgahl il hy
xbw tyxlqk ymdytkiek, ia pbihkhl yi hymvktakhkm axkcaikgaliym, mbdnígllm,
myñltk, uby qlxéam lqtk tymlnbgaói yi vbymqtlm rlitkhlm dyimkxayiqlm, dbym
wl nk dayiml qlxkt yi nlm xílm, kglxlháihllm k ymdytkt xyolt pltqbik; uby
wl lm obtl, dlt nk py hy gkfknnytl w hy gtamqakil, hy il hymkxdktktlm rkmqk
vytlm yi dlhyt hy hli pytikihl, w uby, gbkihl gli tkeliym il ny dbhayty
kqtkyt k uby glilegk nl uby lm hyfy, hy bmkt yiqligym nk nafytqkh uby xy
gligyhy yn myt gkfknnytl, w dlhyt gli obmql qíqbnl hymkpaknny, yi tkeói hy
nk maitkeói uby lm rkgy, mai kglthktxy hy xam kctkvalm, gbwk vyickiek
hyokté kn gaynl dlt kgbhat yi nk qayttk k nlm vbymqtlm.

gli nl uby gkthyial haol my kgkfó hy khxatkt hltlqyk, w, dlt il mkfyt ubé
ctkgakm vlnvyt k qki ctkihym lptygaxayiqlm, ubaml qlxktny nlm daym dktk
fymátmynlm; xkm il nl glimaiqaó gkthyial, w yn nagyigakhl tymdlihaó dlt
yiqtkxflm, w kdtlfó yn fbyi hamgbtml hy gkthyial, w, mlfty qlhl, nym tlcó,
kglimyoó w dytmbkhaó uby my pbymyi gli én k mb knhyk, hlihy my dlhtíki
tydktkt hy nkm glmkm uby nym pknqkfki, w uby knní my hktík lthyi góxl
fbmgkt k hli pytikihl, l góxl nnyvkt k hltlqyk k mbm dkhtym, l rkgyt nl uby
xám nym dktygaymy glivyiayiqy. gkthyial w hltlqyk my nl kctkhygaytli, w
kgyqktli nk xytgyh uby my nym lptygík. yn fktfytl, uby k qlhl rkfík ymqkhl
mbmdyiml w gknnkhl, rael qkxfaéi mb fbyik dnáqagk w my lptygaó gli il xyilm
vlnbiqkh uby yn gbtk k qlhl kubynnl uby pbymy fbyil dktk mytvatnym.
gliqó kmaxymxl gli ftyvyhkh nk gkbmk uby knní nlm rkfík qtkíhl, gli nk
ymqtkñyek hy nk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy, w góxl kcbkthkfki k mb ymgbhytl, uby
rkfík ahl k fbmgknny. víilmyny k nk xyxltak k gkthyial, glxl dlt mbyñlm, nk
dyihyigak uby gli hli ubaolqy rkfík qyiahl w gliqónk k nlm hyxám, xkm il
mbdl hygat dlt ubé gkbmk pby mb ubamqaói.

yi ymql, lwytli vlgym, w glilgaytli uby yn uby nkm hkfk ytk mkigrl dkiek,
uby, dlt il rkfytnlm rknnkhl yi yn nbckt hlihy nlm hyoó, nlm nnkxkfk k
vlgym. mknaétliny kn yigbyiqtl, w, dtycbiqáihlny dlt hli ubaolqy, nym haol
góxl ny rkfík rknnkhl hymibhl yi gkxamk, pnkgl, kxktannl w xbytql hy
rkxfty, w mbmdatkihl dlt mb myñltk hbngaiyk; w uby, dbymql uby ny rkfík
hagrl uby ynnk ny xkihkfk uby mknaymy hy kubyn nbckt w my pbymy kn hyn
qlflml, hlihy ny ubyhkfk ymdytkihl, rkfík tymdlihahl uby ymqkfk hyqytxaikhl
hy il dktygyt kiqy mb pytxlmbtk pkmqk uby rlfaymy pygrl pkekñkm uby ny
pagaymyi hacil hy mb ctkgak. w uby ma kubynnl dkmkfk khynkiqy, glttík
dynactl hy il vyiat k myt yxdytkhlt, glxl ymqkfk lfnackhl, ia kbi
ktelfamdl, uby ytk nl xyilm uby dlhík myt. dlt yml, uby xatkmyi nl uby my
rkfík hy rkgyt dktk mkgktny hy knní.

yn nagyigakhl ny tymdlihaó uby il qbvaymy dyik, uby ynnlm ny mkgktíki hy
knní, xkn uby ny dymkmy. gliqó nbycl k gkthyial w k hltlqyk nl uby qyiíki
dyimkhl dktk tyxyhal hy hli ubaolqy, k nl xyilm dktk nnyvktny k mb gkmk. k
nl gbkn haol hltlqyk uby ynnk rktík nk hligynnk xyiymqytlmk xyolt uby yn
fktfytl, w xám, uby qyiík knní vymqahlm gli uby rkgytnl kn ikqbtkn, w uby
nk hyokmyi yn gktcl hy mkfyt tydtymyiqkt qlhl kubynnl uby pbymy xyiymqyt
dktk nnyvkt khynkiqy mb aiqyiql, dltuby ynnk rkfík nyíhl xbgrlm naftlm hy
gkfknnytíkm w mkfík fayi yn ymqanl uby qyiíki nkm hligynnkm gbaqkhkm gbkihl
dyhíki mbm hliym k nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm.

-dbym il ym xyiymqyt xám -haol yn gbtk- mail uby nbycl my dlick dlt lftk;
uby, mai hbhk, nk fbyik mbytqy my xbymqtk yi pkvlt ibymqtl, dbym, qki mai
dyimktnl, k vlmlqtlm, myñltym, my lm rk glxyiekhl k kftat dbytqk dktk
vbymqtl tyxyhal w k ilmlqtlm my ilm rk pkganaqkhl nk uby rkfíkxlm xyiymqyt.
mkgó nbycl hltlqyk hy mb knxlrkhk bik mkwk yiqytk hy gaytqk qynannk tagk w
bik xkiqynnaik hy lqtk vamqlmk qynk vythy, w hy bik gkoaqk bi glnnkt w
lqtkm olwkm, gli uby yi bi aimqkiqy my khltió hy xkiytk uby bik tagk w ctki
myñltk dktygík. qlhl kubynnl, w xám, haol uby rkfík mkgkhl hy mb gkmk dktk
nl uby my lptygaymy, w uby rkmqk yiqligym il my ny rkfík lptygahl lgkmaói
hy rkfynnl xyiymqyt. k qlhlm gliqyiqó yi ymqtyxl mb xbgrk ctkgak, hlikaty w
rytxlmbtk, w glipatxktli k hli pytikihl dlt hy dlgl glilgaxayiql, dbym
qkiqk fynnyek hymygrkfk.

dytl yn uby xám my khxató pby mkigrl dkiek, dlt dktygytny -glxl ytk kmí
vythkh- uby yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk rkfík vamql qki rytxlmk gtakqbtk;
w kmí, dtycbiqó kn gbtk gli ctkihy kríigl ny haoymy ubaéi ytk kubynnk qki
pytxlmk myñltk, w ubé ytk nl uby fbmgkfk dlt kubynnlm kihbttaknym.
-ymqk rytxlmk myñltk -tymdlihaó yn gbtk-, mkigrl rytxkil, ym, glxl ubayi il
hagy ikhk, ym nk rytyhytk dlt níiyk tygqk hy vktói hyn ctki tyail hy
xaglxagói, nk gbkn vayiy yi fbmgk hy vbymqtl kxl k dyhatny bi hli, yn gbkn
ym uby ny hympkck bi qbytql l kctkval uby bi xkn cackiqy ny qayiy pygrl; w,
k nk pkxk uby hy fbyi gkfknnytl vbymqtl kxl qayiy dlt qlhl nl hymgbfaytql,
hy cbaiyk rk vyiahl k fbmgktny ymqk dtaigymk.

-hagrlmk fbmgkhk w hagrlml rknnkecl -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl dkiek-, w xám
ma xa kxl ym qki vyiqbtlml uby hympkck ymy kctkval w yihytygy ymy qbytql,
xkqkihl k ymy rahydbqk hymy cackiqy uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy; uby mí xkqktá
ma én ny yigbyiqtk, ma wk il pbymy pkiqkmxk, uby gliqtk nkm pkiqkmxkm il
qayiy xa myñlt dlhyt kncbil. dytl bik glmk ubaytl mbdnagkt k vbymqtk
xytgyh, yiqty lqtkm, myñlt nagyigakhl, w ym uby, dltuby k xa kxl il ny qlxy
ckik hy myt ktelfamdl, uby ym nl uby wl qyxl, uby vbymqtk xytgyh ny
kglimyoy uby my gkmy nbycl gli ymqk dtaigymk, w kmí ubyhktá axdlmafanaqkhl
hy tygyfat óthyiym ktelfamdknym w vyihtá gli pkganahkh k mb axdytal w wl kn
pai hy xam hymylm; uby wl ry xatkhl fayi yi ynnl w rknnl dlt xa gbyiqk uby
il xy ymqá fayi uby xa kxl myk ktelfamdl, dltuby wl mlw aiúqan dktk nk
acnymak, dbym mlw gkmkhl, w kihktxy krltk k qtkyt hamdyimkgaliym dktk dlhyt
qyiyt tyiqk dlt nk acnymak, qyiayihl, glxl qyicl, xboyt w raolm, mytík
ibigk kgkfkt. kmí uby, myñlt, qlhl yn qluby ymqá yi uby xa kxl my gkmy
nbycl gli ymqk myñltk, uby rkmqk krltk il mé mb ctkgak, w kmí, il nk nnkxl
dlt mb ilxfty.

-nnáxkmy -tymdlihaó yn gbtk- nk dtaigymk xaglxaglik, dltuby, nnkxáihlmy mb
tyail xaglxagói, gnktl ymqá uby ynnk my rk hy nnkxkt kmí.

-il rkw hbhk yi yml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby wl ry vamql k xbgrlm qlxkt yn
kdynnahl w kngbtiak hyn nbckt hlihy ikgaytli, nnkxáihlmy dyhtl hy kngkná,
obki hy Úfyhk w haycl hy vknnkhlnah; w ymql xymxl my hyfy hy bmkt knná yi
cbaiyk: qlxkt nkm tyaikm nlm ilxftym hy mbm tyailm.

-kmí hyfy hy myt -haol yn gbtk-; w yi nl hyn gkmktmy vbymqtl kxl, wl rkté
yi ynnl qlhlm xam dlhytílm.

gli nl uby ubyhó qki gliqyiql mkigrl gbkiql yn gbtk khxatkhl hy mb
maxdnagahkh, w hy vyt gbái yigkokhlm qyiík yi nk pkiqkmík nlm xymxlm
hamdktkqym uby mb kxl, dbym mai kncbik hbhk my hkfk k yiqyihyt uby rkfík hy
vyiat k myt yxdytkhlt.

wk, yi ymql, my rkfík dbymql hltlqyk mlfty nk xbnk hyn gbtk w yn fktfytl my
rkfík kglxlhkhl kn tlmqtl nk fktfk hy nk glnk hy fbyw, w haoytli k mkigrl
uby nlm cbakmy khlihy hli ubaolqy ymqkfk; kn gbkn khvatqaytli uby il haoymy
uby glilgík kn nagyigakhl ia kn fktfytl, dltuby yi il glilgytnlm glimamqík
qlhl yn qluby hy vyiat k myt yxdytkhlt mb kxl; dbymql uby ia yn gbtk ia
gkthyial ubamaytli at gli ynnlm, dltuby il my ny kglthkmy k hli ubaolqy nk
dyihyigak uby gli gkthyial rkfík qyiahl, w yn gbtk dltuby il ytk xyiymqyt
dlt yiqligym mb dtymyigak. w kmí, nlm hyoktli at hynkiqy, w ynnlm nlm
pbytli macbayihl k day, dlgl k dlgl. il hyoó hy kvamkt yn gbtk nl uby rkfík
hy rkgyt hltlqyk; k nl uby ynnk haol uby hymgbahkmyi, uby qlhl my rktík,
mai pknqkt dbiql, glxl nl dyhíki w daiqkfki nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm.
qtym gbktqlm hy nycbk rkftíki kihkhl, gbkihl hymgbftaytli k hli ubaolqy
yiqty bikm aiqtagkhkm dyñkm, wk vymqahl, kbiuby il ktxkhl; w, kmí glxl
hltlqyk ny val w pby aipltxkhk hy mkigrl uby kubén ytk hli ubaolqy, hal hyn
kelqy k mb dknkptéi, macbaéihlny yn fayi fktfkhl fktfytl. w, yi nnyckihl
obiql k én, yn ymgbhytl my kttloó hy nk xbnk w pby k qlxkt yi nlm ftkelm k
hltlqyk, nk gbkn, kdyáihlmy gli ctkihy hymyivlnqbtk, my pby k raigkt hy
tlhannkm kiqy nkm hy hli ubaolqy; w, kbiuby én dbcikfk dlt nyvkiqktnk,
ynnk, mai nyvkiqktmy, ny pkfnó yi ymqk cbamk:

-hy kubí il xy nyvkiqkté, ¡lr vknytlml w ympltekhl gkfknnytl!, pkmqk uby nk
vbymqtk flihkh w gltqymík xy lqltcby bi hli, yn gbkn tyhbihktá yi rlitk w
dtye hy vbymqtk dytmlik, w yi dtl hy nk xám hymglimlnkhk w kctkvakhk
hligynnk uby yn mln rk vamql. w ma ym uby yn vknlt hy vbymqtl pbytqy ftkel
glttymdlihy k nk vle hy vbymqtk aixltqkn pkxk, lfnackhl ymqáam k pkvltygyt
k nk mai vyiqbtk uby hy qki nbyñym qayttkm vayiy, kn lnlt hy vbymqtl pkxlml
ilxfty, fbmgáihllm dktk tyxyhal hy mbm hymhagrkm.

-il lm tymdlihyté dknkftk, pytxlmk myñltk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ia laté
xám glmk hy vbymqtk pkgayihk, pkmqk uby lm nyvkiqéam hy qayttk.

-il xy nyvkiqkté, myñlt -tymdlihaó nk kpnacahk hligynnk-, ma dtaxytl, dlt
nk vbymqtk gltqymík, il xy ym lqltckhl yn hli uby dahl.

-wl vlm ny lqltcl w gligyhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, glxl il my rkwk hy
gbxdnat yi hkñl l xyicbk hy xa tyw, hy xa dkqtak w hy kubynnk uby hy xa
gltkeói w nafytqkh qayiy nk nnkvy.

-il mytá yi hkñl ia yi xyicbk hy nlm uby hygím, xa fbyi myñlt -tydnagó nk
hlnltlmk hligynnk.

w, ymqkihl yi ymql, my nnycó mkigrl dkiek kn líhl hy mb myñlt w xbw dkmaql
ny haol:

-fayi dbyhy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt, gligyhytny yn hli uby dahy, uby il ym
glmk hy ikhk: mónl ym xkqkt k bi cackiqkel, w ymqk uby nl dahy ym nk knqk
dtaigymk xaglxaglik, tyaik hyn ctki tyail xaglxagói hy yqaldík.

-myk ubayi pbyty -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby wl rkté nl uby mlw lfnackhl w
nl uby xy hagqk xa gligayigak, glipltxy k nl uby dtlpymkhl qyicl.

w, vlnvaéihlmy k nk hligynnk, haol:

-nk vbymqtk ctki pytxlmbtk my nyvkiqy, uby wl ny lqltcl yn hli uby dyhatxy
ubamayty.

-dbym yn uby dahl ym -haol nk hligynnk- uby nk vbymqtk xkciáiaxk dytmlik my
vyick nbycl glixacl hlihy wl ny nnyvkty, w xy dtlxyqk uby il my rk hy
yiqtyxyqyt yi lqtk kvyiqbtk ia hyxkihk kncbik rkmqk hktxy vyickiek hy bi
qtkahlt uby, gliqtk qlhl hytygrl havail w rbxkil, xy qayiy bmbtdkhl xa
tyail.

-hacl uby kmí nl lqltcl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w kmí dlhéam, myñltk,
hymhy rlw xám, hymygrkt nk xknyigliík uby lm pkqack w rkgyt uby glfty
ibyvlm ftílm w pbytekm vbymqtk hymxkwkhk ymdytkiek; uby, gli yn kwbhk hy
halm w nk hy xa ftkel, vlm lm vytéam dtymql tymqaqbahk yi vbymqtl tyail w
myiqkhk yi nk mannk hy vbymqtl kiqacbl w ctkihy ymqkhl, k dymkt w k
hymdygrl hy nlm plnnliym uby gliqtkhygatnl ubamaytyi. w xkilm k nkflt, uby
yi nk qkthkiek hagyi uby mbyny ymqkt yn dynactl.

nk xyiymqytlmk hligynnk dbció, gli xbgrk dltpík, dlt fymktny nkm xkilm, xkm
hli ubaolqy, uby yi qlhl ytk glxyhahl w gltqém gkfknnytl, okxám nl
glimaiqaó; kiqym, nk rael nyvkiqkt w nk kftkeó gli xbgrk gltqymík w
glxyhaxayiql, w xkihó k mkigrl uby tyubataymy nkm gaigrkm k tlgaikiqy w ny
ktxkmy nbycl kn dbiql. mkigrl hymglncó nkm ktxkm, uby, glxl qtlpyl, hy bi
átfln ymqkfki dyihayiqym, w, tyubatayihl nkm gaigrkm, yi bi dbiql ktxó k mb
myñlt; yn gbkn, vaéihlmy ktxkhl, haol:

-vkxlm hy kubí, yi yn ilxfty hy halm, k pkvltygyt ymqk ctki myñltk.
ymqáfkmy yn fktfytl kúi hy tlhannkm, qyiayihl ctki gbyiqk hy hamaxbnkt nk
tamk w hy uby il my ny gkwymy nk fktfk, gli gbwk gkíhk ubaeá ubyhktki qlhlm
mai glimycbat mb fbyik aiqyigaói; w, vayihl uby wk yn hli ymqkfk gligyhahl
w gli nk hanacyigak uby hli ubaolqy my knamqkfk dktk at k gbxdnatny, my
nyvkiqó w qlxó hy nk lqtk xkil k mb myñltk, w yiqty nlm hlm nk mbfaytli yi
nk xbnk. nbycl mbfaó hli ubaolqy mlfty tlgaikiqy, w yn fktfytl my kglxlhó
yi mb gkfknckhbtk, ubyháihlmy mkigrl k day, hlihy hy ibyvl my ny tyilvó nk
déthahk hyn tbgal, gli nk pknqk uby yiqligym ny rkgík; xkm qlhl nl nnyvkfk
gli cbmql, dlt dktygytny uby wk mb myñlt ymqkfk dbymql yi gkxail, w xbw k
dauby, hy myt yxdytkhlt; dltuby mai hbhk kncbik dyimkfk uby my rkfík hy
gkmkt gli kubynnk dtaigymk, w myt, dlt nl xyilm, tyw hy xaglxagói. mónl ny
hkfk dymkhbxfty yn dyimkt uby kubyn tyail ytk yi qayttk hy iyctlm, w uby nk
cyiqy uby dlt mbm vkmknnlm ny haymyi rkfíki hy myt qlhlm iyctlm; k nl gbkn
rael nbycl yi mb axkcaikgaói bi fbyi tyxyhal, w híolmy k mí xamxl:
-¿ubé my xy hk k xí uby xam vkmknnlm myki iyctlm? ¿rkftá xám uby gktckt gli
ynnlm w qtkytnlm k ymdkñk, hlihy nlm dlhté vyihyt, w khlihy xy nlm dkcktái
hy gliqkhl, hy gbwl haiytl dlhté glxdtkt kncúi qíqbnl l kncúi lpagal gli
uby vavat hymgkimkhl qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk? ¡il, mail hltxílm, w il
qyicáam aicyial ia rkfanahkh dktk hamdliyt hy nkm glmkm w dktk vyihyt
qtyaiqk l haye xan vkmknnlm yi hágkxy ymkm dkokm! dkt halm uby nlm ry hy
vlnkt, gragl gli ctkihy, l glxl dbhayty, w uby, dlt iyctlm uby myki, nlm ry
hy vlnvyt fnkiglm l kxktannlm. ¡nnycklm, uby xy xkxl yn hyhl!

gli ymql, kihkfk qki mlnígaql w qki gliqyiql uby my ny lnvahkfk nk
dymkhbxfty hy gkxaikt k day.

qlhl ymql xatkfki hy yiqty bikm ftyñkm gkthyial w yn gbtk, w il mkfíki ubé
rkgytmy dktk obiqktmy gli ynnlm; dytl yn gbtk, uby ytk ctki qtkgamqk,
axkcaió nbycl nl uby rktíki dktk glimycbat nl uby hymykfki; w pby uby gli
bikm qaoytkm uby qtkík yi bi ymqbgry ubaqó gli xbgrk dtymqyek nk fktfk k
gkthyial, w vamqaóny bi gkdlqannl dkthl uby én qtkík w halny bi ryttytbynl
iyctl, w én my ubyhó yi gknekm w yi obfói; w ubyhó qki lqtl hy nl uby kiqym
dktygík gkthyial, uby én xymxl il my glilgaytk, kbiuby k bi ymdyol my
xatktk. rygrl ymql, dbymql wk uby nlm lqtlm rkfíki dkmkhl khynkiqy yi qkiql
uby ynnlm my hamptkektli, gli pkganahkh mknaytli kn gkxail tykn kiqym uby
ynnlm, dltuby nkm xknyekm w xknlm dkmlm hy kubynnlm nbcktym il gligyhíki
uby kihbvaymyi qkiql nlm hy k gkfknnl glxl nlm hy k day. yi ypyql, ynnlm my
dbmaytli yi yn nnkil, k nk mknahk hy nk mayttk, w, kmí glxl mknaó hynnk hli
ubaolqy w mbm gkxktkhkm, yn gbtk my ny dbml k xatkt xbw hy ymdkgal, hkihl
myñknym hy uby ny afk tyglilgayihl; w, kn gkfl hy rkfytny bik fbyik dayek
ymqkhl xatkihl, my pby k én kfaytqlm nlm ftkelm w hagayihl k vlgym:
-dktk fayi myk rknnkhl yn ymdyol hy nk gkfknnytík, yn xa fbyi glxdkqtalqy
hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, nk pnlt w nk ikqk hy nk cyiqanyek, yn kxdktl w
tyxyhal hy nlm xyiymqytlmlm, nk ubaiqkymyigak hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym.
w, hagayihl ymql, qyiík kftkekhl dlt nk tlhannk hy nk daytik aeubaythk k
hli ubaolqy; yn gbkn, ymdkiqkhl hy nl uby vyík w lík hygat w rkgyt kubyn
rlxfty, my ny dbml k xatkt gli kqyigaói, w, kn pai, ny glilgaó w ubyhó glxl
ymdkiqkhl hy vytny, w rael ctkihy pbytek dlt kdyktmy; xkm yn gbtk il nl
glimaiqaó, dlt nl gbkn hli ubaolqy hygík:

-héoyxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt nagyigakhl, uby il ym tkeói uby wl ymqé k
gkfknnl, w bik qki tyvytyihk dytmlik glxl vbymqtk xytgyh ymqé k day.
-yml il glimyiqaté wl yi iaicúi xlhl -haol yn gbtk-: ymqémy nk vbymqtk
ctkihyek k gkfknnl, dbym ymqkihl k gkfknnl kgkfk nkm xkwltym pkekñkm w
kvyiqbtkm uby yi ibymqtk yhkh my rki vamql; uby k xí, kbiuby aihacil
mkgythlqy, fkmqktáxy mbfat yi nkm kigkm hy bik hymqkm xbnkm hymqlm myñltym
uby gli vbymqtk xytgyh gkxaiki, ma il nl rki dlt yilol. w kbi rkté gbyiqk
uby vlw gkfknnytl mlfty yn gkfknnl dyckml, l mlfty nk gyftk l knpkik yi uby
gkfknckfk kubyn pkxlml xltl xbektkuby, uby kúi rkmqk krltk wkgy yigkiqkhl
yi nk ctki gbymqk ebnyxk, uby hamqk dlgl hy nk ctki glxdnbql.

-kúi il gkík wl yi qkiql, xa myñlt nagyigakhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w wl
mé uby xa myñltk nk dtaigymk mytá mytvahk, dlt xa kxlt, hy xkihkt k mb
ymgbhytl hé k vbymqtk xytgyh nk mannk hy mb xbnk, uby én dlhtá kglxlhktmy
yi nkm kigkm, ma ym uby ynnk nkm mbpty.

-mí mbpty, k nl uby wl gtyl -tymdlihaó nk dtaigymk-; w qkxfaéi mé uby il
mytá xyiymqyt xkihátmynl kn myñlt xa ymgbhytl, uby én ym qki gltqém w qki
gltqymkil uby il glimyiqatá uby bik dytmlik ygnymaámqagk vkwk k day,
dbhayihl at k gkfknnl.

-kmí ym -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl.

w, kdyáihlmy yi bi dbiql, glivahó kn gbtk gli nk mannk, w én nk qlxó mai
rkgytmy xbgrl hy tlckt. w pby yn xkn uby kn mbfat k nkm kigkm yn fktfytl,
nk xbnk, uby, yi ypyql, ytk hy knubanyt, uby dktk hygat uby ytk xknk ymql
fkmqk, kneó bi dlgl nlm gbktqlm qtkmytlm w hal hlm glgym yi yn katy, uby, k
hktnkm yi yn dygrl hy xkymy iaglnám, l yi nk gkfyek, én haytk kn hakfnl nk
vyiahk dlt hli ubaolqy. gli qlhl yml, ny mlftymknqktli hy xkiytk uby gkwó
yi yn mbynl, gli qki dlgl gbahkhl hy nkm fktfkm, uby my ny gkwytli yi yn
mbynl; w, glxl my val mai ynnkm, il qbvl lqtl tyxyhal mail kgbhat k
gbftatmy yn tlmqtl gli kxfkm xkilm w k ubyoktmy uby ny rkfíki hyttafkhl nkm
xbynkm. hli ubaolqy, glxl val qlhl kubyn xkel hy fktfkm, mai ubaokhkm w mai
mkicty, nyolm hyn tlmqtl hyn ymgbhytl gkíhl, haol:

-¡vavy halm, uby ym ctki xankctl émqy! ¡nkm fktfkm ny rk hyttafkhl w
kttkigkhl hyn tlmqtl, glxl ma nkm ubaqktki kdlmqk!

yn gbtk, uby val yn dynactl uby glttík mb aivyigaói hy myt hymgbfaytqk,
kgbhaó nbycl k nkm fktfkm w pbymy gli ynnkm khlihy wkgík xkymy iaglnám,
hkihl kúi vlgym qlhkvík, w hy bi clndy, nnycáihlny nk gkfyek k mb dygrl, my
nkm dbml, xbtxbtkihl mlfty én bikm dknkftkm, uby haol uby ytk gaytql
yimknxl kdtldakhl dktk dyckt fktfkm, glxl nl vytíki; w, gbkihl my nkm qbvl
dbymqkm, my kdktqó, w ubyhó yn ymgbhytl qki fayi fktfkhl w qki mkil glxl hy
kiqym, hy uby my khxató hli ubaolqy mlftyxkiytk, w tlcó kn gbtk uby gbkihl
qbvaymy nbckt ny yimyñkmy kubyn yimknxl; uby én yiqyihík uby mb vatqbh k
xám uby dyckt fktfkm my hyfík hy ymqyihyt, dbym ymqkfk gnktl uby hy hlihy
nkm fktfkm my ubaqkmyi rkfík hy ubyhkt nk gktiy nnkckhk w xknqtygrk, w uby,
dbym qlhl nl mkikfk, k xám uby fktfkm kdtlvygrkfk.

-kmí ym -haol yn gbtk, w dtlxyqaó hy yimyñátmyny yi nk dtaxytk lgkmaói.
gligytqátlimy uby dlt yiqligym mbfaymy yn gbtk, w k qtygrlm my pbymyi nlm
qtym xbhkihl, rkmqk uby nnyckmyi k nk vyiqk, uby ymqktík rkmqk hlm nycbkm
hy knní. dbymqlm nlm qtym k gkfknnl, ym k mkfyt, hli ubaolqy, nk dtaigymk w
yn gbtk, w nlm qtym k day, gkthyial, yn fktfytl w mkigrl dkiek, hli ubaolqy
haol k nk hligynnk:

-vbymqtk ctkihyek, myñltk xík, cbíy dlt hlihy xám cbmql ny hayty.

w, kiqym uby ynnk tymdlihaymy, haol yn nagyigakhl:

-¿rkgak ubé tyail ubayty cbakt nk vbymqtk myñltík? ¿ym, dlt vyiqbtk, rkgak
yn hy xaglxagói?; uby mí hyfy hy myt, l wl mé dlgl hy tyailm.

ynnk, uby ymqkfk fayi yi qlhl, yiqyihaó uby rkfík hy tymdlihyt uby mí; w
kmí, haol:

-mí, myñlt, rkgak ymy tyail ym xa gkxail.

-ma kmí ym -haol yn gbtk-, dlt nk xaqkh hy xa dbyfnl ryxlm hy dkmkt, w hy
knní qlxktá vbymqtk xytgyh nk hyttlqk hy gktqkcyik, hlihy my dlhtá yxfktgkt
gli nk fbyik vyiqbtk; w ma rkw vayiql dtómdytl, xkt qtkiubanl w mai
flttkmgk, yi dlgl xyilm hy ibyvy kñlm my dlhtá ymqkt k vamqk hy nk ctki
nkcbik xylik, hacl, xyóqahym, uby ymqá dlgl xám hy gayi oltikhkm xám kgá
hyn tyail hy vbymqtk ctkihyek.

-vbymqtk xytgyh ymqá yickñkhl, myñlt xíl -haol ynnk-, dltuby il rk hlm kñlm
uby wl dktqí hén, w yi vythkh uby ibigk qbvy fbyi qayxdl, w, gli qlhl yml,
ry nnyckhl k vyt nl uby qkiql hymykfk, uby ym kn myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, gbwkm ibyvkm nnycktli k xam líhlm kmí glxl dbmy nlm daym yi ymdkñk,
w ynnkm xy xlvaytli k fbmgktny, dktk yiglxyihktxy yi mb gltqymík w pakt xa
obmqagak hyn vknlt hy mb aivyigafny ftkel.

-il xám: gymyi xam knkfkiekm -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, dltuby mlw
yiyxacl hy qlhl céiytl hy khbnkgaói; w, kbiuby émqk il nl myk, qlhkvík
lpyihyi xam gkmqkm ltyokm myxyokiqym dnáqagkm. nl uby wl mé hygat, myñltk
xík, uby ltk qyick vknlt l il, yn uby qbvayty l il qbvayty my rk hy yxdnykt
yi vbymqtl mytvagal rkmqk dythyt nk vahk; w kmí, hyokihl ymql dktk mb
qayxdl, tbycl kn myñlt nagyigakhl xy hack ubé ym nk gkbmk uby ny rk qtkíhl
dlt ymqkm dktqym, qki mlnl, w qki mai gtakhlm, w qki k nk nacytk, uby xy
dliy ymdkiql.

-k yml wl tymdlihyté gli ftyvyhkh -tymdlihaó yn gbtk-, dltuby mkftá vbymqtk
xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby wl w xkymy iaglnám, ibymqtl kxacl w ibymqtl
fktfytl, ífkxlm k myvannk k glftkt gaytql haiytl uby bi dktayiqy xíl uby rk
xbgrlm kñlm uby dkmó k aihakm xy rkfík yivakhl, w il qki dlglm uby il dkmki
hy mymyiqk xan dymlm yimkwkhlm, uby ym lqtl uby qkn; w, dkmkihl kwyt dlt
ymqlm nbcktym, ilm mknaytli kn yigbyiqtl gbkqtl mknqykhltym w ilm ubaqktli
rkmqk nkm fktfkm; w hy xlhl ilm nkm ubaqktli, uby ny glivail kn fktfytl
dliétmynkm dlmqaekm; w kbi k ymqy xkigyfl uby kubí vk -myñknkihl k
gkthyial- ny dbmaytli glxl hy ibyvl. w ym nl fbyil uby ym dúfnagk pkxk dlt
qlhlm ymqlm gliqltilm uby nlm uby ilm mknqyktli mli hy bilm cknylqym uby
hagyi uby nafytqó, gkma yi ymqy xymxl maqal, bi rlxfty qki vknayiqy uby, k
dymkt hyn glxamktal w hy nkm cbkthkm, nlm mlnqó k qlhlm; w, mai hbhk
kncbik, én hyfík hy ymqkt pbytk hy obagal, l hyfy hy myt qki ctkihy fynnkgl
glxl ynnlm, l kncúi rlxfty mai knxk w mai gligayigak, dbym ubaml mlnqkt kn
nlfl yiqty nkm lvyokm, k nk tkdlmk yiqty nkm cknnaikm, k nk xlmgk yiqty nk
xayn; ubaml hyptkbhkt nk obmqagak, at gliqtk mb tyw w myñlt ikqbtkn, dbym
pby gliqtk mbm obmqlm xkihkxayiqlm. ubaml, hacl, ubaqkt k nkm cknytkm mbm
daym, dliyt yi knfltlql k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh, uby rkfík xbgrlm kñlm uby
tydlmkfk; ubaml, paiknxyiqy, rkgyt bi rygrl dlt hlihy my daythk mb knxk w
il my ckiy mb gbytdl.

rkfíknym gliqkhl mkigrl kn gbtk w kn fktfytl nk kvyiqbtk hy nlm cknylqym,
uby kgkfó mb kxl gli qkiqk cnltak mbwk, w dlt ymql gktckfk nk xkil yn gbtk
typataéihlnk, dlt vyt nl uby rkgík l hygík hli ubaolqy; kn gbkn my ny
xbhkfk nk glnlt k gkhk dknkftk, w il lmkfk hygat uby én rkfík mahl yn
nafytqkhlt hy kubynnk fbyik cyiqy.

-Émqlm, dbym -haol yn gbtk-, pbytli nlm uby ilm tlfktli; uby halm, dlt mb
xamytaglthak, my nl dythliy kn uby il nlm hyoó nnyvkt kn hyfahl mbdnagal.





gkdíqbnl zzz. uby qtkqk hyn ctkgalml ktqapagal w lthyi uby my qbvl yi mkgkt
k ibymqtl yikxltkhl gkfknnytl hy nk kmdytímaxk dyiaqyigak yi uby my rkfík
dbymql


il rbfl fayi kgkfkhl yn gbtk, gbkihl mkigrl haol:

-dbym xík py, myñlt nagyigakhl, yn uby rael ymk pkekñk pby xa kxl, w il
dltuby wl il ny haoy kiqym w ny kvamé uby xatkmy nl uby rkgík, w uby ytk
dygkhl hktnym nafytqkh, dltuby qlhlm afki knní dlt ctkihímaxlm fynnkglm.
-¡xkokhytl! -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, k nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym il
nym qlgk ia kqkñy kvytacbkt ma nlm kpnacahlm, yigkhyikhlm w ldtymlm uby
yigbyiqtki dlt nlm gkxailm vki hy kubynnk xkiytk, l ymqái yi kubynnk
kicbmqak, dlt mbm gbndkm l dlt mbm ctkgakm; mónl ny qlgk kwbhktnym glxl k
xyiymqytlmlm, dliayihl nlm lolm yi mbm dyikm w il yi mbm fynnkubytíkm. wl
qldé bi tlmktal w mktqk hy cyiqy xlríik w hymhagrkhk, w ragy gli ynnlm nl
uby xa tynacaói xy dahy, w nl hyxám knná my kvyick; w k ubayi xkn ny rk
dktygahl, mknvl nk mkiqk haciahkh hyn myñlt nagyigakhl w mb rlitkhk
dytmlik, hacl uby mkfy dlgl hy kgrkuby hy gkfknnytík, w uby xayiqy glxl bi
rahydbqk w xkn ikgahl; w ymql ny rkté glilgyt gli xa ymdkhk, hlihy xám
nktckxyiqy my gliqayiy.

w ymql haol kpatxáihlmy yi nlm ymqtaflm w gknáihlmy yn xlttaói; dltuby nk
fkgík hy fktfytl, uby k mb gbyiqk ytk yn wynxl hy xkxftail, nnyvkfk glnckhl
hyn kteói hynkiqytl, rkmqk khlfktnk hyn xkn qtkqkxayiql uby nk ragaytli nlm
cknylqym.

hltlqyk, uby ytk hamgtyqk w hy ctki hlikaty, glxl ubayi wk mkfík yn
xyicbkhl rbxlt hy hli ubaolqy w uby qlhlm rkgíki fbtnk hén, mail mkigrl
dkiek, il ubaml myt dktk xyilm, w, vaéihlny qki yilokhl, ny haol:
-myñlt gkfknnytl, xaéxftymyny k nk vbymqtk xytgyh yn hli uby xy qayiy
dtlxyqahl, w uby, glipltxy k én, il dbyhy yiqtyxyqytmy yi lqtk kvyiqbtk,
dlt btcyiqy uby myk; mlmaycby vbymqtk xytgyh yn dygrl, uby ma yn myñlt
nagyigakhl mbdaytk uby dlt ymy aivagql ftkel rkfíki mahl naftkhlm nlm
cknylqym, én my haytk qtym dbiqlm yi nk flgk, w kbi my xlthaytk qtym vygym
nk nyicbk, kiqym uby rkfyt hagrl dknkftk uby yi hymdygrl hy vbymqtk xytgyh
tyhbihktk.

-yml obtl wl fayi -haol yn gbtk-, w kbi xy rbfaytk ubaqkhl bi faclqy.
-wl gknnkté, myñltk xík -haol hli ubaolqy-, w tydtaxaté nk obmqk gónytk uby
wk yi xa dygrl my rkfík nyvkiqkhl, w até ubayql w dkgípagl rkmqk qkiql uby
lm gbxdnk yn hli dtlxyqahl; dytl, yi dkcl hymqy fbyi hymyl, lm mbdnagl xy
hacáam, ma il my lm rkgy hy xkn, gbán ym nk vbymqtk gbaqk w gbáiqkm,
ubaéiym w gbánym mli nkm dytmlikm hy ubayi lm qyicl hy hkt hyfahk,
mkqampygrk w yiqytk vyickiek.

-yml rkté wl hy ckik -tymdlihaó hltlqyk-, ma ym uby il lm yipkhki lít
námqaxkm w hymctkgakm.

-il yipkhktá, myñltk xík -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

k nl uby tymdlihaó hltlqyk:

-dbym kmí ym, ymqéixy vbymqtkm xytgyhym kqyiqlm.

il rbfl ynnk hagrl ymql, gbkihl gkthyial w yn fktfytl my ny dbmaytli kn
nkhl, hymylmlm hy vyt góxl paicík mb ramqltak nk hamgtyqk hltlqyk; w nl
xamxl rael mkigrl, uby qki yickñkhl afk gli ynnk glxl mb kxl. w ynnk,
hymdbém hy rkfytmy dbymql fayi yi nk mannk w dtyvyiíhlmy gli qlmyt w rkgyt
lqtlm khyxkiym, gli xbgrl hlikaty, glxyieó k hygat hymqk xkiytk:
-«dtaxytkxyiqy, ubaytl uby vbymqtkm xytgyhym mydki, myñltym xílm, uby k xí
xy nnkxki...»

w hyqúvlmy kubí bi dlgl, dltuby my ny lnvahó yn ilxfty uby yn gbtk ny rkfík
dbymql; dytl én kgbhaó kn tyxyhal, dltuby yiqyihaó yi nl uby tydktkfk, w
haol:

-il ym xktkvannk, myñltk xík, uby nk vbymqtk ctkihyek my qbtfy w yxdkgry
gliqkihl mbm hymvyiqbtkm, uby ynnkm mbynyi myt qknym, uby xbgrkm vygym
ubaqki nk xyxltak k nlm uby xknqtkqki, hy qkn xkiytk uby kbi hy mbm xymxlm
ilxftym il my nym kgbythk, glxl rki rygrl gli vbymqtk ctki myñltík, uby my
rk lnvahkhl uby my nnkxk nk dtaigymk xaglxaglik, nycíqaxk rytyhytk hyn ctki
tyail xaglxagói; w gli ymqy kdbiqkxayiql dbyhy nk vbymqtk ctkihyek tyhbgat
krltk páganxyiqy k mb nkmqaxkhk xyxltak qlhl kubynnl uby gliqkt ubamayty.
-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó nk hligynnk-, w hymhy kubí khynkiqy gtyl uby
il mytá xyiymqyt kdbiqktxy ikhk, uby wl mknhté k fbyi dbytql gli xa
vythkhytk ramqltak. «nk gbkn ym uby yn tyw xa dkhty, uby my nnkxk qaikgtal
yn mkfahlt, pby xbw hlgql yi ymql uby nnkxki yn ktqy xácagk, w kngkieó dlt
mb gayigak uby xa xkhty, uby my nnkxkfk nk tyaik oktkxannk, rkfík hy xltat
dtaxytl uby én, w uby hy knní k dlgl qayxdl én qkxfaéi rkfík hy dkmkt hymqk
vahk w wl rkfík hy ubyhkt rbétpkik hy dkhty w xkhty. dytl hygík én uby il
ny pkqackfk qkiql ymql gbkiql ny dliík yi glipbmaói mkfyt, dlt glmk xbw
gaytqk, uby bi hymglxbikn cackiqy, myñlt hy bik ctkihy íimbnk, uby gkma
knaihk gli ibymqtl tyail, nnkxkhl dkihkpankihl hy nk plmgk vamqk (dltuby ym
glmk kvytacbkhk uby, kbiuby qayiy nlm lolm yi mb nbckt w hytygrlm, mayxdty
xatk kn tyvém, glxl ma pbymy faegl, w ymql nl rkgy én hy xknacil w dlt
dliyt xayhl w ymdkiql k nlm uby xatk); hacl uby mbdl uby ymqy cackiqy, yi
mkfayihl xa ltpkihkh, rkfík hy dkmkt gli ctki dlhytíl mlfty xa tyail w xy
nl rkfík hy ubaqkt qlhl, mai hyoktxy bik dyubyñk knhyk hlihy xy tyglcaymy;
dytl uby dlhík ymgbmkt qlhk ymqk tbaik w hymctkgak ma wl xy ubamaymy gkmkt
gli én; xkm, k nl uby én yiqyihík, okxám dyimkfk uby xy vyihtík k xí yi
vlnbiqkh hy rkgyt qki hymacbkn gkmkxayiql; w haol yi ymql nk dbtk vythkh,
dltuby okxám xy rk dkmkhl dlt yn dyimkxayiql gkmktxy gli kubyn cackiqy,
dytl ia gli lqtl kncbil, dlt ctkihy w hymkpltkhl uby pbymy. haol qkxfaéi xa
dkhty uby, hymdbém uby én pbymy xbytql w vaymy wl uby dkihkpankihl
glxyiekfk k dkmkt mlfty xa tyail, uby il kcbkthkmy k dliytxy yi hypyimk,
dltuby mytík hymqtbatxy, mail uby naftyxyiqy ny hyokmy hymyxfktkekhl yn
tyail, ma ubytík ymgbmkt nk xbytqy w qlqkn hymqtbagaói hy xam fbyilm w
nyknym vkmknnlm, dltuby il rkfík hy myt dlmafny hypyihytxy hy nk yihakfnkhk
pbytek hyn cackiqy; mail uby nbycl, gli kncbilm hy nlm xílm, xy dbmaymy yi
gkxail hy nkm ymdkñkm, hlihy rknnktík yn tyxyhal hy xam xknym rknnkihl k bi
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, gbwk pkxk yi ymqy qayxdl my ymqyihytík dlt qlhl ymqy
tyail, yn gbkn my rkfík hy nnkxkt, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, hli kelqy l hli
caclqy.»

-hli ubaolqy hatík, myñltk -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl dkiek-, l, dlt lqtl
ilxfty, yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol hltlqyk-. «haol xám: uby rkfík hy myt knql hy
gbytdl, mygl hy tlmqtl, w uby yi yn nkhl hytygrl, hyfkol hyn rlxftl
aeubaythl, l dlt knní obiql, rkfík hy qyiyt bi nbikt dkthl gli gaytqlm
gkfynnlm k xkiytk hy gythkm.»

yi lwyihl ymql hli ubaolqy, haol k mb ymgbhytl:

-qyi kubí, mkigrl, raol, kwúhkxy k hymibhkt, uby ubaytl vyt ma mlw yn
gkfknnytl uby kubyn mkfal tyw hyoó dtlpyqaekhl.

-dbym, ¿dktk ubé ubayty vbymqtk xytgyh hymibhktmy? -haol hltlqyk.
-dktk vyt ma qyicl ymy nbikt uby vbymqtl dkhty haol -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.
-il rkw dktk ubé hymibhktmy -haol mkigrl-, uby wl mé uby qayiy vbymqtk
xytgyh bi nbikt hymkm myñkm yi nk xaqkh hyn ymdaikel, uby ym myñkn hy myt
rlxfty pbytqy.

-yml fkmqk -haol hltlqyk-, dltuby gli nlm kxaclm il my rk hy xatkt yi dlgkm
glmkm, w uby ymqé yi yn rlxftl l uby ymqé yi yn ymdaikel, axdltqk dlgl;
fkmqk uby rkwk nbikt, w ymqé hlihy ymqbvayty, dbym qlhl ym bik xymxk gktiy;
w, mai hbhk, kgytqó xa fbyi dkhty yi qlhl, w wl ry kgytqkhl yi yiglxyihktxy
kn myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby én ym dlt ubayi xa dkhty haol, dbym nkm myñknym
hyn tlmqtl vayiyi gli nkm hy nk fbyik pkxk uby ymqy gkfknnytl qayiy il mónl
yi ymdkñk, dytl yi qlhk nk xkigrk, dbym kdyikm xy rbfy hymyxfktgkhl yi
lmbik, gbkihl lí hygat qkiqkm rkekñkm mbwkm, uby nbycl xy hal yn knxk uby
ytk yn xymxl uby vyiík k fbmgkt.

-dbym, ¿góxl my hymyxfktgó vbymqtk xytgyh yi lmbik, myñltk xík -dtycbiqó
hli ubaolqy-, ma il ym dbytql hy xkt?

xkm, kiqym uby hltlqyk tymdlihaymy, qlxó yn gbtk nk xkil w haol:

-hyfy hy ubytyt hygat nk myñltk dtaigymk uby, hymdbém uby hymyxfktgó yi
xánkck, nk dtaxytk dktqy hlihy lwó ibyvkm hy vbymqtk xytgyh pby yi lmbik.
-yml ubamy hygat -haol hltlqyk.

-w ymql nnyvk gkxail -haol yn gbtk-, w dtlmack vbymqtk xkoymqkh khynkiqy.
-il rkw uby dtlmycbat -tymdlihaó hltlqyk-, mail uby, paiknxyiqy, xa mbytqy
rk mahl qki fbyik yi rknnkt kn myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby wk xy gbyiql w qyicl
dlt tyaik w myñltk hy qlhl xa tyail, dbym én, dlt mb gltqymík w
xkciapagyigak, xy rk dtlxyqahl yn hli hy atmy glixacl hlihyubaytk uby wl ny
nnyvkty, uby il mytá k lqtk dktqy uby k dliytny hynkiqy hy dkihkpankihl hy
nk plmgk vamqk, dktk uby ny xkqy w xy tymqaqbwk nl uby qki gliqtk tkeói xy
qayiy bmbtdkhl: uby qlhl ymql rk hy mbgyhyt k dyhat hy flgk, dbym kmí nl
hyoó dtlpyqaekhl qaikgtal yn mkfahlt, xa fbyi dkhty; yn gbkn qkxfaéi hyoó
hagrl w ymgtaql yi nyqtkm gknhykm, l ctayckm, uby wl il nkm mé nyyt, uby ma
ymqy gkfknnytl hy nk dtlpygík, hymdbém hy rkfyt hyclnnkhl kn cackiqy,
ubamaymy gkmktmy glixacl, uby wl xy lqltckmy nbycl mai tédnagk kncbik dlt
mb nycíqaxk ymdlmk, w ny haymy nk dlmymaói hy xa tyail, obiql gli nk hy xa
dytmlik.

-¿ubé qy dktygy, mkigrl kxacl? -haol k ymqy dbiql hli ubaolqy-. ¿il lwym nl
uby dkmk? ¿il qy nl haoy wl? xatk ma qyiyxlm wk tyail uby xkihkt w tyaik
gli ubayi gkmkt.

-¡yml obtl wl -haol mkigrl- dktk yn dbql uby il my gkmkty yi kftayihl yn
ckeikqagl kn myñlt dkihkrankhl! dbym, ¡xliqk uby ym xknk nk tyaik! ¡kmí my
xy vbynvki nkm dbnckm hy nk gkxk!

w, hagayihl ymql, hal hlm ekdkqyqkm yi yn katy, gli xbymqtkm hy ctkihímaxl
gliqyiql, w nbycl pby k qlxkt nkm tayihkm hy nk xbnk hy hltlqyk, w,
rkgaéihlnk hyqyiyt, my raigó hy tlhannkm kiqy ynnk, mbdnagáihlny ny haymy
nkm xkilm dktk fymátmynkm, yi myñkn uby nk tygafík dlt mb tyaik w myñltk.
¿ubaéi il rkfík hy tyít hy nlm gatgbmqkiqym, vayihl nk nlgbtk hyn kxl w nk
maxdnagahkh hyn gtakhl? yi ypygql, hltlqyk my nkm hal, w ny dtlxyqaó hy
rkgytny ctki myñlt yi mb tyail, gbkihl yn gaynl ny ragaymy qkiql fayi uby
my nl hyokmy glftkt w clekt. kctkhygaómynl mkigrl gli qknym dknkftkm uby
tyilvó nk tamk yi qlhlm.

-Émqk, myñltym -dtlmacbaó hltlqyk-, ym xa ramqltak: mónl tymqk dlt hygatlm
uby hy gbkiqk cyiqy hy kglxdkñkxayiql mkubé hy xa tyail il xy rk ubyhkhl
mail mónl ymqy fbyi fktfkhl ymgbhytl, dltuby qlhlm my kiycktli yi bik ctki
flttkmgk uby qbvaxlm k vamqk hyn dbytql, w én w wl mknaxlm yi hlm qkfnkm k
qayttk, glxl dlt xankctl; w kmí, ym qlhl xankctl w xamqytal yn hamgbtml hy
xa vahk, glxl nl rkftéam ilqkhl. w ma yi kncbik glmk ry kihkhl hyxkmakhk, l
il qki kgytqkhk glxl hyfaytk, ygrkh nk gbndk k nl uby yn myñlt nagyigakhl
haol kn dtaigadal hy xa gbyiql: uby nlm qtkfkolm gliqaiblm w
yzqtklthaiktalm ubaqki nk xyxltak kn uby nlm dkhygy.

-Émk il xy ubaqktái k xí, ¡lr knqk w vknytlmk myñltk! -haol hli ubaolqy-,
gbkiqlm wl dkmkty yi mytvatlm, dlt ctkihym w il vamqlm uby myki; w kmí, hy
ibyvl glipatxl yn hli uby lm ry dtlxyqahl, w obtl hy at gli vlm kn gkfl hyn
xbihl, rkmqk vytxy gli yn paytl yiyxacl vbymqtl, k ubayi dayiml, gli yn
kwbhk hy halm w hy xa ftkel, qkokt nk gkfyek mlfytfak gli nlm panlm
hymqk... il ubaytl hygat fbyik ymdkhk, xytgyh k caiém hy dkmkxliqy, uby xy
nnyvó nk xík.

ymql haol yiqty hayiqym, w dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-w hymdbém hy rkfétmynk qkokhl w dbémqllm yi dkgípagk dlmymaói hy vbymqtl
ymqkhl, ubyhktá k vbymqtk vlnbiqkh rkgyt hy vbymqtk dytmlik nl uby xám yi
qknkiqy lm vaiayty; dltuby, xayiqtkm uby wl qbvayty lgbdkhk nk xyxltak w
gkbqavk nk vlnbiqkh, dythahl yn yiqyihaxayiql, k kubynnk..., w il hacl xám,
il ym dlmafny uby wl kttlmqty, ia dlt dayiml, yn gkmktxy, kbiuby pbymy gli
yn kvy péiaz.

dktygaóny qki xkn k mkigrl nl uby únqaxkxyiqy mb kxl haol kgytgk hy il
ubytyt gkmktmy, uby, gli ctkihy yilol, knekihl nk vle, haol:

-vlql k xí, w obtl k xí, uby il qayiy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy,
gkfkn obagal. dbym, ¿góxl ym dlmafny uby dliy vbymqtk xytgyh yi hbhk yn
gkmktmy gli qki knqk dtaigymk glxl kubémqk? ¿dayimk uby ny rk hy lptygyt nk
pltqbik, qtkm gkhk gkiqannl, myxyokiqy vyiqbtk glxl nk uby krltk my ny
lptygy? ¿ym, dlt hagrk, xám rytxlmk xa myñltk hbngaiyk? il, dlt gaytql, ia
kbi gli nk xaqkh, w kbi ymqlw dlt hygat uby il nnyck k mb ekdkql hy nk uby
ymqá hynkiqy. kmí, iltkxknk kngkiekté wl yn glihkhl uby ymdytl, ma vbymqtk
xytgyh my kihk k dyhat glqbpkm yi yn clnpl. gámymy, gámymy nbycl,
yiglxaéihlny wl k mkqkiám, w qlxy ymy tyail uby my ny vayiy k nkm xkilm hy
vlfam, vlfam, w, yi mayihl tyw, ráckxy xktubém l khynkiqkhl, w nbycl,
maubaytk my nl nnyvy yn hakfnl qlhl.

hli ubaolqy, uby qknym fnkmpyxakm lwó hygat gliqtk mb myñltk hbngaiyk, il
nl dbhl mbptat, w, knekihl yn nkieói, mai rkfnknny dknkftk k mkigrl w mai
hygatny ymqk flgk ym xík, ny hal qknym hlm dknlm uby hal gli én yi qayttk;
w ma il pbytk dltuby hltlqyk ny hal vlgym uby il ny haytk xám, mai hbhk ny
ubaqktk knní nk vahk.

-¿dyimáam -ny haol k gkfl hy tkql-, vannkil tbai, uby rk hy rkfyt nbckt
mayxdty dktk dliytxy nk xkil yi nk rltgkokhbtk, w uby qlhl rk hy myt yttkt
vlm w dythliktlm wl? dbym il nl dyiméam, fynnkgl hymglxbnckhl, uby mai hbhk
nl ymqám, dbym rkm dbymql nyicbk yi nk mai dkt hbngaiyk. ¿w il mkféam vlm,
ckñái, pkubíi, fynaqty, uby ma il pbymy dlt yn vknlt uby ynnk aipbihy yi xa
ftkel, uby il ny qyihtík wl dktk xkqkt bik dbnck? hygah, mlgkttói hy nyicbk
vadytaik, ¿w ubaéi dyimáam uby rk ckikhl ymqy tyail w gltqkhl nk gkfyek k
ymqy cackiqy, w régrllm k vlm xktubém, uby qlhl ymql hlw wk dlt rygrl w dlt
glmk dkmkhk yi glmk obeckhk, ma il ym yn vknlt hy hbngaiyk, qlxkihl k xa
ftkel dlt aimqtbxyiql hy mbm rkekñkm? ynnk dynyk yi xí, w vyigy yi xí, w wl
vavl w tymdatl yi ynnk, w qyicl vahk w myt. ¡lr rahydbqk fynnkgl, w góxl
mlam hymkctkhygahl: uby lm vyam nyvkiqkhl hyn dlnvl hy nk qayttk k myt
myñlt hy qíqbnl, w glttymdlihéam k qki fbyik lftk gli hygat xkn hy ubayi lm
nk rael!

il ymqkfk qki xknqtygrl mkigrl uby il lwymy qlhl gbkiql mb kxl ny hygík, w,
nyvkiqáihlmy gli bi dlgl hy dtymqyek, my pby k dliyt hyqtám hyn dknkptéi hy
hltlqyk, w hymhy knní haol k mb kxl:

-híckxy, myñlt: ma vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy hyqytxaikhl hy il gkmktmy gli ymqk
ctki dtaigymk, gnktl ymqá uby il mytá yn tyail mbwl; w, il maéihlnl, ¿ubé
xytgyhym xy dbyhy rkgyt? ymql ym hy nl uby wl xy ubyol; gámymy vbymqtk
xytgyh bik dlt bik gli ymqk tyaik, krltk uby nk qyiyxlm kubí glxl nnlvahk
hyn gaynl, w hymdbém dbyhy vlnvytmy gli xa myñltk hbngaiyk; uby tywym hyfy
hy rkfyt rkfahl yi yn xbihl uby rkwki mahl kxkigyfkhlm. yi nl hy nk
rytxlmbtk il xy yiqtyxyql; uby, yi vythkh, ma vk k hygatnk, uby yiqtkxfkm
xy dktygyi fayi, dbymql uby wl ibigk ry vamql k nk myñltk hbngaiyk.
-¿góxl uby il nk rkm vamql, qtkahlt fnkmpyxl? -haol hli ubaolqy-. dbym, ¿il
kgkfkm hy qtkytxy krltk bi tygkhl hy mb dktqy?

-hacl uby il nk ry vamql qki hymdkgal -haol mkigrl- uby dbyhk rkfyt ilqkhl
dktqagbnktxyiqy mb rytxlmbtk w mbm fbyikm dktqym dbiql dlt dbiql; dytl kmí,
k fbnql, xy dktygy fayi.

-krltk qy hamgbndl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w dythóikxy yn yilol uby qy ry hkhl,
uby nlm dtaxytlm xlvaxayiqlm il mli yi xkilm hy nlm rlxftym.

-wk wl nl vyl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w kmí, yi xí nk ckik hy rkfnkt mayxdty ym
dtaxytl xlvaxayiql, w il dbyhl hyokt hy hygat, dlt bik vye maubaytk, nl uby
xy vayiy k nk nyicbk.

-gli qlhl yml -haol hli ubaolqy-, xatk, mkigrl, nl uby rkfnkm, dltuby
qkiqkm vygym vk yn gkiqktannl k nk pbyiqy..., w il qy hacl xám.

-krltk fayi -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, halm ymqá yi yn gaynl, uby vy nkm qtkxdkm,
w mytá obye hy ubaéi rkgy xám xkn: wl yi il rkfnkt fayi, l vbymqtk xytgyh
yi lftknnl.

-il rkwk xám -haol hltlqyk-: glttyh, mkigrl, w fymkh nk xkil k vbymqtl
myñlt, w dyhanhy dythói, w hy kubí khynkiqy kihkh xám kqyiqkhl yi vbymqtkm
knkfkiekm w vaqbdytalm, w il hacáam xkn hy kubymk myñltk qlflmk, k ubayi wl
il glilegl ma il ym dktk mytvannk, w qyiyh glipakiek yi halm, uby il lm rk
hy pknqkt bi ymqkhl hlihy vaváam glxl bi dtíigady.

pby mkigrl gkfaefkol w dahaó nk xkil k mb myñlt, w én my nk hal gli
tydlmkhl gliqaiyiqy; w, hymdbém uby my nk rbfl fymkhl, ny ygró nk
fyihagaói, w haol k mkigrl uby my khynkiqkmyi bi dlgl, uby qyiík uby
dtycbiqknny w uby hydktqat gli én glmkm hy xbgrk axdltqkigak. ríelnl kmí
mkigrl w kdktqátlimy nlm hlm kncl khynkiqy, w híolny hli ubaolqy:
-hymdbém uby vyiamqy, il ry qyiahl nbckt ia ymdkgal dktk dtycbiqktqy xbgrkm
glmkm hy dktqagbnktahkh kgytgk hy nk yxfkokhk uby nnyvkmqy w hy nk
tymdbymqk uby qtboamqy; w krltk, dbym nk pltqbik ilm rk gligyhahl qayxdl w
nbckt, il xy iaycbym qú nk vyiqbtk uby dbyhym hktxy gli qki fbyikm ibyvkm.
-dtycbiqy vbymqtk xytgyh nl uby ubamayty -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby k qlhl
hkté qki fbyik mknahk glxl qbvy nk yiqtkhk. dytl mbdnagl k vbymqtk xytgyh,
myñlt xíl, uby il myk hy kubí khynkiqy qki vyickqavl.

-¿dlt ubé nl hagym, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-híclnl -tymdlihaó- dltuby ymqlm dknlm hy kcltk xám pbytli dlt nk dyihyigak
uby yiqty nlm hlm qtkfó yn hakfnl nk lqtk ilgry, uby dlt nl uby haoy gliqtk
xa myñltk hbngaiyk, k ubayi kxl w tyvytyigal glxl k bik tynaubak, kbiuby yi
ynnk il nl rkwk, mónl dlt myt glmk hy vbymqtk xytgyh.

-il qltiym k ymkm dnáqagkm, mkigrl, dlt qb vahk -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby xy
hki dymkhbxfty; wk qy dythlié yiqligym, w fayi mkfym qú uby mbyny hygatmy:
k dygkhl ibyvl, dyiaqyigak ibyvk.

yi qkiql uby nlm hlm afki yi ymqkm dnáqagkm, haol yn gbtk k hltlqyk uby
rkfík kihkhl xbw hamgtyqk, kmí yi yn gbyiql glxl yi nk ftyvyhkh hén, w yi
nk maxanaqbh uby qbvl gli nlm hy nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm. ynnk haol uby
xbgrlm tkqlm my rkfík yiqtyqyiahl yi nyynnlm, dytl uby il mkfík ynnk hóihy
ytki nkm dtlvaigakm ia dbytqlm hy xkt, w uby kmí rkfík hagrl k qayiql uby
my rkfík hymyxfktgkhl yi lmbik.

-wl nl yiqyihí kmí -haol yn gbtk-, w dlt yml kgbhí nbycl k hygat nl uby
haoy, gli uby my kglxlhó qlhl. dytl, ¿il ym glmk ymqtkñk vyt gli gbáiqk
pkganahkh gtyy ymqy hymvyiqbtkhl rahkncl qlhkm ymqkm aivyigaliym w
xyiqatkm, mónl dltuby nnyvki yn ymqanl w xlhl hy nkm iygyhkhym hy mbm
naftlm?

-mí ym -haol gkthyial-, w qki tktk w ibigk vamqk, uby wl il mé ma ubytayihl
aivyiqktnk w pkftagktnk xyiqatlmkxyiqy, rbfaytk qki kcbhl aicyial uby
dbhaytk hkt yi ynnk.

-dbym lqtk glmk rkw yi ynnl -haol yn gbtk-: uby pbytk hy nkm maxdnagahkhym
uby ymqy fbyi rahkncl hagy qlgkiqym k mb nlgbtk, ma ny qtkqki hy lqtkm
glmkm, hamgbtty gli fliímaxkm tkeliym w xbymqtk qyiyt bi yiqyihaxayiql
gnktl w kdkgafny yi qlhl. hy xkiytk uby, glxl il ny qlubyi yi mbm
gkfknnytíkm, il rkftá ikhay uby ny obecby mail dlt hy xbw fbyi
yiqyihaxayiql.

yi qkiql uby ynnlm afki yi ymqk glivytmkgaói, dtlmacbaó hli ubaolqy gli nk
mbwk w haol k mkigrl:

-ygryxlm, dkiek kxacl, dynannlm k nk xkt yi ymql hy ibymqtkm dyihyigakm, w
haxy krltk, mai qyiyt gbyiqk gli yilol ia tyiglt kncbil: ¿hóihy, góxl w
gbáihl rknnkmqy k hbngaiyk? ¿ubé rkgík? ¿ubé ny haoamqy? ¿ubé qy tymdlihaó?
¿ubé tlmqtl rael gbkihl nyík xa gktqk? ¿ubaéi qy nk qtkmnkhó? w qlhl
kubynnl uby vaytym uby yi ymqy gkml ym hacil hy mkfytmy, hy dtycbiqktmy w
mkqampkgytmy, mai uby kñkhkm l xayiqkm dlt hktxy cbmql, ia xyilm qy kgltqym
dlt il ubaqátxyny.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma vk k hygat nk vythkh, nk gktqk il xy nk
qtkmnkhó ikhay, dltuby wl il nnyvé gktqk kncbik.

-kmí ym glxl qú hagym -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby yn naftannl hy xyxltak
hlihy wl nk ymgtafí ny rknné yi xa dlhyt k gkfl hy hlm híkm hy qb dktqahk,
nl gbkn xy gkbmó ctkihímaxk dyik, dlt il mkfyt nl uby rkfíkm qú hy rkgyt
gbkihl qy vaymym mai gktqk, w gtyí mayxdty uby qy vlnvaytkm hymhy yn nbckt
hlihy nk ygrktkm xyilm.

-kmí pbytk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma il nk rbfaytk wl qlxkhl yi nk xyxltak
gbkihl vbymqtk xytgyh xy nk nywó, hy xkiytk uby my nk haoy k bi mkgtamqái,
uby xy nk qtkmnkhó hyn yiqyihaxayiql, qki dbiql dlt dbiql, uby haol uby yi
qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk, kbiuby rkfík nyíhl xbgrkm gktqkm hy hymglxbiaói,
il rkfík vamql ia nyíhl qki naihk gktqk glxl kubénnk.

-w ¿qaéiymnk qlhkvík yi nk xyxltak, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-il, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby hymdbém uby nk ha, glxl va uby il
rkfík hy myt hy xám dtlvygrl, ha yi lnvahknnk. w ma kncl my xy kgbythk, ym
kubynnl hyn mlfkokhk, hacl, hyn mlfytkik myñltk, w nl únqaxl: vbymqtl rkmqk
nk xbytqy, yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk. w, yi xyhal hymqkm hlm glmkm,
ny dbmy xám hy qtygayiqkm knxkm, w vahkm, w lolm xílm.





gkdíqbnl zzza. hy nlm mkftlmlm tkelikxayiqlm uby dkmktli yiqty hli ubaolqy
w mkigrl dkiek, mb ymgbhytl, gli lqtlm mbgymlm


-qlhl yml il xy hymgliqyiqk; dtlmacby khynkiqy -haol hli ubaolqy-.
nnyckmqy, ¿w ubé rkgík kubynnk tyaik hy nk rytxlmbtk? k fbyi mycbtl uby nk
rknnkmqy yimktqkihl dytnkm, l flthkihl kncbik yxdtymk gli ltl hy gkñbqannl
dktk ymqy mb gkbqavl gkfknnytl.

-il nk rknné -tymdlihaó mkigrl- mail krygrkihl hlm rkiyckm hy qtacl yi bi
glttkn hy mb gkmk.

-dbym rke gbyiqk -haol hli ubaolqy- uby nlm ctkilm hy kubyn qtacl ytki
ctkilm hy dytnkm, qlgkhlm hy mbm xkilm. w ma xatkmqy, kxacl, yn qtacl ¿ytk
gkihykn, l qtygryn?

-il ytk mail tbfaói -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-dbym wl qy kmycbtl -haol hli ubaolqy- uby, krygrkhl dlt mbm xkilm, rael
dki gkihykn, mai hbhk kncbik. dytl dkmk khynkiqy: gbkihl ny hamqy xa gktqk,
¿fymónk? ¿dúmlmynk mlfty nk gkfyek? ¿rael kncbik gytyxliak hacik hy qkn
gktqk, l ubé rael?

-gbkihl wl my nk afk k hkt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ynnk ymqkfk yi nk pbck hyn
xyiyl hy bik fbyik dktqy hy qtacl uby qyiík yi nk gtafk, w híolxy: ''dliyh,
kxacl, ymk gktqk mlfty kubyn glmqkn, uby il nk dbyhl nyyt rkmqk uby kgkfy
hy kgtafkt qlhl nl uby kubí ymqá''.

-¡hamgtyqk myñltk! -haol hli ubaolqy-. yml hyfaó hy myt dlt nyytnk hymdkgal
w tygtyktmy gli ynnk. khynkiqy, mkigrl: w, yi qkiql uby ymqkfk yi mb
xyiymqyt, ¿ubé glnlubalm dkmó gliqacl? ¿ubé qy dtycbiqó hy xí? w qú, ¿ubé
ny tymdlihamqy? kgkfk, gbéiqkxynl qlhl; il my qy ubyhy yi yn qaiqytl bik
xíiaxk.

-ynnk il xy dtycbiqó ikhk -haol mkigrl-, xkm wl ny haoy hy nk xkiytk uby
vbymqtk xytgyh, dlt mb mytvagal, ubyhkfk rkgayihl dyiaqyigak, hymibhl hy nk
gaiqbtk kttafk, xyqahl yiqty ymqkm mayttkm glxl ma pbytk mknvkoy, hbtxayihl
yi yn mbynl, mai glxyt dki k xkiqynym ia mai dyaiktmy nk fktfk, nnltkihl w
xknhagayihl mb pltqbik.

-yi hygat uby xknhygík xa pltqbik haoamqy xkn -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby
kiqym nk fyihacl w fyihygaté qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk, dlt rkfytxy rygrl
hacil hy xytygyt kxkt qki knqk myñltk glxl hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

-qki knqk ym -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby k fbyik py uby xy nnyvk k xí xám hy bi
glql.

-dbym, ¿góxl, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy-. ¿rkmqy xyhahl qú gli ynnk?
-xyhíxy yi ymqk xkiytk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: uby, nnycáihlny k kwbhkt k dliyt
bi glmqkn hy qtacl mlfty bi obxyiql, nnyckxlm qki obiqlm uby ygré hy vyt
uby xy nnyvkfk xám hy bi ctki dknxl.

-dbym ¡ym vythkh -tydnagó hli ubaolqy- uby il kglxdkñk ymk ctkihyek w nk
khltik gli xan xannliym w ctkgakm hyn knxk! dytl il xy iycktám, mkigrl, bik
glmk: gbkihl nnyckmqy obiql k ynnk, ¿il myiqamqy bi lnlt mkfyl, bik
ptkckigak ktlxáqagk, w bi il mé ubé hy fbyil, uby wl il kgaytql k hknny
ilxfty? hacl, ¿bi qbrl l qbpl glxl ma ymqbvaytkm yi nk qayihk hy kncúi
gbtalml cbkiqytl?

-nl uby mé hygat -haol mkigrl- ym uby myiqí bi lnltgannl kncl rlxftbil; w
hyfík hy myt uby ynnk, gli yn xbgrl yoytgagal, ymqkfk mbhkhk w kncl
glttylmk.

-il mytík yml -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, mail uby qú hyfíkm hy ymqkt
tlxkhaekhl, l qy hyfamqy hy lnyt k qa xamxl; dltuby wl mé fayi k nl uby
rbyny kubynnk tlmk yiqty ymdaikm, kubyn natal hyn gkxdl, kubyn áxfkt
hymnyíhl.

-qlhl dbyhy myt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby xbgrkm vygym mkny hy xí kubyn lnlt
uby yiqligym xy dktygaó uby mkník hy mb xytgyh hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk; dytl
il rkw hy ubé xktkvannktmy, uby bi hakfnl dktygy k lqtl.

-w fayi -dtlmacbaó hli ubaolqy-, ry kubí uby kgkfó hy naxdakt mb qtacl w hy
yivaknnl kn xlnail. ¿ubé rael gbkihl nywó nk gktqk?

-nk gktqk -haol mkigrl- il nk nywó, dltuby haol uby il mkfík nyyt ia
ymgtafat; kiqym, nk tkmcó w nk rael xyibhkm dayekm, hagayihl uby il nk
ubytík hkt k nyyt k ikhay, dltuby il my mbdaymyi yi yn nbckt mbm mygtyqlm,
w uby fkmqkfk nl uby wl ny rkfík hagrl hy dknkftk kgytgk hyn kxlt uby
vbymqtk xytgyh ny qyiík w hy nk dyiaqyigak yzqtklthaiktak uby dlt mb gkbmk
ubyhkfk rkgayihl. w, paiknxyiqy, xy haol uby haoymy k vbymqtk xytgyh uby ny
fymkfk nkm xkilm, w uby knní ubyhkfk gli xám hymyl hy vytny uby hy
ymgtafatny; w uby, kmí, ny mbdnagkfk w xkihkfk uby, vamqk nk dtymyiqy,
mknaymy hy kubynnlm xkqlttknym w my hyokmy hy rkgyt hamdktkqym, w my
dbmaymy nbycl nbycl yi gkxail hyn qlflml, ma lqtk glmk hy xám axdltqkigak
il ny mbgyhaymy, dltuby qyiík ctki hymyl hy vyt k vbymqtk xytgyh. taómy
xbgrl gbkihl ny haoy glxl my nnkxkfk vbymqtk xytgyh yn gkfknnytl hy nk
qtamqy pacbtk. dtycbiqény ma rkfík ahl knná yn vaegkíil hy xkttkm; híolxy
uby mí, w uby ytk bi rlxfty xbw hy fayi. qkxfaéi ny dtycbiqé dlt nlm
cknylqym, xkm híolxy uby il rkfík vamql rkmqk yiqligym kncbil.

-qlhl vk fayi rkmqk kcltk -haol hli ubaolqy-. dytl haxy: ¿ubé olwk pby nk
uby qy hal, kn hymdyhatqy, dlt nkm ibyvkm uby hy xí ny nnyvkmqy? dltuby ym
bmkhk w kiqacbk glmqbxfty yiqty nlm gkfknnytlm w hkxkm kihkiqym hkt k nlm
ymgbhytlm, hligynnkm l yikilm uby nym nnyvki ibyvkm, hy mbm hkxkm k ynnlm,
k ynnkm hy mbm kihkiqym, kncbik tagk olwk yi knftagakm, yi kctkhygaxayiql
hy mb tygkhl.

-fayi dbyhy yml myt kmí, w wl nk qyicl dlt fbyik bmkiek; dytl yml hyfaó hy
myt yi nlm qayxdlm dkmkhlm, uby krltk mónl my hyfy hy kglmqbxftkt k hkt bi
dyhkel hy dki w ubyml, uby ymql pby nl uby xy hal xa myñltk hbngaiyk, dlt
nkm fkthkm hy bi glttkn, gbkihl hynnk xy hymdyhí; w kbi, dlt xám myñkm, ytk
yn ubyml lvyobil.

-ym nafytkn yi ymqtyxl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ma il qy hal olwk hy ltl, mai
hbhk hyfaó hy myt dltuby il nk qyihtík knní k nk xkil dktk hátqynk; dytl
fbyikm mli xkickm hymdbém hy dkmgbk: wl nk vyté, w my mkqampktá qlhl.
¿mkfym hy ubé ymqlw xktkvannkhl, mkigrl? hy uby xy dktygy uby pbamqy w
vyiamqy dlt nlm katym, dbym dlgl xám hy qtym híkm rkm qkthkhl yi at w vyiat
hymhy kubí kn qlflml, rkfayihl hy kubí knná xám hy qtyaiqk nycbkm; dlt nl
gbkn xy hlw k yiqyihyt uby kubyn mkfal iactlxkiqy uby qayiy gbyiqk gli xam
glmkm w ym xa kxacl (dltuby dlt pbytek ny rkw, w ny rk hy rkfyt, ml dyik
uby wl il mytík fbyi gkfknnytl kihkiqy); hacl uby ymqy qkn qy hyfaó hy
kwbhkt k gkxaikt, mai uby qú nl maiqaymym; uby rkw mkfal hémqlm uby glcy k
bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy hbtxayihl yi mb gkxk, w, mai mkfyt góxl l yi ubé
xkiytk, kxkiygy lqtl hík xám hy xan nycbkm hy hlihy kilgrygaó. w ma il
pbymy dlt ymql, il my dlhtíki mlglttyt yi mbm dynactlm nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym bilm k lqtlm, glxl my mlglttyi k gkhk dkml. uby kgkygy ymqkt bil
dynykihl yi nkm mayttkm hy ktxyiak gli kncúi yihtakcl, l gli kncúi paytl
vymqacnl, l gli lqtl gkfknnytl, hlihy nnyvk nl dylt hy nk fkqknnk w ymqá wk
k dbiql hy xbytqy, w gbkihl il lm xy gkql, kmlxk dlt kgbnná, yigaxk hy bik
ibfy, l mlfty bi gkttl hy pbycl, lqtl gkfknnytl kxacl mbwl, uby dlgl kiqym
my rknnkfk yi aicknkqyttk, uby ny pkvltygy w naftk hy nk xbytqy, w k nk
ilgry my rknnk yi mb dlmkhk, gyikihl xbw k mb mkflt; w mbyny rkfyt hy nk
bik k nk lqtk dktqy hlm l qtym xan nycbkm. w qlhl ymql my rkgy dlt
aihbmqtak w mkfahbtík hymqlm mkfalm yigkiqkhltym uby qayiyi gbahkhl hymqlm
vknytlmlm gkfknnytlm. kmí uby, kxacl mkigrl, il my xy rkgy hapagbnqlml
gtyyt uby yi qki ftyvy qayxdl rkwkm ahl w vyiahl hymhy ymqy nbckt kn hyn
qlflml, dbym, glxl qyicl hagrl, kncúi mkfal kxacl qy hyfaó hy nnyvkt yi
vlnkihannkm, mai uby qú nl maiqaymym.

-kmí mytík -haol mkigrl-; dltuby k fbyik py uby kihkfk tlgaikiqy glxl ma
pbytk kmil hy caqkil gli kelcby yi nlm líhlm.

-w ¡góxl ma nnyvkfk kelcby! -haol hli ubaolqy-, w kbi bik nycaói hy
hyxlialm, uby ym cyiqy uby gkxaik w rkgy gkxaikt, mai gkimktmy, qlhl
kubynnl uby my nym kiqlok. dytl, hyokihl ymql kdktqy, ¿ubé qy dktygy k qa
uby hyfl wl hy rkgyt krltk gytgk hy nl uby xa myñltk xy xkihk uby nk vkwk k
vyt?; uby, kbiuby wl vyl uby ymqlw lfnackhl k gbxdnat mb xkihkxayiql, vélxy
qkxfaéi axdlmafanaqkhl hyn hli uby ry dtlxyqahl k nk dtaigymk uby gli
ilmlqtlm vayiy, w pbétekxy nk nyw hy gkfknnytík k gbxdnat xa dknkftk kiqym
uby xa cbmql. dlt bik dktqy, xy kglmk w pkqack yn hymyl hy vyt k xa myñltk;
dlt lqtk, xy aigaqk w nnkxk nk dtlxyqahk py w nk cnltak uby ry hy kngkiekt
yi ymqk yxdtymk. dytl nl uby dayiml rkgyt mytá gkxaikt kdtaymk w nnyckt
dtymql hlihy ymqá ymqy cackiqy, w, yi nnyckihl, ny gltqkté nk gkfyek, w
dlihté k nk dtaigymk dkgípagkxyiqy yi mb ymqkhl, w kn dbiql hkté nk vbynqk
k vyt k nk nbe uby xam myiqahlm knbxftk, k nk gbkn hkté qknym hamgbndkm uby
ynnk vyick k qyiyt dlt fbyik xa qkthkiek, dbym vytá uby qlhl tyhbihk yi
kbxyiql hy mb cnltak w pkxk, dbym gbkiqk wl ry kngkiekhl, kngkiel w
kngkiekty dlt nkm ktxkm yi ymqk vahk, qlhk xy vayiy hyn pkvlt uby ynnk xy
hk w hy myt wl mbwl.

-¡kw -haol mkigrl-, w góxl ymqá vbymqtk xytgyh nkmqaxkhl hy ymlm gkmglm!
dbym híckxy, myñlt: ¿dayimk vbymqtk xytgyh gkxaikt ymqy gkxail yi fknhy, w
hyokt dkmkt w dythyt bi qki tagl w qki dtaigadkn gkmkxayiql glxl émqy,
hlihy ny hki yi hlqy bi tyail, uby k fbyik vythkh uby ry líhl hygat uby
qayiy xám hy vyaiqy xan nycbkm hy gliqltil, w uby ym kfbihkiqímaxl hy qlhkm
nkm glmkm uby mli iygymktakm dktk yn mbmqyiql hy nk vahk rbxkik, w uby ym
xkwlt uby dltqbckn w uby gkmqannk obiqlm? gknny, dlt kxlt hy halm, w qyick
vytcüyiek hy nl uby rk hagrl, w qlxy xa glimyol, w dythóiyxy, w gámymy
nbycl yi yn dtaxyt nbckt uby rkwk gbtk; w ma il, krí ymqá ibymqtl
nagyigakhl, uby nl rktá hy dytnkm. w khvaytqk uby wk qyicl yhkh dktk hkt
glimyolm, w uby ymqy uby ny hlw ny vayiy hy xlnhy, w uby xám vkny dáoktl yi
xkil uby fbaqty vlnkihl, dltuby ubayi fayi qayiy w xkn ymglcy, dlt fayi uby
my yilok il my vyick.

-xatk, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: ma yn glimyol uby xy hkm hy uby xy
gkmy ym dltuby myk nbycl tyw, yi xkqkihl kn cackiqy, w qyick góxlhl dktk
rkgytqy xytgyhym w hktqy nl dtlxyqahl, ráclqy mkfyt uby mai gkmktxy dlhté
gbxdnat qb hymyl xbw páganxyiqy, dltuby wl mkgkté hy khkrknk, kiqym hy
yiqtkt yi nk fkqknnk, uby, mknayihl vyigyhlt hynnk, wk uby il xy gkmy, xy
rki hy hkt bik dktqy hyn tyail, dktk uby nk dbyhk hkt k ubayi wl ubamayty;
w, yi háihlxynk, ¿k ubaéi ubaytym qú uby nk hé mail k qa?

-yml ymqá gnktl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl xaty vbymqtk xytgyh uby nk ymglok
rkgak nk xktaik, dltuby, ma il xy gliqyiqkty nk vavayihk, dbyhk yxfktgkt
xam iyctlm vkmknnlm w rkgyt hynnlm nl uby wk ry hagrl. w vbymqtk xytgyh il
my gbty hy at dlt kcltk k vyt k xa myñltk hbngaiyk, mail váwkmy k xkqkt kn
cackiqy, w glignbwkxlm ymqy iyclgal; uby dlt halm uby my xy kmayiqk uby rk
hy myt hy xbgrk rlitk w hy xbgrl dtlvygrl.

-híclqy, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby ymqám yi nl gaytql, w uby rkfté hy
qlxkt qb glimyol yi gbkiql yn at kiqym gli nk dtaigymk uby k vyt k
hbngaiyk. w kvímlqy uby il hackm ikhk k ikhay, ia k nlm uby gli ilmlqtlm
vayiyi, hy nl uby kubí ryxlm hydktqahl w qtkqkhl; uby, dbym hbngaiyk ym qki
tygkqkhk uby il ubayty uby my mydki mbm dyimkxayiqlm, il mytá fayi uby wl,
ia lqtl dlt xí, nlm hymgbftk.

-dbym ma yml ym kmí -haol mkigrl-, ¿góxl rkgy vbymqtk xytgyh uby qlhlm nlm
uby vyigy dlt mb ftkel my vkwki k dtymyiqkt kiqy xa myñltk hbngaiyk, mayihl
ymql patxk hy mb ilxfty uby nk ubayty fayi w uby ym mb yikxltkhl? w, mayihl
pltelml uby nlm uby pbytyi my rki hy at k raigkt hy pailolm kiqy mb
dtymyigak, w hygat uby vki hy dktqy hy vbymqtk xytgyh k hknny nk
lfyhayigak, ¿góxl my dbyhyi yigbftat nlm dyimkxayiqlm hy yiqtkxflm?
-¡lr, ubé iygal w ubé maxdny uby ytym! -haol hli ubaolqy-. ¿qú il vym,
mkigrl, uby yml qlhl tyhbihk yi mb xkwlt yimknekxayiql? dltuby rkm hy mkfyt
uby yi ymqy ibymqtl ymqanl hy gkfknnytík ym ctki rlitk qyiyt bik hkxk
xbgrlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym uby nk matvki, mai uby my ymqayihki xám mbm
dyimkxayiqlm uby k mytvannk, dlt mónl myt ynnk ubayi ym, mai ymdytkt lqtl
dtyxal hy mbm xbgrlm w fbyilm hymylm, mail uby ynnk my gliqyiqy hy
kgyqktnlm dlt mbm gkfknnytlm.

-gli ymk xkiytk hy kxlt -haol mkigrl- ry líhl wl dtyhagkt uby my rk hy kxkt
k ibymqtl myñlt, dlt mí mlnl, mai uby ilm xbyvk ymdytkiek hy cnltak l qyxlt
hy dyik. kbiuby wl ny ubyttík kxkt w mytvat dlt nl uby dbhaymy.
-¡vánkqy yn hakfnl dlt vannkil -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ubé hy hamgtygaliym
hagym k nkm vygym! il dktygy mail uby rkm ymqbhakhl.

-dbym k py xík uby il mé nyyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

yi ymql, nym hal vlgym xkymy iaglnám uby ymdytkmyi bi dlgl, uby ubytíki
hyqyiytmy k fyfyt yi bik pliqygannk uby knní ymqkfk. hyqúvlmy hli ubaolqy,
gli il dlgl cbmql hy mkigrl, uby wk ymqkfk gkimkhl hy xyiqat qkiql w qyxík
il ny glcaymy mb kxl k dknkftkm; dltuby, dbymql uby én mkfík uby hbngaiyk
ytk bik nkftkhltk hyn qlflml, il nk rkfík vamql yi qlhk mb vahk.
rkfíkmy yi ymqy qayxdl vymqahl gkthyial nlm vymqahlm uby hltlqyk qtkík
gbkihl nk rknnktli, uby, kbiuby il ytki xbw fbyilm, rkgíki xbgrk vyiqkok k
nlm uby hyokfk. kdyátlimy obiql k nk pbyiqy, w gli nl uby yn gbtk my
kglxlhó yi nk vyiqk mkqampagaytli, kbiuby dlgl, nk xbgrk rkxfty uby qlhlm
qtkíki.

ymqkihl yi ymql, kgytqó k dkmkt dlt knní bi xbgrkgrl uby afk hy gkxail, yn
gbkn, dliaéihlmy k xatkt gli xbgrk kqyigaói k nlm uby yi nk pbyiqy ymqkfki,
hy knní k dlgl kttyxyqaó k hli ubaolqy, w, kftkeáihlny dlt nkm daytikm,
glxyieó k nnltkt xbw hy dtldómaql, hagayihl:

-¡kw, myñlt xíl! ¿il xy glilgy vbymqtk xytgyh? dbym xítyxy fayi, uby wl mlw
kubyn xlel kihtém uby ubaqó vbymqtk xytgyh hy nk yigaik hlihy ymqkfk kqkhl.
tyglilgaóny hli ubaolqy, w, kmaéihlny dlt nk xkil, my vlnvaó k nlm uby knní
ymqkfki w haol:

-dltuby vyki vbymqtkm xytgyhym gbái hy axdltqkigak ym rkfyt gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym yi yn xbihl, uby hympkcki nlm qbytqlm w kctkvalm uby yi én my
rkgyi dlt nlm aimlnyiqym w xknlm rlxftym uby yi én vavyi, mydki vbymqtkm
xytgyhym uby nlm híkm dkmkhlm, dkmkihl wl dlt bi flmuby, lí bilm ctaqlm w
bikm vlgym xbw nkmqaxlmkm, glxl hy dytmlik kpnacahk w xyiymqytlmk; kgbhí
nbycl, nnyvkhl hy xa lfnackgaói, rkgak nk dktqy hlihy xy dktygaó uby nkm
nkxyiqkfnym vlgym mlikfki, w rknné kqkhl k bik yigaik k ymqy xbgrkgrl uby
krltk ymqá hynkiqy (hy nl uby xy rbyncl yi yn knxk, dltuby mytá qymqacl uby
il xy hyoktá xyiqat yi ikhk); hacl uby ymqkfk kqkhl k nk yigaik, hymibhl
hyn xyhal gbytdl kttafk, w ymqáfkny kftayihl k kelqym gli nkm tayihkm hy
bik wycbk bi vannkil, uby hymdbém mbdy uby ytk kxl mbwl; w, kmí glxl wl ny
va, ny dtycbiqé nk gkbmk hy qki kqtle vkdbnkxayiql; tymdlihaó yn ekpal uby
ny kelqkfk dltuby ytk mb gtakhl, w uby gaytqlm hymgbahlm uby qyiík ikgíki
xám hy nkhtói uby hy maxdny; k nl gbkn ymqy iañl haol: ''myñlt, il xy kelqk
mail dltuby ny dahl xa mknktal''. yn kxl tydnagó il mé ubé ktyickm w
hamgbndkm, nkm gbknym, kbiuby hy xí pbytli líhkm, il pbytli khxaqahkm. yi
tymlnbgaói, wl ny ragy hymkqkt, w qlxé obtkxyiql kn vannkil hy uby ny
nnyvktík glimacl w ny dkcktík bi tykn mlfty lqtl, w kbi mkrbxkhlm. ¿il ym
vythkh qlhl ymql, raol kihtém? ¿il ilqkmqy gli gbáiql axdytal my nl xkihé,
w gli gbáiqk rbxanhkh dtlxyqaó hy rkgyt qlhl gbkiql wl ny axdbmy, w
ilqapaubé w ubamy? tymdlihy; il qy qbtfym ia hbhym yi ikhk: ha nl uby dkmó
k ymqlm myñltym, dltuby my vyk w glimahyty myt hyn dtlvygrl uby hacl rkfyt
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym dlt nlm gkxailm.

-qlhl nl uby vbymqtk xytgyh rk hagrl ym xbgrk vythkh -tymdlihaó yn
xbgrkgrl-, dytl yn pai hyn iyclgal mbgyhaó xbw kn tyvém hy nl uby vbymqtk
xytgyh my axkcaik.

-¿góxl kn tyvém? -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-; nbycl, ¿il qy dkcó yn vannkil?
-il mónl il xy dkcó -tymdlihaó yn xbgrkgrl-, dytl, kmí glxl vbymqtk xytgyh
qtkmdbml hyn flmuby w ubyhkxlm mlnlm, xy vlnvaó k kqkt k nk xymxk yigaik, w
xy hal hy ibyvl qkiqlm kelqym uby ubyhé rygrl bi mki fktqlnlxé hymlnnkhl;
w, k gkhk kelqy uby xy hkfk, xy hygík bi hlikaty w grbpyqk kgytgk hy rkgyt
fbtnk hy vbymqtk xytgyh, uby, k il myiqat wl qkiql hlnlt, xy taytk hy nl
uby hygík. yi ypyql: én xy dktó qkn, uby rkmqk krltk ry ymqkhl gbtáihlxy yi
bi rlmdaqkn hyn xkn uby yn xkn vannkil yiqligym xy rael. hy qlhl nl gbkn
qayiy vbymqtk xytgyh nk gbndk, dltuby ma my pbytk mb gkxail khynkiqy w il
vaiaytk hlihy il ny nnkxkfki, ia my yiqtyxyqaytk yi iyclgalm koyilm, xa kxl
my gliqyiqktk gli hktxy bik l hlm hlgyikm hy kelqym, w nbycl xy mlnqktk w
dkcktk gbkiql xy hyfík. xkm, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh ny hymrlitó qki mai
dtldómaql w ny haol qkiqkm vannkiíkm, yigyihaómyny nk gónytk, w, glxl il nk
dbhl vyickt yi vbymqtk xytgyh, gbkihl my val mlnl hymgktcó mlfty xí yn
ibfnkhl, hy xlhl uby xy dktygy uby il myté xám rlxfty yi qlhk xa vahk.
-yn hkñl ymqbvl -haol hli ubaolqy- yi atxy wl hy knní; uby il xy rkfík hy
at rkmqk hyoktqy dkckhl, dltuby fayi hyfík wl hy mkfyt, dlt nbyickm
yzdytayigakm, uby il rkw vannkil uby cbkthy dknkftk uby qayiy, ma én vyy
uby il ny ymqá fayi cbkthknnk. dytl wk qy kgbythkm, kihtém, uby wl obté uby
ma il qy dkckfk, uby rkfík hy at k fbmgktny, w uby ny rkfík hy rknnkt,
kbiuby my ymglihaymy yi yn vayiqty hy nk fknnyik.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol kihtém-, dytl il kdtlvygró ikhk.

-krltk vytám ma kdtlvygrk -haol hli ubaolqy.

w, hagayihl ymql, my nyvkiqó xbw kdtaymk w xkihó k mkigrl uby yiptyikmy k
tlgaikiqy, uby ymqkfk dkgayihl yi qkiql uby ynnlm glxíki.

dtycbiqóny hltlqyk ubé ytk nl uby rkgyt ubytík. Én ny tymdlihaó uby ubytík
at k fbmgkt kn vannkil w gkmqacknny hy qki xkn qétxail, w rkgyt dkckhl k
kihtém rkmqk yn únqaxl xktkvyhí, k hymdygrl w dymkt hy gbkiqlm vannkilm
rbfaymy yi yn xbihl. k nl uby ynnk tymdlihaó uby khvatqaymy uby il dlhík,
glipltxy kn hli dtlxyqahl, yiqtyxyqytmy yi iaicbik yxdtymk rkmqk kgkfkt nk
mbwk; w uby, dbym ymql mkfík én xyolt uby lqtl kncbil, uby mlmyckmy yn
dygrl rkmqk nk vbynqk hy mb tyail.

-kmí ym vythkh -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w ym pltelml uby kihtém qyick
dkgayigak rkmqk nk vbynqk, glxl vlm, myñltk, hygím; uby wl ny qltil k obtkt
w k dtlxyqyt hy ibyvl hy il dktkt rkmqk rkgytny vyickhl w dkckhl.

-il xy gtyl hymlm obtkxyiqlm -haol kihtém-; xám ubamaytk qyiyt kcltk gli
ubé nnyckt k myvannk uby qlhkm nkm vyickiekm hyn xbihl: héxy, ma qayiy krí,
kncl uby glxk w nnyvy, w ubéhymy gli halm mb xytgyh w qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym; uby qki fayi kihkiqym myki ynnlm dktk glimacl glxl nl rki mahl
dktk glixacl.

mkgó hy mb tydbymql mkigrl bi dyhkel hy dki w lqtl hy ubyml, w, háihlmynl
kn xlel, ny haol:

-qlxá, rytxkil kihtém, uby k qlhlm ilm kngkiek dktqy hy vbymqtk hymctkgak.
-dbym, ¿ubé dktqy lm kngkiek k vlm? -dtycbiqó kihtém.

-ymqk dktqy hy ubyml w dki uby lm hlw -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby halm mkfy ma
xy rk hy rkgyt pknqk l il; dltuby lm rkcl mkfyt, kxacl, uby nlm ymgbhytlm
hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym ymqkxlm mboyqlm k xbgrk rkxfty w k xknk vyiqbtk,
w kbi k lqtkm glmkm uby my mayiqyi xyolt uby my hagyi.

kihtém kmaó hy mb dki w ubyml, w, vayihl uby ikhay ny hkfk lqtk glmk, kfkoó
mb gkfyek w qlxó yn gkxail yi nkm xkilm, glxl mbyny hygatmy. fayi ym vythkh
uby, kn dktqatmy, haol k hli ubaolqy:

-dlt kxlt hy halm, myñlt gkfknnytl kihkiqy, uby ma lqtk vye xy yigliqtkty,
kbiuby vyk uby xy rkgyi dyhkelm, il xy mlglttk ia kwbhy, mail héoyxy gli xa
hymctkgak; uby il mytá qkiqk, uby il myk xkwlt nk uby xy vyihtá hy mb kwbhk
hy vbymqtk xytgyh, k ubayi halm xknhack, w k qlhlm gbkiqlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym rki ikgahl yi yn xbihl.

Ífkmy k nyvkiqkt hli ubaolqy dktk gkmqacknny, xkm én my dbml k glttyt hy
xlhl uby iaicbil my kqtyvaó k mycbanny. ubyhó glttahímaxl hli ubaolqy hyn
gbyiql hy kihtém, w pby xyiymqyt uby nlm hyxám qbvaymyi xbgrk gbyiqk gli il
tyítmy, dlt il kgkfknny hy glttyt hyn qlhl.





gkdíqbnl zzzaa. uby qtkqk hy nl uby mbgyhaó yi nk vyiqk k qlhk nk gbkhtannk
hy hli ubaolqy


kgkfómy nk fbyik glxahk, yimannktli nbycl, w, mai uby nym mbgyhaymy glmk
hacik hy gliqkt, nnycktli lqtl hík k nk vyiqk, ymdkiql w kmlxftl hy mkigrl
dkiek; w, kbiuby én ubamaytk il yiqtkt yi ynnk, il nl dbhl rbat. nk
vyiqytk, vyiqytl, mb raok w xktaqltiym, uby vaytli vyiat k hli ubaolqy w k
mkigrl, nym mknaytli k tygyfat gli xbymqtkm hy xbgrk knyctík, w én nkm
tygafaó gli ctkvy gliqaiyiqy w kdnkbml, w híolnym uby ny khytyekmyi lqtl
xyolt nygrl uby nk vye dkmkhk; k nl gbkn ny tymdlihaó nk rbémdyhk uby glxl
nk dkckmy xyolt uby nk lqtk vye, uby ynnk my nk hktík hy dtíigadym. hli
ubaolqy haol uby mí rktík, w kmí, ny khytyektli bil tkelikfny yi yn xamxl
gktkxkigrói hy xkttkm, w én my kglmqó nbycl, dltuby vyiík xbw ubyftkiqkhl w
pknql hy obagal.

il my rbfl fayi yigyttkhl, gbkihl nk rbémdyhk kttyxyqaó kn fktfytl, w,
kmaéihlny hy nk fktfk, haol:

-dktk xa mkiqacbkhk, uby il my rk kúi hy kdtlvygrkt xám hy xa tkfl dktk mb
fktfk, w uby xy rk hy vlnvyt xa glnk; uby kihk nl hy xa xktahl dlt ymlm
mbynlm, uby ym vytcüyiek; hacl, yn dyaiy, uby mlník wl glnckt hy xa fbyik
glnk.

il my nk ubytík hkt yn fktfytl, kbiuby ynnk xám qatkfk, rkmqk uby yn
nagyigakhl ny haol uby my nk haymy, uby wk il ytk xyiymqyt xám bmkt hy
kubynnk aihbmqtak, mail uby my hymgbftaymy w xlmqtkmy yi mb xamxk pltxk, w
haoymy k hli ubaolqy uby gbkihl ny hymdloktli nlm nkhtliym cknylqym my
rkfíki vyiahl k kubynnk vyiqk rbwyihl; w uby ma dtycbiqkmy dlt yn ymgbhytl
hy nk dtaigymk, ny hatíki uby ynnk ny rkfík yivakhl khynkiqy k hkt kvaml k
nlm hy mb tyail glxl ynnk afk w nnyvkfk glimacl yn nafytqkhlt hy qlhlm. gli
ymql, hal hy fbyik ckik nk glnk k nk vyiqytk yn fktfytl, w kmaxamxl ny
vlnvaytli qlhlm nlm khrytyiqym uby rkfík dtymqkhl dktk nk nafytqkh hy hli
ubaolqy. ymdkiqátlimy qlhlm nlm hy nk vyiqk hy nk rytxlmbtk hy hltlqyk, w
kbi hyn fbyi qknny hyn ekckn gkthyial. rael yn gbtk uby nym khytyekmyi hy
glxyt hy nl uby yi nk vyiqk rbfaymy, w yn rbémdyh, gli ymdytkiek hy xyolt
dkck, gli hanacyigak nym khytyeó bik tkelikfny glxahk; w k qlhl ymql hltxík
hli ubaolqy, w pbytli hy dktygyt hy il hymdytqknny, dltuby xám dtlvygrl ny
rktík dlt yiqligym yn hltxat uby yn glxyt.

qtkqktli mlfty glxahk, ymqkihl hynkiqy yn vyiqytl, mb xboyt, mb raok,
xktaqltiym, qlhlm nlm dkmkoytlm, hy nk ymqtkñk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy w hyn
xlhl uby ny rkfíki rknnkhl. nk rbémdyhk nym gliqó nl uby gli én w gli yn
kttaytl nym rkfík kgliqygahl, w, xatkihl ma kgkml ymqkfk knní mkigrl, glxl
il ny vaymy, gliqó qlhl nl hy mb xkiqykxayiql, hy uby il dlgl cbmql
tygafaytli. w, glxl yn gbtk haoymy uby nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm uby hli
ubaolqy rkfík nyíhl ny rkfíki vbynql yn obagal, haol yn vyiqytl:

-il mé wl góxl dbyhy myt yml; uby yi vythkh uby, k nl uby wl yiqayihl, il
rkw xyolt nyqtkhl yi yn xbihl, w uby qyicl krí hlm l qtym hynnlm, gli lqtlm
dkdynym, uby vythkhytkxyiqy xy rki hkhl nk vahk, il mónl k xí, mail k lqtlm
xbgrlm. dltuby, gbkihl ym qayxdl hy nk mayck, my tyglcyi kubí, nkm paymqkm,
xbgrlm myckhltym, w mayxdty rkw kncbilm uby mkfyi nyyt, yn gbkn glcy bil
hymqlm naftlm yi nkm xkilm, w tlhyáxlilm hén xám hy qtyaiqk, w ymqáxlmny
ymgbgrkihl gli qkiql cbmql uby ilm ubaqk xan gkikm; k nl xyilm, hy xí mé
hygat uby gbkihl lwl hygat kubynnlm pbtafbihlm w qyttafnym clndym uby nlm
gkfknnytlm dycki, uby xy qlxk ckik hy rkgyt lqtl qkiql, w uby ubyttík ymqkt
lwéihlnlm ilgrym w híkm.

-w wl ia xám ia xyilm -haol nk vyiqytk-, dltuby ibigk qyicl fbyi tkql yi xa
gkmk mail kubyn uby vlm ymqáam ymgbgrkihl nyyt: uby ymqáam qki yxflfkhl,
uby il lm kgltháam hy tyñat dlt yiqligym.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol xktaqltiym-, w k fbyik py uby wl qkxfaéi cbmql
xbgrl hy lít kubynnkm glmkm, uby mli xbw naihkm; w xám, gbkihl gbyiqki uby
my ymqá nk lqtk myñltk hyfkol hy bilm iktkiolm kftkekhk gli mb gkfknnytl, w
uby nym ymqá bik hbyñk rkgaéihlnym nk cbkthk, xbytqk hy yivahak w gli xbgrl
mlftymknql. hacl uby qlhl ymql ym glmk hy xaynym.

-w k vlm ¿ubé lm dktygy, myñltk hligynnk? -haol yn gbtk, rkfnkihl gli nk
raok hyn vyiqytl.

-il mé, myñlt, yi xa áiaxk -tymdlihaó ynnk-; qkxfaéi wl nl ymgbgrl, w yi
vythkh uby, kbiuby il nl yiqayihl, uby tygafl cbmql yi línnl; dytl il cbmql
wl hy nlm clndym hy uby xa dkhty cbmqk, mail hy nkm nkxyiqkgaliym uby nlm
gkfknnytlm rkgyi gbkihl ymqái kbmyiqym hy mbm myñltkm: uby yi vythkh uby
kncbikm vygym xy rkgyi nnltkt hy glxdkmaói uby nym qyicl.

-nbycl, ¿fayi nkm tyxyhaátkhym vlm, myñltk hligynnk -haol hltlqyk-, ma dlt
vlm nnltktki?

-il mé nl uby xy ragaytk -tymdlihaó nk xlek-; mónl mé uby rkw kncbikm
myñltkm hy kubénnkm qki gtbynym, uby nkm nnkxki mbm gkfknnytlm qactym w
nyliym w lqtkm xan aixbihagakm. w, ¡oymúm!, wl il mé ubé cyiqy ym kubénnk
qki hymknxkhk w qki mai gligayigak, uby dlt il xatkt k bi rlxfty rlitkhl,
ny hyoki uby my xbytk, l uby my vbynvk nlgl. wl il mé dktk ubé ym qkiql
xynaihty: ma nl rkgyi hy rlitkhkm, gámyimy gli ynnlm, uby ynnlm il hymyki
lqtk glmk.

-gknnk, iañk -haol nk vyiqytk-, uby dktygy uby mkfym xbgrl hymqkm glmkm, w
il ymqá fayi k nkm hligynnkm mkfyt ia rkfnkt qkiql.

-glxl xy nl dtycbiqk ymqy myñlt -tymdlihaó ynnk-, il dbhy hyokt hy
tymdlihynny.

-krltk fayi -haol yn gbtk-, qtkyhxy, myñlt rbémdyh, kubymlm naftlm, uby nlm
ubaytl vyt.

-uby xy dnkgy -tymdlihaó én.

w, yiqtkihl yi mb kdlmyiql, mkgó hén bik xknyqannk vayok, gyttkhk gli bik
gkhyiannk, w, kftaéihlnk, rknnó yi ynnk qtym naftlm ctkihym w bilm dkdynym
hy xbw fbyik nyqtk, ymgtaqlm hy xkil. yn dtaxyt naftl uby kftaó val uby ytk
hli gatlicanal hy qtkgak; w yn lqtl, hy pynazxktqy hy ratgkiak; w yn lqtl,
nk ramqltak hyn ctki gkdaqái clieknl rytiáihye hy góthlfk, gli nk vahk hy
haycl cktgík hy dktyhym. kmí glxl yn gbtk nywó nlm hlm qíqbnlm dtaxytlm,
vlnvaó yn tlmqtl kn fktfytl w haol:

-pknqk ilm rkgyi kubí krltk yn kxk hy xa kxacl w mb mlftaik.

-il rkgyi -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl-, uby qkxfaéi mé wl nnyvknnlm kn glttkn l k
nk graxyiyk; uby yi vythkh uby rkw xbw fbyi pbycl yi ynnk.

-nbycl, ¿ubayty vbymqtk xytgyh ubyxkt xám naftlm? -haol yn vyiqytl.
-il xám -haol yn gbtk- uby ymqlm hlm: yn hy hli gatlicanal w yn hy
pynazxktqy.

-dbym, ¿dlt vyiqbtk -haol yn vyiqytl- xam naftlm mli rytyoym l pnyxáqaglm,
uby nlm ubayty ubyxkt?

-gamxáqaglm ubytéam hygat, kxacl -haol yn fktfytl-, uby il pnyxáqaglm.

-kmí ym -tydnagó yn vyiqytl-; xkm ma kncbil ubayty ubyxkt, myk ymy hyn ctki
gkdaqái w hymy haycl cktgík, uby kiqym hyokté ubyxkt bi raol uby hyokt
ubyxkt iaicbil hymlqtlm.

-rytxkil xíl -haol yn gbtk-, ymqlm hlm naftlm mli xyiqatlmlm w ymqái nnyilm
hy hamdktkqym w hyvkiylm; w ymqy hyn ctki gkdaqái ym ramqltak vythkhytk, w
qayiy nlm rygrlm hy clieknl rytiáihye hy góthlfk, yn gbkn, dlt mbm xbgrkm w
ctkihym rkekñkm, xytygaó myt nnkxkhl hy qlhl yn xbihl ctki gkdaqái,
tyilxfty pkxlml w gnktl, w hén mónl xytygahl. w ymqy haycl cktgík hy
dktyhym pby bi dtaigadkn gkfknnytl, ikqbtkn hy nk gabhkh hy qtboannl, yi
ymqtyxkhbtk, vknyiqímaxl mlnhkhl, w hy qkiqkm pbytekm ikqbtknym uby hyqyiík
gli bi hyhl bik tbyhk hy xlnail yi nk xaqkh hy mb pbtak; w, dbymql gli bi
xliqkiqy yi nk yiqtkhk hy bik dbyiqy, hyqbvl k qlhl bi aiibxytkfny
yoétgaql, uby il dkmkmy dlt ynnk; w rael lqtkm qknym glmkm uby, glxl ma én
nkm gbyiqk w nkm ymgtafy én kmaxamxl, gli nk xlhymqak hy gkfknnytl w hy
gltliamqk dtldal, nkm ymgtafaytk lqtl, nafty w hymkdkmalikhl, dbmaytki yi
mb lnvahl nkm hy nlm réqltym, kubanym w tlnhkiym.

-¡qlxklm gli xa dkhty! -haol yn hagrl vyiqytl-. ¡xatkh hy ubé my ymdkiqk:
hy hyqyiyt bik tbyhk hy xlnail! dlt halm, krltk rkfík vbymqtk xytgyh hy
nyyt nl uby rael pynazxktqy hy ratgkiak, uby hy bi tyvém mlnl dktqaó gaigl
cackiqym dlt nk gaiqbtk, glxl ma pbytki rygrlm hy rkfkm, glxl nlm
ptkanygaglm uby rkgyi nlm iañlm. w lqtk vye kttyxyqaó gli bi ctkihímaxl w
dlhytlmímaxl yoétgaql, hlihy nnyvó xám hy bi xannói w myamgayiqlm xan
mlnhkhlm, qlhlm ktxkhlm hymhy yn day rkmqk nk gkfyek, w nlm hymfktkqó k
qlhlm, glxl ma pbytki xkikhkm hy lvyokm. dbym, ¿ubé xy hatái hyn fbyil hy
hli gatlicanal hy qtkgak, uby pby qki vknayiqy w kiaxlml glxl my vytá yi yn
naftl, hlihy gbyiqk uby, ikvyckihl dlt bi tíl, ny mknaó hy nk xaqkh hyn
kcbk bik mytdayiqy hy pbycl, w én, kmí glxl nk val, my kttloó mlfty ynnk, w
my dbml k rltgkokhkm yigaxk hy mbm ymgkxlmkm ymdknhkm, w ny kdtyqó gli
kxfkm xkilm nk cktckiqk, gli qkiqk pbytek uby, vayihl nk mytdayiqy uby nk
afk krlckihl, il qbvl lqtl tyxyhal mail hyoktmy at k nl rlihl hyn tíl,
nnyváihlmy qtkm mí kn gkfknnytl, uby ibigk nk ubaml mlnqkt? w, gbkihl
nnycktli knná fkol, my rknnó yi bilm dknkgalm w yi bilm okthaiym qki naihlm
uby ytk xktkvannk; w nbycl nk maytdy my vlnvaó yi bi vayol kigakil, uby ny
haol qkiqkm hy glmkm uby il rkw xám uby lít. gknny, myñlt, uby ma lwymy
ymql, my vlnvytík nlgl hy dnkgyt. ¡hlm rackm dktk yn ctki gkdaqái w dktk
ymy haycl cktgík uby hagy!

lwyihl ymql hltlqyk, haol gknnkihl k gkthyial:

-dlgl ny pknqk k ibymqtl rbémdyh dktk rkgyt nk mycbihk dktqy hy hli
ubaolqy.

-kmí xy dktygy k xí -tymdlihaó gkthyial-, dltuby, mycúi hk aihagal, én
qayiy dlt gaytql uby qlhl nl uby ymqlm naftlm gbyiqki dkmó ia xám ia xyilm
uby nl ymgtafyi, w il ny rktái gtyyt lqtk glmk ptkanym hymgknelm.
-xatkh, rytxkil -qltió k hygat yn gbtk-, uby il rbfl yi yn xbihl pynazxktqy
hy ratgkiak, ia hli gatlicanal hy qtkgak, ia lqtlm gkfknnytlm myxyokiqym
uby nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm gbyiqki, dltuby qlhl ym glxdlmqbtk w paggaói
hy aicyialm lgalmlm, uby nlm glxdbmaytli dktk yn ypyql uby vlm hygím hy
yiqtyqyiyt yn qayxdl, glxl nl yiqtyqayiyi nywéihlnlm vbymqtlm myckhltym;
dltuby tyknxyiqy lm obtl uby ibigk qknym gkfknnytlm pbytli yi yn xbihl, ia
qknym rkekñkm ia hamdktkqym kgliqygaytli yi én.

-¡k lqtl dyttl gli ymy rbyml! -tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl-. ¡glxl ma wl il
mbdaymy gbáiqkm mli gaigl w khóihy xy kdtayqk yn ekdkql! il dayimy vbymqtk
xytgyh hktxy dkdannk, dltuby dlt halm uby il mlw ikhk fnkigl. ¡fbyil ym uby
ubaytk hktxy vbymqtk xytgyh k yiqyihyt uby qlhl kubynnl uby ymqlm fbyilm
naftlm hagyi myk hamdktkqym w xyiqatkm, ymqkihl axdtyml gli nagyigak hy nlm
myñltym hyn glimyol tykn, glxl ma ynnlm pbytki cyiqy uby rkfíki hy hyokt
axdtaxat qkiqk xyiqatk obiqk, w qkiqkm fkqknnkm w qkiqlm yigkiqkxyiqlm uby
ubaqki yn obagal!

-wk lm ry hagrl, kxacl -tydnagó yn gbtk-, uby ymql my rkgy dktk yiqtyqyiyt
ibymqtlm lgalmlm dyimkxayiqlm; w, kmí glxl my glimayiqy yi nkm tydúfnagkm
fayi gligytqkhkm uby rkwk obyclm hy koyhtye, hy dynlqk w hy qtbglm, dktk
yiqtyqyiyt k kncbilm uby ia qayiyi, ia hyfyi, ia dbyhyi qtkfkokt, kmí my
glimayiqy axdtaxat w uby rkwk qknym naftlm, gtywyihl, glxl ym vythkh, uby
il rk hy rkfyt kncbil qki aciltkiqy uby qyick dlt ramqltak vythkhytk
iaicbik hymqlm naftlm. w ma xy pbytk nígaql kcltk, w yn kbhaqltal nl
tyubataytk, wl haoytk glmkm kgytgk hy nl uby rki hy qyiyt nlm naftlm hy
gkfknnytíkm dktk myt fbyilm, uby ubaeá pbytki hy dtlvygrl w kbi hy cbmql
dktk kncbilm; dytl wl ymdytl uby vyihtá qayxdl yi uby nl dbyhk glxbiagkt
gli ubayi dbyhk tyxyhaknnl, w yi ymqy yiqtyqkiql gtyyh, myñlt vyiqytl, nl
uby lm ry hagrl, w qlxkh vbymqtlm naftlm, w knná lm kvyiah gli mbm vythkhym
l xyiqatkm, w fbyi dtlvygrl lm rkcki, w ubaytk halm uby il gloyéam hyn day
uby gloyk vbymqtl rbémdyh hli ubaolqy.

-yml il -tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl-, uby il myté wl qki nlgl uby xy rkck
gkfknnytl kihkiqy: uby fayi vyl uby krltk il my bmk nl uby my bmkfk yi
kubyn qayxdl, gbkihl my hagy uby kihkfki dlt yn xbihl ymqlm pkxlmlm
gkfknnytlm.

k nk xaqkh hymqk dnáqagk my rknnó mkigrl dtymyiqy, w ubyhó xbw glipbml w
dyimkqavl hy nl uby rkfík líhl hygat uby krltk il my bmkfki gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym, w uby qlhlm nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm ytki iygyhkhym w xyiqatkm,
w dtldbml yi mb gltkeói hy ymdytkt yi nl uby dktkfk kubyn vakoy hy mb kxl,
w uby ma il mkník gli nk pynagahkh uby én dyimkfk, hyqytxaikfk hy hyoknny w
vlnvytmy gli mb xboyt w mbm raolm k mb kglmqbxftkhl qtkfkol.

nnyváfkmy nk xknyqk w nlm naftlm yn vyiqytl, xkm yn gbtk ny haol:
-ymdytkh, uby ubaytl vyt ubé dkdynym mli ymlm uby hy qki fbyik nyqtk ymqái
ymgtaqlm.

mkgónlm yn rbémdyh, w, háihlmynlm k nyyt, val rkmqk lftk hy lgrl dnayclm
ymgtaqlm hy xkil, w kn dtaigadal qyiíki bi qíqbnl ctkihy uby hygík: ilvynk
hyn gbtalml axdytqaiyiqy. nywó yn gbtk dktk mí qtym l gbkqtl tyicnliym w
haol:

-gaytql uby il xy dktygy xkn yn qíqbnl hymqk ilvynk, w uby xy vayiy
vlnbiqkh hy nyynnk qlhk.

k nl uby tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl:

-dbym fayi dbyhy nyynnk mb tyvytyigak, dltuby ny rkcl mkfyt uby kncbilm
rbémdyhym uby kubí nk rki nyíhl nym rk gliqyiqkhl xbgrl, w xy nk rki dyhahl
gli xbgrkm vytkm; xkm wl il my nk ry ubytahl hkt, dyimkihl vlnvétmynk k
ubayi kubí hyoó ymqk xknyqk lnvahkhk gli ymqlm naftlm w ymlm dkdynym; uby
fayi dbyhy myt uby vbynvk mb hbyñl dlt kubí kncúi qayxdl, w, kbiuby mé uby
xy rki hy rkgyt pknqk nlm naftlm, k py uby my nlm ry hy vlnvyt: uby, kbiuby
vyiqytl, qlhkvík mlw gtamqakil.

-vlm qyiéam xbgrk tkeói, kxacl -haol yn gbtk-, xkm, gli qlhl yml, ma nk
ilvynk xy gliqyiqk, xy nk rkféam hy hyokt qtkmnkhkt.

-hy xbw fbyik ckik -tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl.

xayiqtkm nlm hlm ymql hygíki, rkfík qlxkhl gkthyial nk ilvynk w glxyiekhl k
nyyt yi ynnk; w, dktygaéihlny nl xamxl uby kn gbtk, ny tlcó uby nk nywymy
hy xlhl uby qlhlm nk lwymyi.

-mí nywytk -haol yn gbtk-, ma il pbytk xyolt ckmqkt ymqy qayxdl yi hltxat
uby yi nyyt.

-rktql tydlml mytá dktk xí -haol hltlqyk- yiqtyqyiyt yn qayxdl lwyihl kncúi
gbyiql, dbym kúi il qyicl yn ymdítaqb qki mlmyckhl uby xy gligyhk hltxat
gbkihl pbytk tkeói.

-dbym hymk xkiytk -haol yn gbtk-, ubaytl nyytnk, dlt gbtalmahkh maubaytk;
ubaeá qyihtá kncbik hy cbmql.

kgbhaó xkymy iaglnám k tlcktny nl xymxl, w mkigrl qkxfaéi; nl gbkn vamql
hyn gbtk, w yiqyihayihl uby k qlhlm hktík cbmql w én ny tygafatík, haol:
-dbym kmí ym, ymqéixy qlhlm kqyiqlm, uby nk ilvynk glxayiek hymqk xkiytk:





gkdíqbnl zzzaaa. hlihy my gbyiqk nk ilvynk hyn gbtalml axdytqaiyiqy


«yi pnltyigak, gabhkh tagk w pkxlmk hy aqknak, yi nk dtlvaigak uby nnkxki
qlmgkik, vavíki kimynxl w nlqktal, hlm gkfknnytlm taglm w dtaigadknym, w
qki kxaclm uby, dlt yzgynyigak w kiqlilxkmak, hy qlhlm nlm uby nlm glilgíki
nlm hlm kxaclm ytki nnkxkhlm. ytki mlnqytlm, xlelm hy bik xamxk yhkh w hy
bikm xamxkm glmqbxftym; qlhl nl gbkn ytk fkmqkiqy gkbmk k uby nlm hlm gli
tygídtlgk kxamqkh my glttymdlihaymyi. fayi ym vythkh uby yn kimynxl ytk
kncl xám aignaikhl k nlm dkmkqayxdlm kxltlmlm uby yn nlqktal, kn gbkn
nnyvkfki qtkm mí nlm hy nk gkek; dytl, gbkihl my lptygík, hyokfk kimynxl hy
kgbhat k mbm cbmqlm dlt mycbat nlm hy nlqktal, w nlqktal hyokfk nlm mbwlm
dlt kgbhat k nlm hy kimynxl; w, hymqk xkiytk, kihkfki qki k bik mbm
vlnbiqkhym, uby il rkfík gligytqkhl tynlo uby kmí nl kihbvaymy.
»kihkfk kimynxl dythahl hy kxltym hy bik hligynnk dtaigadkn w rytxlmk hy nk
xamxk gabhkh, raok hy qki fbyilm dkhtym w qki fbyik ynnk dlt mí, uby my
hyqytxaió, gli yn dktygyt hy mb kxacl nlqktal, mai yn gbkn iaicbik glmk
rkgík, hy dyhannk dlt ymdlmk k mbm dkhtym, w kmí nl dbml yi yoygbgaói; w yn
uby nnyvó nk yxfkokhk pby nlqktal, w yn uby glignbwó yn iyclgal qki k cbmql
hy mb kxacl, uby yi ftyvy qayxdl my val dbymql yi nk dlmymaói uby hymykfk,
w gkxank qki gliqyiqk hy rkfyt kngkiekhl k kimynxl dlt ymdlml, uby il
gymkfk hy hkt ctkgakm kn gaynl, w k nlqktal, dlt gbwl xyhal qkiql fayi ny
rkfík vyiahl.

»nlm dtaxytlm híkm, glxl qlhlm nlm hy flhk mbynyi myt knyctym, gliqaibó
nlqktal, glxl mlník, nk gkmk hy mb kxacl kimynxl, dtlgbtkihl rlitknny,
pymqyoknny w tyclgaoknny gli qlhl kubynnl uby k én ny pby dlmafny; dytl,
kgkfkhkm nkm flhkm w mlmyckhk wk nk ptygbyigak hy nkm vamaqkm w dktkfayiym,
glxyieó nlqktal k hymgbahktmy gli gbahkhl hy nkm ahkm yi gkmk hy kimynxl,
dlt dktygytny k én -glxl ym tkeói uby dktyegk k qlhlm nlm uby pbytyi
hamgtyqlm- uby il my rki hy vamaqkt ia gliqaibkt nkm gkmkm hy nlm kxaclm
gkmkhlm hy nk xamxk xkiytk uby gbkihl ytki mlnqytlm; dltuby, kbiuby nk
fbyik w vythkhytk kxamqkh il dbyhy ia hyfy hy myt mlmdygrlmk yi ikhk, gli
qlhl ymql, ym qki hynagkhk nk rlitk hyn gkmkhl, uby dktygy uby my dbyhy
lpyihyt kbi hy nlm xymxlm rytxkilm, gbkiql xám hy nlm kxaclm.

»ilqó kimynxl nk tyxamaói hy nlqktal, w pltxó hén ubyokm ctkihym,
hagaéihlny uby ma én mbdaytk uby yn gkmktmy rkfík hy myt dktqy dktk il
glxbiagknny glxl mlník, uby okxám nl rbfaytk rygrl, w uby ma, dlt nk fbyik
glttymdlihyigak uby nlm hlm qyiíki xayiqtkm én pby mlnqytl, rkfíki
kngkiekhl qki hbngy ilxfty glxl yn hy myt nnkxkhlm nlm hlm kxaclm, uby il
dytxaqaymy, dlt ubytyt rkgyt hyn gatgbimdygql, mai lqtk lgkmaói kncbik,
uby qki pkxlml w qki kctkhkfny ilxfty my dythaymy; w uby kmí, ny mbdnagkfk,
ma ytk nígaql uby qkn qétxail hy rkfnkt my bmkmy yiqty ynnlm, uby vlnvaymy
k myt myñlt hy mb gkmk, w k yiqtkt w mknat yi ynnk glxl hy kiqym,
kmycbtáihlny uby mb ymdlmk gkxank il qyiík lqtl cbmql ia lqtk vlnbiqkh uby
nk uby én ubytík uby qbvaymy, w uby, dlt rkfyt mkfahl ynnk gli gbáiqkm
vytkm nlm hlm my kxkfki, ymqkfk glipbmk hy vyt yi én qkiqk ymubavyek.
»k qlhkm ymqkm w lqtkm xbgrkm tkeliym uby kimynxl haol k nlqktal dktk
dytmbkhanny vlnvaymy glxl mlník k mb gkmk, tymdlihaó nlqktal gli qkiqk
dtbhyigak, hamgtygaói w kvaml, uby kimynxl ubyhó mkqampygrl hy nk fbyik
aiqyigaói hy mb kxacl, w ubyhktli hy gligaytql uby hlm híkm yi nk myxkik w
nkm paymqkm pbymy nlqktal k glxyt gli én; w, kbiuby ymql ubyhó kmí
gligytqkhl yiqty nlm hlm, dtldbml nlqktal hy il rkgyt xám hy kubynnl uby
vaymy uby xám glivyiík k nk rlitk hy mb kxacl, gbwl gtéhaql ymqaxkfk yi
xám uby yn mbwl dtldtal. hygík én, w hygík fayi, uby yn gkmkhl k ubayi yn
gaynl rkfík gligyhahl xboyt rytxlmk, qkiql gbahkhl rkfík hy qyiyt ubé
kxaclm nnyvkfk k mb gkmk glxl yi xatkt gli ubé kxackm mb xboyt glivytmkfk,
dltuby nl uby il my rkgy ia gligaytqk yi nkm dnkekm, ia yi nlm qyxdnlm, ia
yi nkm paymqkm dúfnagkm, ia ymqkgaliym -glmkm uby il qlhkm vygym nkm rki hy
iyckt nlm xktahlm k mbm xboytym-, my gligaytqk w pkganaqk yi gkmk hy nk
kxack l nk dktayiqk hy ubayi xám mkqampkgaói my qayiy.

»qkxfaéi hygík nlqktal uby qyiíki iygymahkh nlm gkmkhlm hy qyiyt gkhk bil
kncúi kxacl uby ny khvatqaymy hy nlm hymgbahlm uby yi mb dtlgyhyt ragaymy,
dltuby mbyny kgliqygyt uby gli yn xbgrl kxlt uby yn xktahl k nk xboyt
qayiy, l il ny khvaytqy l il ny hagy, dlt il yiloknnk, uby rkck l hyoy hy
rkgyt kncbikm glmkm, uby yn rkgynnkm l il, ny mytík hy rlitk l hy
vaqbdytal; hy nl gbkn, mayihl hyn kxacl khvytqahl, páganxyiqy dlihtík
tyxyhal yi qlhl. dytl, ¿hóihy my rknnktá kxacl qki hamgtyql w qki nykn w
vythkhytl glxl kubí nlqktal ny dahy? il nl mé wl, dlt gaytql; mónl nlqktal
ytk émqy, uby gli qlhk mlnagaqbh w khvytqaxayiql xatkfk dlt nk rlitk hy mb
kxacl w dtlgbtkfk hyexkt, ptamkt w kgltqkt nlm híkm hyn gligaytql hyn at k
mb gkmk, dltuby il dktygaymy xkn kn vbncl lgalml w k nlm lolm vkckfbihlm w
xknagalmlm nk yiqtkhk hy bi xlel tagl, cyiqanrlxfty w fayi ikgahl, w hy nkm
fbyikm dktqym uby én dyimkfk uby qyiík, yi nk gkmk hy bik xboyt qki rytxlmk
glxl gkxank; uby, dbymql uby mb flihkh w vknlt dlhík dliyt ptyil k qlhk
xknhagayiqy nyicbk, qlhkvík il ubytík dliyt yi hbhk mb gtéhaql ia yn hy mb
kxacl, w dlt ymql nlm xám hy nlm híkm hyn gligaytql nlm lgbdkfk w
yiqtyqyiík yi lqtkm glmkm, uby én hkfk k yiqyihyt myt aiyzgbmkfnym. kmí
uby, yi ubyokm hyn bil w hamgbndkm hyn lqtl my dkmkfki xbgrlm tkqlm w
dktqym hyn hík.

»mbgyhaó, dbym, uby bil uby nlm hlm my kihkfki dkmykihl dlt bi dtkhl pbytk
hy nk gabhkh, kimynxl haol k nlqktal nkm myxyokiqym tkeliym:
»-dyimkfkm, kxacl nlqktal, uby k nkm xytgyhym uby halm xy rk rygrl yi
rkgytxy raol hy qknym dkhtym glxl pbytli nlm xílm w kn hktxy, il gli xkil
ymgkmk, nlm fayiym, kmí nlm uby nnkxki hy ikqbtknyek glxl nlm hy pltqbik,
il dbyhl wl glttymdlihyt gli kctkhygaxayiql uby nnycby kn fayi tygyfahl, w
mlfty kn uby xy rael yi hktxy k qa dlt kxacl w k gkxank dlt xboyt dtldtak:
hlm dtyihkm uby nkm ymqaxl, ma il yi yn ctkhl uby hyfl, yi yn uby dbyhl.
dbym gli qlhkm ymqkm dktqym, uby mbynyi myt yn qlhl gli uby nlm rlxftym
mbynyi w dbyhyi vavat gliqyiqlm, vavl wl yn xám hymdygrkhl w yn xám
hymkftahl rlxfty hy qlhl yn biavytml xbihl; dltuby il mé ubé híkm k ymqk
dktqy xy pkqack w kdtayqk bi hymyl qki ymqtkñl, w qki pbytk hyn bml glxúi
hy lqtlm, uby wl xy xktkvannl hy xí xamxl, w xy gbndl w xy tañl k mlnkm, w
dtlgbtl gknnktnl w yigbftatnl hy xam dtldtalm dyimkxayiqlm; w kmí xy rk
mahl dlmafny mknat gli ymqy mygtyql glxl ma hy aihbmqtak dtlgbtktk hygannl
k qlhl yn xbihl. w, dbym uby, yi ypyql, én rk hy mknat k dnkek,ubaytl uby
myk yi nk hyn ktgravl hy qb mygtyql, glipakhl uby, gli én w gli nk
hanacyigak uby dlihtám, glxl xa kxacl vythkhytl, yi tyxyhaktxy, wl xy vyté
dtymql nafty hy nk kicbmqak uby xy gkbmk, w nnycktá xa knyctík dlt qb
mlnagaqbh kn ctkhl uby rk nnyckhl xa hymgliqyiql dlt xa nlgbtk.
»mbmdyiml qyiíki k nlqktal nkm tkeliym hy kimynxl, w il mkfík yi ubé rkfík
hy dktkt qki nktck dtyvyigaói l dtyáxfbnl; w, kbiuby afk tyvlnvayihl yi mb
axkcaikgaói ubé hymyl dlhtík myt kubyn uby k mb kxacl qkiql pkqackfk, hal
mayxdty xbw nyolm hyn fnkigl hy nk vythkh; w, dlt mknat dtymql hy nk kcliík
uby ny gkbmkfk kubynnk mbmdyimaói, ny haol uby rkgík ilqltal kctkval k mb
xbgrk kxamqkh yi kihkt fbmgkihl tlhylm dktk hygatny mbm xám yigbfaytqlm
dyimkxayiqlm, dbym qyiík gaytql uby my dlhík dtlxyqyt hén, l wk glimyolm
dktk yiqtyqyiynnlm, l wk tyxyhal dktk gbxdnannlm.

»-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó kimynxl-, w gli ymk glipakiek qy rkcl mkfyt,
kxacl nlqktal, uby yn hymyl uby xy pkqack ym dyimkt ma gkxank, xa ymdlmk,
ym qki fbyik w qki dytpyqk glxl wl dayiml; w il dbyhl yiqytktxy yi ymqk
vythkh, ma il ym dtlfáihlnk hy xkiytk uby nk dtbyfk xkiapaymqy nlm ubankqym
hy mb flihkh, glxl yn pbycl xbymqtk nlm hyn ltl. dltuby wl qyicl dktk xí,
¡lr kxacl!, uby il ym bik xboyt xám fbyik hy gbkiql ym l il ym mlnagaqkhk,
w uby kubynnk mlnk ym pbytqy uby il my hlfnk k nkm dtlxymkm, k nkm háhavkm,
k nkm náctaxkm w k nkm gliqaibkm axdltqbiahkhym hy nlm mlnígaqlm kxkiqym.
dltuby, ¿ubé rkw uby kctkhygyt -hygík én- uby bik xboyt myk fbyik, ma ikhay
ny hagy uby myk xknk? ¿ubé xbgrl uby ymqé tyglcahk w qyxytlmk nk uby il ny
hki lgkmaói dktk uby my mbynqy, w nk uby mkfy uby qayiy xktahl uby, yi
glcaéihlnk yi nk dtaxytk hymyivlnqbtk, nk rk hy ubaqkt nk vahk? kimí uby,
nk uby ym fbyik dlt qyxlt, l dlt pknqk hy nbckt, wl il nk ubaytl qyiyt yi
kubynnk ymqaxk yi uby qyihté k nk mlnagaqkhk w dytmycbahk uby mknaó gli nk
gltlik hyn vyigaxayiql. hy xlhl uby, dlt ymqkm tkeliym w dlt lqtkm xbgrkm
uby qy dbhaytk hygat dktk kgtyhaqkt w pltqknygyt nk ldaiaói uby qyicl,
hymyl uby gkxank, xa ymdlmk, dkmy dlt ymqkm hapagbnqkhym w my kgtamlny w
ubankqy yi yn pbycl hy vytmy tyubytahk w mlnagaqkhk, w hy ubayi qyick vknlt
dktk dliyt yi ynnk mbm hymylm; w ma ynnk mkny, glxl gtyl uby mknhtá, gli nk
dknxk hymqk fkqknnk, qyihté wl dlt mai acbkn xa vyiqbtk; dlhté wl hygat uby
ymqá glnxl yn vkgíl hy xam hymylm; haté uby xy gbdl yi mbytqy nk xboyt
pbytqy, hy ubayi yn mkfal hagy uby ¿ubaéi nk rknnktá? w, gbkihl ymql mbgyhk
kn tyvém hy nl uby dayiml, gli yn cbmql hy vyt uby kgytqé yi xa ldaiaói,
nnyvkté mai dyik nk uby hy tkeói dlhtá gkbmktxy xa qki glmqlmk yzdytayigak.
w, dtlmbdbymql uby iaicbik glmk hy gbkiqkm xy haoytym yi gliqtk hy xa hymyl
rk hy myt hy kncúi dtlvygrl dktk hyokt hy dliytny dlt nk lftk, ubaytl, ¡lr
kxacl nlqktal!, uby qy hamdlickm k myt yn aimqtbxyiql uby nkfty kubymqk
lftk hy xa cbmql; uby wl qy hkté nbckt dktk uby nl rkckm, mai pknqktqy qlhl
kubynnl uby wl vayty myt iygymktal dktk mlnagaqkt k bik xboyt rliymqk,
rlitkhk, tyglcahk w hymaiqytymkhk. w xbévyxy, yiqty lqtkm glmkm, k pakt hy
qa ymqk qki kthbk yxdtymk, yn vyt uby ma hy qa ym vyigahk gkxank, il rk hy
nnyckt yn vyigaxayiql k qlhl qtkigy w taclt, mail k mónl k qyiyt dlt rygrl
nl uby my rk hy rkgyt, dlt fbyi tymdyql; w kmí, il ubyhkté wl lpyihahl xám
hy gli yn hymyl, w xa aiobtak ubyhktá ymglihahk yi nk vatqbh hy qb
manyigal, uby fayi mé uby yi nl uby xy qlgkty rk hy myt yqytil glxl yn hy
nk xbytqy. kmí uby, ma ubaytym uby wl qyick vahk uby dbyhk hygat uby nl ym,
hymhy nbycl rkm hy yiqtkt yi ymqk kxltlmk fkqknnk, il qafak ia
dytyelmkxyiqy, mail gli yn kríigl w hanacyigak uby xa hymyl dahy, w gli nk
glipakiek uby ibymqtk kxamqkh xy kmycbtk.

»Émqkm pbytli nkm tkeliym uby kimynxl haol k nlqktal, k qlhkm nkm gbknym
ymqbvl qki kqyiql, uby ma il pbytli nkm uby ubyhki ymgtaqkm uby ny haol, il
hymdnycó mbm nkfalm rkmqk uby rbfl kgkfkhl; w, vayihl uby il hygík xám,
hymdbém uby ny ymqbvl xatkihl bi fbyi ymdkgal, glxl ma xatktk lqtk glmk uby
okxám rbfaytk vamql, uby ny gkbmktk khxatkgaói w ymdkiql, ny haol:
»-il xy dbyhl dytmbkhat, ¡lr kxacl kimynxl!, k uby il myki fbtnkm nkm glmkm
uby xy rkm hagrl; uby, k dyimkt uby hy vytkm nkm hygíkm, il glimaiqaytk uby
qki khynkiqy dkmktkm, dltuby gli il ymgbgrktqy dtyvaiaytk qb nktck ktyick.
mai hbhk axkcail, l uby il xy glilgym, l uby wl il qy glilegl. dytl il; uby
fayi mé uby ytym kimynxl, w qú mkfym uby wl mlw nlqktal; yn hkñl ymqá yi
uby wl dayiml uby il ytym yn kimynxl uby mlníkm, w qú hyfym hy rkfyt
dyimkhl uby qkxdlgl wl mlw yn nlqktal uby hyfík myt, dltuby nkm glmkm uby
xy rkm hagrl, ia mli hy kubyn kimynxl xa kxacl, ia nkm uby xy dahym my rki
hy dyhat k kubyn nlqktal uby qú glilgym; dltuby nlm fbyilm kxaclm rki hy
dtlfkt k mbm kxaclm w vknytmy hynnlm, glxl haol bi dlyqk, bmuby kh ktkm;
uby ubaml hygat uby il my rkfíki hy vknyt hy mb kxamqkh yi glmkm uby pbymyi
gliqtk halm. dbym, ma ymql maiqaó bi cyiqan hy nk kxamqkh, ¿gbáiql xyolt ym
uby nl mayiqk yn gtamqakil, uby mkfy uby dlt iaicbik rbxkik rk hy dythyt nk
kxamqkh havaik? w gbkihl yn kxacl qatkmy qkiql nk fkttk uby dbmaymy kdktqy
nlm tymdyqlm hyn gaynl dlt kgbhat k nlm hy mb kxacl, il rk hy myt dlt glmkm
nacytkm w hy dlgl xlxyiql, mail dlt kubynnkm yi uby vkwk nk rlitk w nk vahk
hy mb kxacl. dbym haxy qú krltk, kimynxl: ¿gbán hymqkm hlm glmkm qayiym yi
dynactl dktk uby wl xy kvyiqbty k glxdnkgytqy w k rkgyt bik glmk qki
hyqymqkfny glxl xy dahym? iaicbik, dlt gaytql; kiqym, xy dahym, mycúi wl
yiqayihl, uby dtlgbty w mlnagaqy ubaqktqy nk rlitk w nk vahk, w ubaqátxynk
k xí obiqkxyiqy. dltuby ma wl ry hy dtlgbtkt ubaqktqy nk rlitk, gnktl ymqá
uby qy ubaql nk vahk, dbym yn rlxfty mai rlitk dylt ym uby bi xbytql; w,
mayihl wl yn aimqtbxyiql, glxl qú ubaytym uby nl myk, hy qkiql xkn qbwl,
¿il vyicl k ubyhkt hymrlitkhl, w, dlt yn xymxl glimacbayiqy, mai vahk?
ymgbgrk, kxacl kimynxl, w qyi dkgayigak hy il tymdlihytxy rkmqk uby kgkfy
hy hygatqy nl uby my xy lptygayty kgytgk hy nl uby qy rk dyhahl qb hymyl;
uby qayxdl ubyhktá dktk uby qú xy tydnaubym w wl qy ymgbgry.

»-uby xy dnkgy -haol kimynxl-: ha nl uby ubamaytym.

»w nlqktal dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

»-dktégyxy, ¡lr kimynxl!, uby qayiym qú krltk yn aicyial glxl yn uby
mayxdty qayiyi nlm xltlm, k nlm gbknym il my nym dbyhy hkt k yiqyihyt yn
yttlt hy mb mygqk gli nkm kglqkgaliym hy nk mkiqk ymgtaqbtk, ia gli tkeliym
uby glimamqki yi ymdygbnkgaói hyn yiqyihaxayiql, ia uby vkwki pbihkhkm yi
ktqígbnlm hy py, mail uby nym rki hy qtkyt yoyxdnlm dkndkfnym, páganym,
aiqynycafnym, hyxlimqtkqavlm, aihbfaqkfnym, gli hyxlmqtkgaliym xkqyxáqagkm
uby il my dbyhyi iyckt, glxl gbkihl hagyi: "ma hy hlm dktqym acbknym
ubaqkxlm dktqym acbknym, nkm uby ubyhki qkxfaéi mli acbknym"; w, gbkihl
ymql il yiqayihki hy dknkftk, glxl, yi ypyql, il nl yiqayihyi, rámynym hy
xlmqtkt gli nkm xkilm w dliétmynl hynkiqy hy nlm lolm, w, kbi gli qlhl
ymql, il fkmqk ikhay gli ynnlm k dytmbkhatnym nkm vythkhym hy xa mkgtk
tynacaói. w ymqy xymxl qétxail w xlhl xy glivyihtá bmkt gliqacl, dltuby yn
hymyl uby yi qa rk ikgahl vk qki hymgkxaikhl w qki pbytk hy qlhl kubynnl
uby qyick mlxftk hy tkelikfny, uby xy dktygy uby rk hy myt qayxdl ckmqkhl
yn uby lgbdkty yi hktqy k yiqyihyt qb maxdnagahkh, uby dlt krltk il ny
ubaytl hkt lqtl ilxfty, w kbi ymqlw dlt hyoktqy yi qb hymkqail, yi dyik hy
qb xkn hymyl; xkm il xy hyok bmkt hymqy taclt nk kxamqkh uby qy qyicl, nk
gbkn il glimayiqy uby qy hyoy dbymql yi qki xkiapaymql dynactl hy dythytqy.
w, dltuby gnktl nl vykm, haxy, kimynxl: ¿qú il xy rkm hagrl uby qyicl hy
mlnagaqkt k bik tyqatkhk, dytmbkhat k bik rliymqk, lptygyt k bik
hymaiqytymkhk, mytvat k bik dtbhyiqy? mí uby xy nl rkm hagrl. dbym ma qú
mkfym uby qayiym xboyt tyqatkhk, rliymqk, hymaiqytymkhk w dtbhyiqy, ¿ubé
fbmgkm? w ma dayimkm uby hy qlhlm xam kmknqlm rk hy mknat vyigyhltk, glxl
mknhtá mai hbhk, ¿ubé xyoltym qíqbnlm dayimkm hktny hymdbém uby nlm uby
krltk qayiy, l ubé mytá xám hymdbém hy nl uby ym krltk? l ym uby qú il nk
qayiym dlt nk uby hagym, l qú il mkfym nl uby dahym. ma il nk qayiym dlt nl
uby hagym, ¿dktk ubé ubaytym dtlfktnk, mail, glxl k xknk, rkgyt hynnk nl
uby xám qy vaiayty yi cbmql? xkm ma ym qki fbyik glxl gtyym, axdytqaiyiqy
glmk mytá rkgyt yzdytayigak hy nk xymxk vythkh, dbym, hymdbém hy rygrk, my
rk hy ubyhkt gli nk ymqaxkgaói uby dtaxytl qyiík. kmí uby, ym tkeói
glignbwyiqy uby yn aiqyiqkt nkm glmkm hy nkm gbknym kiqym ilm dbyhy mbgyhyt
hkñl uby dtlvygrl ym hy obagalm mai hamgbtml w qyxytktalm, w xám gbkihl
ubaytyi aiqyiqkt kubynnkm k uby il mli pltekhlm ia glxdynahlm, w uby hy xbw
nyolm qtkyi hymgbfaytql uby yn aiqyiqktnkm ym xkiapaymqk nlgbtk. nkm glmkm
hapagbnqlmkm my aiqyiqki dlt halm, l dlt yn xbihl, l dlt yiqtkxflm k hlm:
nkm uby my kglxyqyi dlt halm mli nkm uby kglxyqaytli nlm mkiqlm,
kglxyqayihl k vavat vahk hy áicynym yi gbytdlm rbxkilm; nkm uby my kglxyqyi
dlt tymdyql hyn xbihl mli nkm hy kubynnlm uby dkmki qkiqk aipaiahkh hy
kcbk, qkiqk havytmahkh hy gnaxkm, qkiqk ymqtkñyek hy cyiqym, dlt khubatat
ymqlm uby nnkxki fayiym hy pltqbik. w nkm uby my aiqyiqki dlt halm w dlt yn
xbihl obiqkxyiqy mli kubynnkm hy nlm vknytlmlm mlnhkhlm, uby kdyikm vyyi yi
yn gliqtktal xbtl kfaytql qkiql ymdkgal gbkiql ym yn uby dbhl rkgyt bik
tyhlihk fknk hy ktqannytík, gbkihl, dbymql kdktqy qlhl qyxlt, mai rkgyt
hamgbtml ia khvytqat kn xkiapaymql dynactl uby nym kxyikek, nnyvkhlm yi
vbynl hy nkm knkm hyn hymyl hy vlnvyt dlt mb py, dlt mb ikgaói w dlt mb
tyw, my kttloki aiqtédahkxyiqy dlt nk xaqkh hy xan gliqtkdbymqkm xbytqym
uby nlm ymdytki. ymqkm glmkm mli nkm uby mbynyi aiqyiqktmy, w ym rlitk,
cnltak w dtlvygrl aiqyiqktnkm, kbiuby qki nnyikm hy aiglivyiayiqym w
dynactlm. dytl nk uby qú hagym uby ubaytym aiqyiqkt w dliyt dlt lftk, ia qy
rk hy kngkiekt cnltak hy halm, fayiym hy nk pltqbik, ia pkxk gli nlm
rlxftym; dltuby, dbymql uby mknckm gli ynnk glxl hymykm, il rkm hy ubyhkt
ia xám bpkil, ia xám tagl, ia xám rlitkhl uby ymqám krltk; w ma il mknym,
qy rkm hy vyt yi nk xkwlt xamytak uby axkcaiktmy dbyhk, dltuby il qy rk hy
kdtlvygrkt dyimkt yiqligym uby il mkfy ikhay nk hymctkgak uby qy rk
mbgyhahl, dltuby fkmqktá dktk kpnacatqy w hymrkgytqy uby nk mydkm qú xymxl.
w, dktk glipatxkgaói hymqk vythkh, qy ubaytl hygat bik ymqkigak uby rael yn
pkxlml dlyqk nbam qkimanl, yi yn pai hy mb dtaxytk dktqy hy nkm náctaxkm hy
mki dyhtl, uby hagy kmí:

   gtygy yn hlnlt w gtygy nk vytcüyiek
   yi dyhtl, gbkihl yn hík my rk xlmqtkhl;
   w, kbiuby knní il vy k ikhay, my kvytcüyiek
   hy mí xymxl, dlt vyt uby rkfík dygkhl:
   uby k bi xkciáiaxl dygrl k rkfyt vytcüyiek
   il mónl rk hy xlvytny yn myt xatkhl;
   uby hy mí my kvytcüyiek gbkihl wyttk,
   ma fayi lqtl il vyy uby gaynl w qayttk.

kmí uby, il ymgbmktám gli yn mygtyql qb hlnlt; kiqym, qyihtám uby nnltkt
gliqail, ma il náctaxkm hy nlm lolm, náctaxkm hy mkicty hyn gltkeói, glxl
nkm nnltkfk kubyn maxdny hlgqlt uby ibymqtl dlyqk ilm gbyiqk uby rael nk
dtbyfk hyn vkml, uby, gli xyolt hamgbtml, my ymgbmó hy rkgytnk yn dtbhyiqy
tyaiknhlm; uby, dbymql uby kubynnl myk paggaói dléqagk, qayiy yi mí
yigyttkhlm mygtyqlm xltknym hacilm hy myt khvytqahlm w yiqyihahlm y
axaqkhlm. gbkiql xám uby, gli nl uby krltk dayiml hygatqy, kgkfktám hy
vyiat yi glilgaxayiql hyn ctkihy yttlt uby ubaytym glxyqyt. haxy, kimynxl,
ma yn gaynl, l nk mbytqy fbyik, qy rbfaytk rygrl myñlt w nycíqaxl dlmymlt
hy bi paiímaxl hakxkiqy, hy gbwk flihkh w ubankqym ymqbvaymyi mkqampygrlm
gbkiqlm nkdahktalm ny vaymyi, w uby qlhlm k bik vle w hy glxúi dktygyt
haoymyi uby nnyckfk yi ubankqym, flihkh w paiyek k gbkiql my dlhík ymqyihyt
nk ikqbtknyek hy qkn dayhtk, w qú xymxl nl gtywymym kmí, mai mkfyt lqtk
glmk yi gliqtktal, ¿mytík obmql uby qy vaiaymy yi hymyl hy qlxkt kubyn
hakxkiqy, w dliytny yiqty bi kwbiuby w bi xktqannl, w knní, k dbtk pbytek
hy clndym w ftkelm, dtlfkt ma ym qki hbtl w qki pail glxl hagyi? w xám, ma
nl dbmaymym dlt lftk; uby, dbymql gkml uby nk dayhtk ragaymy tymamqyigak k
qki iygak dtbyfk, il dlt yml my ny kñkhatík xám vknlt ia xám pkxk; w ma my
tlxdaymy, glmk uby dlhtík myt, ¿il my dythytík qlhl? mí, dlt gaytql,
hyokihl k mb hbyñl yi ymqaxkgaói hy uby qlhlm ny qyicki dlt maxdny. dbym
rke gbyiqk, kimynxl kxacl, uby gkxank ym píiamaxl hakxkiqy, kmí yi qb
ymqaxkgaói glxl yi nk koyik, w uby il ym tkeói dliytnk yi gliqaicyigak hy
uby my ubayfty, dbym, kbiuby my ubyhy gli mb yiqytyek, il dbyhy mbfat k xám
vknlt hyn uby krltk qayiy; w ma pknqkmy w il tymamqaymy, glimahytk hymhy
krltk gbán ubyhktíkm mai ynnk, w gli gbáiqk tkeói qy dlhtíkm ubyokt hy qa
xymxl, dlt rkfyt mahl gkbmk hy mb dythagaói w nk qbwk. xatk uby il rkw olwk
yi yn xbihl uby qkiql vknck glxl nk xboyt gkmqk w rlitkhk, w uby qlhl yn
rlilt hy nkm xboytym glimamqy yi nk ldaiaói fbyik uby hynnkm my qayiy; w,
dbym nk hy qb ymdlmk ym qkn uby nnyck kn ymqtyxl hy flihkh uby mkfym, ¿dktk
ubé ubaytym dliyt ymqk vythkh yi hbhk? xatk, kxacl, uby nk xboyt ym kiaxkn
axdytpygql, w uby il my ny rki hy dliyt yxfktkelm hlihy qtldaygy w gkack,
mail ubaqátmynlm w hymdyoknny yn gkxail hy gbknubayt aiglivyiayiqy, dktk
uby mai dymkhbxfty glttk nacytk k kngkiekt nk dytpygaói uby ny pknqk, uby
glimamqy yi yn myt vatqblmk. gbyiqki nlm ikqbtknym uby yn ktxaial ym bi
kiaxknyol uby qayiy bik dayn fnkiubímaxk, w uby gbkihl ubaytyi gkektny, nlm
gkekhltym bmki hymqy ktqapagal: uby, mkfayihl nkm dktqym dlt hlihy mbyny
dkmkt w kgbhat, nkm kqkoki gli nlhl, w hymdbém, loyáihlny, ny yigkxaiki
rkgak kubyn nbckt, w kmí glxl yn ktxaial nnyck kn nlhl, my ymqá ubyhl w my
hyok dtyihyt w gkbqavkt, k qtbygl hy il dkmkt dlt yn gayil w dythyt w
yimbgakt mb fnkigbtk, uby nk ymqaxk yi xám uby nk nafytqkh w nk vahk. nk
rliymqk w gkmqk xboyt ym ktxaial, w ym xám uby iayvy fnkigk w naxdak nk
vatqbh hy nk rliymqahkh; w yn uby ubamayty uby il nk daythk, kiqym nk
cbkthy w glimytvy, rk hy bmkt hy lqtl ymqanl hapytyiqy uby gli yn ktxaial
my qayiy, dltuby il ny rki hy dliyt hynkiqy yn gayil hy nlm tycknlm w
mytvagalm hy nlm axdltqbilm kxkiqym, dltuby ubaeá, w kbi mai ubaeá, il
qayiy qkiqk vatqbh w pbytek ikqbtkn uby dbyhk dlt mí xymxk kqtldynnkt w
dkmkt dlt kubynnlm yxfktkelm, w ym iygymktal ubaqátmynlm w dliytny hynkiqy
nk naxdayek hy nk vatqbh w nk fynnyek uby yigayttk yi mí nk fbyik pkxk. ym
kmaxymxl nk fbyik xboyt glxl ymdyol hy gtamqkn nbgayiqy w gnktl; dytl ymqá
mboyql k yxdkñktmy w ymgbtygytmy gli gbknubaytk knayiql uby ny qluby. rkmy
hy bmkt gli nk rliymqk xboyt yn ymqanl uby gli nkm tynaubakm: khltktnkm w
il qlgktnkm. rkmy hy cbkthkt w ymqaxkt nk xboyt fbyik glxl my cbkthk w
ymqaxk bi rytxlml okthíi uby ymqá nnyil hy pnltym w tlmkm, gbwl hbyñl il
glimayiqy uby ikhay ny dkmyy ia xkilmyy; fkmqk uby hymhy nyolm, w dlt yiqty
nkm vytokm hy rayttl, clgyi hy mb ptkctkigak w rytxlmbtk. paiknxyiqy,
ubaytl hygatqy bilm vytmlm uby my xy rki vyiahl k nk xyxltak, uby nlm lí yi
bik glxyhak xlhytik, uby xy dktygy uby rkgyi kn dtldómaql hy nl uby vkxlm
qtkqkihl. kglimyokfk bi dtbhyiqy vayol k lqtl, dkhty hy bik hligynnk, uby
nk tyglcaymy, cbkthkmy w yigyttkmy, w yiqty lqtkm tkeliym, ny haol émqkm:

   ym hy vahtal nk xboyt;
   dytl il my rk hy dtlfkt
   ma my dbyhy l il ubyftkt,
   dltuby qlhl dlhtík myt.
   w ym xám págan yn ubyftktmy,
   w il ym glthbtk dliytmy
   k dynactl hy tlxdytmy
   nl uby il dbyhy mlnhktmy.
   w yi ymqk ldaiaói ymqéi
   qlhlm, w yi tkeói nk pbihl:
   uby ma rkw háikym yi yn xbihl,
   rkw dnbvakm hy ltl qkxfaéi.

gbkiql rkmqk kubí qy ry hagrl, ¡lr kimynxl!, rk mahl dlt nl uby k qa qy
qlgk; w krltk ym fayi uby my lack kncl hy nl uby k xí xy glivayiy; w ma
pbyty nktcl, dythóikxy, uby qlhl nl tyubayty yn nkfytaiql hlihy qy rkm
yiqtkhl w hy hlihy ubaytym uby wl qy mkuby. qú xy qayiym dlt kxacl w
ubaytym ubaqktxy nk rlitk, glmk uby ym gliqtk qlhk kxamqkh; w kbi il mónl
dtyqyihym ymql, mail uby dtlgbtkm uby wl qy nk ubaqy k qa. uby xy nk
ubaytym ubaqkt k xí ymqá gnktl, dbym, gbkihl gkxank vyk uby wl nk mlnagaql,
glxl xy dahym, gaytql ymqá uby xy rk hy qyiyt dlt rlxfty mai rlitk w xkn
xatkhl, dbym aiqyiql w rkcl bik glmk qki pbytk hy kubynnl uby yn myt ubayi
mlw w qb kxamqkh xy lfnack. hy uby ubaytym uby qy nk ubaqy k qa il rkw
hbhk, dltuby, vayihl gkxank uby wl nk mlnagaql, rk hy dyimkt uby wl ry
vamql yi ynnk kncbik navakihkh uby xy hal kqtyvaxayiql k hymgbftatny xa xkn
hymyl; w, qyiaéihlmy dlt hymrlitkhk, qy qlgk k qa, glxl k glmk mbwk, mb
xymxk hymrlitk. w hy kubí ikgy nl uby glxúixyiqy my dnkqagk: uby yn xktahl
hy nk xboyt khúnqytk, dbymql uby én il nl mydk ia rkwk hkhl lgkmaói dktk
uby mb xboyt il myk nk uby hyfy, ia rkwk mahl yi mb xkil, ia yi mb hymgbahl
w dlgl tygkql ymqltfkt mb hymctkgak, gli qlhl, ny nnkxki w ny ilxftki gli
ilxfty hy vaqbdytal w fkol; w yi gaytqk xkiytk ny xatki, nlm uby nk xknhkh
hy mb xboyt mkfyi, gli lolm hy xyilmdtygal, yi gkxfal hy xatktny gli nlm hy
námqaxk, vayihl uby il dlt mb gbndk, mail dlt yn cbmql hy mb xknk
glxdkñytk, ymqá yi kubynnk hymvyiqbtk. dytl ubaétlqy hygat nk gkbmk dlt uby
gli obmqk tkeói ym hymrlitkhl yn xktahl hy nk xboyt xknk, kbiuby én il mydk
uby nl ym, ia qyick gbndk, ia rkwk mahl dktqy, ia hkhl lgkmaói, dktk uby
ynnk nl myk. w il qy gkimym hy lítxy, uby qlhl rk hy tyhbihkt yi qb
dtlvygrl. gbkihl halm gtaó k ibymqtl dtaxytl dkhty yi yn dktkíml qyttyikn,
hagy nk havaik ymgtaqbtk uby aipbihaó halm mbyñl yi khái, w uby, ymqkihl
hbtxayihl, ny mkgó bik glmqannk hyn nkhl maiaymqtl, hy nk gbkn pltxó k
ibymqtk xkhty yvk; w, kmí glxl khái hymdytqó w nk xató, haol: ''Émqk ym
gktiy hy xa gktiy w rbyml hy xam rbymlm''. w halm haol: ''dlt émqk hyoktá
yn rlxfty k mb dkhty w xkhty, w mytái hlm yi bik gktiy xamxk''. w yiqligym
pby aimqaqbahl yn havail mkgtkxyiql hyn xkqtaxlial, gli qknym nkelm uby
mlnk nk xbytqy dbyhy hymkqktnlm. w qayiy qkiqk pbytek w vatqbh ymqy
xankctlml mkgtkxyiql, uby rkgy uby hlm hapytyiqym dytmlikm myki bik xymxk
gktiy; w kúi rkgy xám yi nlm fbyilm gkmkhlm, uby, kbiuby qayiyi hlm knxkm,
il qayiyi xám hy bik vlnbiqkh. w hy kubí vayiy uby, glxl nk gktiy hy nk
ymdlmk myk bik xymxk gli nk hyn ymdlml, nkm xkigrkm uby yi ynnk gkyi, l nlm
hypygqlm uby my dtlgbtk, tyhbihki yi nk gktiy hyn xktahl, kbiuby én il rkwk
hkhl, glxl ubyhk hagrl, lgkmaói dktk kubyn hkñl. dltuby, kmí glxl yn hlnlt
hyn day l hy gbknubayt xayxftl hyn gbytdl rbxkil ny mayiqy qlhl yn gbytdl,
dlt myt qlhl hy bik gktiy xymxk, w nk gkfyek mayiqy yn hkñl hyn qlfannl,
mai uby ynnk my ny rkwk gkbmkhl, kmí yn xktahl ym dktqagadkiqy hy nk
hymrlitk hy nk xboyt, dlt myt bik xymxk glmk gli ynnk. w glxl nkm rlitkm w
hymrlitkm hyn xbihl myki qlhkm w ikegki hy gktiy w mkicty, w nkm hy nk
xboyt xknk myki hymqy céiytl, ym pltelml uby kn xktahl ny ubydk dktqy
hynnkm, w myk qyiahl dlt hymrlitkhl mai uby én nl mydk. xatk, dbym, ¡lr
kimynxl!, kn dynactl uby qy dliym yi ubytyt qbtfkt yn mlmaycl yi uby qb
fbyik ymdlmk vavy. xatk dlt gbái vkik y axdytqaiyiqy gbtalmahkh ubaytym
tyvlnvyt nlm rbxltym uby krltk ymqái mlmyckhlm yi yn dygrl hy qb gkmqk
ymdlmk. khvaytqy uby nl uby kvyiqbtkm k ckikt ym dlgl, w uby nl uby
dythytám mytá qkiql uby nl hyokté yi mb dbiql, dltuby xy pknqki dknkftkm
dktk yigktygytnl. dytl ma qlhl gbkiql ry hagrl il fkmqk k xlvytqy hy qb xkn
dtldómaql, fayi dbyhym fbmgkt lqtl aimqtbxyiql hy qb hymrlitk w hymvyiqbtk,
uby wl il dayiml mytnl, kbiuby dlt ynnl daythk qb kxamqkh, uby ym nk xkwlt
déthahk uby axkcaikt dbyhl.

»gknnó, yi hagayihl ymql, yn vatqblml w dtbhyiqy nlqktal, w kimynxl ubyhó
qki glipbml w dyimkqavl uby dlt bi fbyi ymdkgal il ny dbhl tymdlihyt
dknkftk; dytl, yi pai, ny haol:

»-gli nk kqyigaói uby rkm vamql ry ymgbgrkhl, nlqktal kxacl, gbkiql rkm
ubytahl hygatxy, w yi qbm tkeliym, yoyxdnlm w glxdktkgaliym ry vamql nk
xbgrk hamgtygaói uby qayiym w yn ymqtyxl hy nk vythkhytk kxamqkh uby
kngkiekm; w kimaxymxl vyl w glipayml uby ma il macl qb dktygyt w xy vlw
qtkm yn xíl, vlw rbwyihl hyn fayi w glttayihl qtkm yn xkn. dtlmbdbymql
ymql, rkm hy glimahytkt uby wl dkhyegl krltk nk yipytxyhkh uby mbynyi qyiyt
kncbikm xboytym, uby my nym kiqlok glxyt qayttk, wyml, gktfói w lqtkm glmkm
dyltym, kbi kmubytlmkm dktk xatktmy, gbkiql xám dktk glxytmy; kmí uby, ym
xyiymqyt bmkt hy kncúi ktqapagal dktk uby wl mkiy, w ymql my dlhík rkgyt
gli pkganahkh, mónl gli uby glxayigym, kbiuby qafak w paicahkxyiqy, k
mlnagaqkt k gkxank, nk gbkn il rk hy myt qki qaytik uby k nlm dtaxytlm
yigbyiqtlm hé gli mb rliymqahkh dlt qayttk; w gli mlnl ymqy dtaigadal
ubyhkté gliqyiql w qú rkftám gbxdnahl gli nl uby hyfym k ibymqtk kxamqkh,
il mlnkxyiqy háihlxy nk vahk, mail dytmbkhaéihlxy hy il vytxy mai rlitk. w
ymqám lfnackhl k rkgyt ymql dlt bik tkeói mlnk; w ym uby, ymqkihl wl, glxl
ymqlw, hyqytxaikhl hy dliyt yi dnáqagk ymqk dtbyfk, il rkm qú hy glimyiqat
uby wl hé gbyiqk hy xa hymkqail k lqtk dytmlik, gli uby dlihtík yi kvyiqbtk
yn rlilt uby qú dtlgbtkm uby il daythk; w, gbkihl yn qbwl il ymqé yi yn
dbiql uby hyfy yi nk aiqyigaói hy gkxank yi qkiql uby nk mlnagaqktym,
axdltqk dlgl l ikhk, dbym gli ftyvyhkh, vayihl yi ynnk nk yiqytyek uby
ymdytkxlm, ny dlhtám hygat nk dbtk vythkh hy ibymqtl ktqapagal, gli uby
vlnvytá qb gtéhaql kn myt dtaxytl. w, dbym qki dlgl kvyiqbtkm w qkiql
gliqyiql xy dbyhym hkt kvyiqbtáihlqy, il nl hyoym hy rkgyt, kbiuby xám
aiglivyiayiqym my qy dlicki hynkiqy, dbym, glxl wk ry hagrl, gli mónl uby
glxayigym hkté dlt glignbahk nk gkbmk.

»vayihl nlqktal nk tymlnbqk vlnbiqkh hy kimynxl, w il mkfayihl ubé xám
yoyxdnlm qtkytny ia ubé xám tkeliym xlmqtktny dktk uby il nk macbaymy, w
vayihl uby ny kxyikekfk uby hktík k lqtl gbyiqk hy mb xkn hymyl, dlt yvaqkt
xkwlt xkn, hyqytxaió hy gliqyiqktny w rkgyt nl uby ny dyhík, gli dtldómaql
y aiqyigaói hy cbakt kubyn iyclgal hy xlhl uby, mai knqytkt nlm
dyimkxayiqlm hy gkxank, ubyhkmy kimynxl mkqampygrl; w kmí, ny tymdlihaó uby
il glxbiagkmy mb dyimkxayiql gli lqtl kncbil, uby én qlxkfk k mb gktcl
kubynnk yxdtymk, nk gbkn glxyiektík gbkihl k én ny haymy xám cbmql.
kftkeóny kimynxl qaytik w kxltlmkxyiqy, w kctkhygaóny mb lptygaxayiql, glxl
ma kncbik ctkihy xytgyh ny rbfaytk rygrl; w ubyhktli hy kgbythl yiqty nlm
hlm uby hymhy lqtl hík macbayiqy my glxyiekmy nk lftk; uby én ny hktík
nbckt w qayxdl glxl k mbm mlnkm dbhaymy rkfnkt k gkxank, w kmaxymxl ny
hktík haiytlm w olwkm uby hktnk w uby lptygytnk. kglimyoóny uby ny haymy
xúmagkm, uby ymgtafaymy vytmlm yi mb knkfkiek, w uby, gbkihl én il ubamaymy
qlxkt qtkfkol hy rkgytnlm, én xymxl nlm rktík. k qlhl my lptygaó nlqktal,
fayi gli hapytyiqy aiqyigaói uby kimynxl dyimkfk.

»w gli ymqy kgbythl my vlnvaytli k gkmk hy kimynxl, hlihy rknnktli k gkxank
gli kimak w gbahkhl, ymdytkihl k mb ymdlml, dltuby kubyn hík qkthkfk yi
vyiat xám hy nl kglmqbxftkhl.

»pbymy nlqktal k mb gkmk, w kimynxl ubyhó yi nk mbwk, qki gliqyiql glxl
nlqktal pby dyimkqavl, il mkfayihl ubé qtkek hkt dktk mknat fayi hy kubyn
axdytqaiyiqy iyclgal. dytl kubynnk ilgry dyimó yn xlhl uby qyihtík dktk
yickñkt k kimynxl, mai lpyihyt k gkxank; w lqtl hík vail k glxyt gli mb
kxacl, w pby fayi tygyfahl hy gkxank, nk gbkn ny tygyfík w tycknkfk gli
xbgrk vlnbiqkh, dlt yiqyihyt nk fbyik uby mb ymdlml ny qyiík.
»kgkfktli hy glxyt, nyvkiqktli nlm xkiqynym w kimynxl haol k nlqktal uby my
ubyhkmy knní gli gkxank, yi qkiql uby én afk k bi iyclgal pltelml, uby
hyiqtl hy rltk w xyhak vlnvytík. tlcóny gkxank uby il my pbymy w nlqktal my
lptygaó k rkgytny glxdkñík, xám ikhk kdtlvygró gli kimynxl; kiqym,
axdltqbió k nlqktal uby my ubyhkmy w ny kcbkthkmy, dltuby qyiík uby qtkqkt
gli én bik glmk hy xbgrk axdltqkigak. haol qkxfaéi k gkxank uby il hyokmy
mlnl k nlqktal yi qkiql uby én vlnvaymy. yi ypyql, én mbdl qki fayi paicat
nk iygymahkh, l iygyhkh, hy mb kbmyigak, uby ikhay dbhaytk yiqyihyt uby ytk
paicahk. pbymy kimynxl, w ubyhktli mlnlm k nk xymk gkxank w nlqktal, dltuby
nk hyxám cyiqy hy gkmk qlhk my rkfík ahl k glxyt. valmy nlqktal dbymql yi
nk ymqkgkhk uby mb kxacl hymykfk w gli yn yiyxacl hynkiqy, uby dbhaytk
vyigyt gli mlnk mb rytxlmbtk k bi ymgbkhtói hy gkfknnytlm ktxkhlm: xatkh ma
ytk tkeói uby ny qyxaytk nlqktal.

»dytl nl uby rael pby dliyt yn glhl mlfty yn ftkel hy nk mannk w nk xkil
kfaytqk yi nk xyoannk, w, dahayihl dythói k gkxank hyn xkn glxyhaxayiql,
haol uby ubytík tydlmkt bi dlgl yi qkiql uby kimynxl vlnvík. gkxank ny
tymdlihaó uby xyolt tydlmktík yi yn ymqtkhl uby yi nk mannk, w kmí, ny tlcó
my yiqtkmy k hltxat yi én. il ubaml nlqktal, w knní my ubyhó hltxahl rkmqk
uby vlnvaó kimynxl, yn gbkn, glxl rknnó k gkxank yi mb kdlmyiql w k nlqktal
hbtxayihl, gtywó uby, glxl my rkfík qkthkhl qkiql, wk rkftíki qyiahl nlm
hlm nbckt dktk rkfnkt, w kbi dktk hltxat, w il val nk rltk yi uby nlqktal
hymdytqkmy, dktk vlnvytmy gli én pbytk w dtycbiqktny hy mb vyiqbtk.
»qlhl ny mbgyhaó glxl én ubaml: nlqktal hymdytqó, w nbycl mknaytli nlm hlm
hy gkmk, w kmí, ny dtycbiqó nl uby hymykfk, w ny tymdlihaó nlqktal uby il
ny rkfík dktygahl myt fayi uby nk dtaxytk vye my hymgbftaymy hyn qlhl; w
kmí, il rkfík rygrl lqtk glmk uby knkfkt k gkxank hy rytxlmk, hagaéihlny
uby yi qlhk nk gabhkh il my qtkqkfk hy lqtk glmk uby hy mb rytxlmbtk w
hamgtygaói, w uby émqy ny rkfík dktygahl fbyi dtaigadal dktk yiqtkt ckikihl
nk vlnbiqkh, w hamdliaéihlnk k uby lqtk vye ny ymgbgrkmy gli cbmql, bmkihl
yi ymql hyn ktqapagal uby yn hyxlial bmk gbkihl ubayty yickñkt k kncbil uby
ymqá dbymql yi kqknkwk hy xatkt dlt mí: uby my qtkimpltxk yi áicyn hy nbe,
maéihlnl én hy qaiayfnkm, w, dliaéihlny hynkiqy kdktayigakm fbyikm, kn gkfl
hymgbfty ubaéi ym w mkny gli mb aiqyigaói, ma k nlm dtaigadalm il ym
hymgbfaytql mb yickñl. qlhl ymql ny gliqyiqó xbgrl k kimynxl, w haol uby
gkhk hík hktík yn xymxl nbckt, kbiuby il mknaymy hy gkmk, dltuby yi ynnk my
lgbdktík yi glmkm uby gkxank il dbhaymy vyiat yi glilgaxayiql hy mb
ktqapagal.

»mbgyhaó, dbym, uby my dkmktli xbgrlm híkm uby, mai hygat nlqktal dknkftk k
gkxank, tymdlihík k kimynxl uby nk rkfnkfk w okxám dlhík mkgkt hynnk bik
dyubyñk xbymqtk hy vyiat yi iaicbik glmk uby xknk pbymy, ia kbi hkt bik
myñkn hy mlxftk hy ymdytkiek; kiqym, hygík uby ny kxyikekfk uby ma hy kubyn
xkn dyimkxayiql il my ubaqkfk, uby nl rkfík hy hygat k mb ymdlml.
»-fayi ymqá -haol kimynxl-. rkmqk kubí rk tymamqahl gkxank k nkm dknkftkm;
ym xyiymqyt vyt góxl tymamqy k nkm lftkm: wl lm hkté xkñkik hlm xan ymgbhlm
hy ltl dktk uby my nlm lptyegáam, w kbi my nlm hyam, w lqtlm qkiqlm dktk
uby glxdtéam olwkm gli uby gyfktnk; uby nkm xboytym mbynyi myt kpagalikhkm,
w xám ma mli rytxlmkm, dlt xám gkmqkm uby myki, k ymql hy qtkytmy fayi w
kihkt cknkikm; w ma ynnk tymamqy k ymqk qyiqkgaói, wl ubyhkté mkqampygrl w
il lm hkté xám dymkhbxfty.

»nlqktal tymdlihaó uby wk uby rkfík glxyiekhl, uby én nnyvktík rkmqk yn pai
kubynnk yxdtymk, dbymql uby yiqyihík mknat hynnk gkimkhl w vyigahl. lqtl
hík tygafaó nlm gbkqtl xan ymgbhlm, w gli ynnlm gbkqtl xan glipbmaliym,
dltuby il mkfík ubé hygatmy dktk xyiqat hy ibyvl; dytl, yi ypyql, hyqytxaió
hy hygatny uby gkxank ymqkfk qki yiqytk k nkm háhavkm w dtlxymkm glxl k nkm
dknkftkm, w uby il rkfík dktk ubé gkimktmy xám, dltuby qlhl yn qayxdl my
ckmqkfk yi fknhy.

»dytl nk mbytqy, uby nkm glmkm cbakfk hy lqtk xkiytk, lthyió uby, rkfayihl
hyokhl kimynxl mlnlm k nlqktal w k gkxank, glxl lqtkm vygym mlník, én my
yigyttó yi bi kdlmyiql w dlt nlm kcboytlm hy nk gyttkhbtk ymqbvl xatkihl w
ymgbgrkihl nl uby nlm hlm qtkqkfki, w val uby yi xám hy xyhak rltk nlqktal
il rkfnó dknkftk k gkxank, ia my nk rkfnktk ma knní ymqbvaytk bi macnl, w
gkwó yi nk gbyiqk hy uby gbkiql mb kxacl ny rkfík hagrl hy nkm tymdbymqkm
hy gkxank qlhl ytk paggaói w xyiqatk. w, dktk vyt ma ymql ytk kimí, mknaó
hyn kdlmyiql, w, nnkxkihl k nlqktal kdktqy, ny dtycbiqó ubé ibyvkm rkfík w
hy ubé qyxdny ymqkfk gkxank. nlqktal ny tymdlihaó uby il dyimkfk xám hktny
dbiqkhk yi kubyn iyclgal, dltuby tymdlihík qki ámdytk w hymkftahkxyiqy, uby
il qyihtík áiaxl dktk vlnvyt k hygatny glmk kncbik.

»-¡kr! -haol kimynxl-, nlqktal, nlqktal, w gbái xkn glttymdlihym k nl uby
xy hyfym w k nl xbgrl uby hy qa glipíl! krltk qy ry ymqkhl xatkihl dlt yn
nbckt uby gligyhy nk yiqtkhk hymqk nnkvy, w ry vamql uby il rkm hagrl
dknkftk k gkxank, dlt hlihy xy hlw k yiqyihyt uby kbi nkm dtaxytkm ny
qayiym dlt hygat; w ma ymql ym kmí, glxl mai hbhk nl ym, ¿dktk ubé xy
yickñkm, l dlt ubé ubaytym ubaqktxy gli qb aihbmqtak nlm xyhalm uby wl
dlhtík rknnkt dktk glimycbat xa hymyl?

»il haol xám kimynxl, dytl fkmqó nl uby rkfík hagrl dktk hyokt glttahl w
glipbml k nlqktal; yn gbkn, gkma glxl qlxkihl dlt dbiql hy rlitk yn rkfyt
mahl rknnkhl yi xyiqatk, obtó k kimynxl uby hymhy kubyn xlxyiql qlxkfk qki
k mb gktcl yn gliqyiqknny w il xyiqanny, gbkn nl vytík ma gli gbtalmahkh nl
ymdakfk; gbkiql xám, uby il mytík xyiymqyt bmkt hy iaicbik hanacyigak,
dltuby nk uby én dyimkfk dliyt yi mkqampkgynny ny ubaqktík hy qlhk
mlmdygrk. gtywóny kimynxl, w dktk hknny glxlhahkh xám mycbtk w xyilm
mlftymknqkhk, hyqytxaió hy rkgyt kbmyigak hy mb gkmk dlt lgrl híkm, wéihlmy
k nk hy bi kxacl mbwl, uby ymqkfk yi bik knhyk, il nyolm hy nk gabhkh, gli
yn gbkn kxacl gligytqó uby ny yivakmy k nnkxkt gli xbgrkm vytkm, dktk qyiyt
lgkmaói gli gkxank hy mb dktqahk.

»¡hymhagrkhl w xkn khvytqahl hy qa, kimynxl! ¿ubé ym nl uby rkgym? ¿ubé ym
nl uby qtkekm? ¿ubé ym nl uby lthyikm? xatk uby rkgym gliqtk qa xamxl,
qtkekihl qb hymrlitk w lthyikihl qb dythagaói. fbyik ym qb ymdlmk gkxank,
ubayqk w mlmyckhkxyiqy nk dlmyym, ikhay mlftymknqk qb cbmql, mbm
dyimkxayiqlm il mknyi hy nkm dktyhym hy mb gkmk, qú ytym mb gaynl yi nk
qayttk, yn fnkigl hy mbm hymylm, yn gbxdnaxayiql hy mbm cbmqlm w nk xyhahk
dlt hlihy xahy mb vlnbiqkh, kobmqáihlnk yi qlhl gli nk qbwk w gli nk hyn
gaynl. dbym ma nk xaik hy mb rlilt, rytxlmbtk, rliymqahkh w tyglcaxayiql qy
hk mai iaicúi qtkfkol qlhk nk taubyek uby qayiy w qú dbyhym hymykt, ¿dktk
ubé ubaytym krlihkt nk qayttk w fbmgkt ibyvkm vyqkm hy ibyvl w ibigk vamql
qymltl, dliaéihlqy k dynactl uby qlhk vyick kfkol, dbym, yi pai, my
mbmqyiqk mlfty nlm héfanym kttaxlm hy mb pnkgk ikqbtknyek? xatk uby yn uby
fbmgk nl axdlmafny ym obmql uby nl dlmafny my ny iaycby, glxl nl haol xyolt
bi dlyqk, hagayihl:

   fbmgl yi nk xbytqy nk vahk,
   mknbh yi nk yipytxyhkh,
   yi nk dtamaói nafytqkh,
   yi nl gyttkhl mknahk
   w yi yn qtkahlt nyknqkh.
   dytl xa mbytqy, hy ubayi
   okxám ymdytl kncúi fayi,
   gli yn gaynl rk ymqkqbahl
   uby, dbym nl axdlmafny dahl,
   nl dlmafny kbi il xy hyi.

»pbymy lqtl hík kimynxl k nk knhyk, hyokihl hagrl k gkxank uby yn qayxdl
uby én ymqbvaymy kbmyiqy vyihtík nlqktal k xatkt dlt mb gkmk w k glxyt gli
ynnk; uby qbvaymy gbahkhl hy qtkqknny glxl k mb xymxk dytmlik. kpnacaómy
gkxank, glxl xboyt hamgtyqk w rlitkhk, hy nk lthyi uby mb xktahl ny hyokfk,
w híolny uby khvatqaymy uby il ymqkfk fayi uby ikhay, én kbmyiqy, lgbdkmy
nk mannk hy mb xymk, w uby ma nl rkgík dlt il qyiyt glipakiek uby ynnk
mkftík clfytikt mb gkmk, uby dtlfkmy dlt kubynnk vye, w vytík dlt
yzdytayigak glxl dktk xkwltym gbahkhlm ytk fkmqkiqy. kimynxl ny tydnagó uby
kubén ytk mb cbmql, w uby il qyiík xám uby rkgyt uby fkokt nk gkfyek w
lfyhygynny. gkxank haol uby kimí nl rktík, kbiuby gliqtk mb vlnbiqkh.
»dktqaómy kimynxl, w lqtl hík vail k mb gkmk nlqktal, hlihy pby tymgyfahl
hy gkxank gli kxltlml w rliymql kglcaxayiql; nk gbkn okxám my dbml yi dktqy
hlihy nlqktal nk vaymy k mlnkm, dltuby mayxdty kihkfk tlhykhk hy mbm
gtakhlm w gtakhkm, ymdygaknxyiqy hy bik hligynnk mbwk, nnkxkhk nyliynk, k
ubayi ynnk xbgrl ubytík, dlt rkfytmy gtakhl hymhy iañkm nkm hlm obiqkm yi
gkmk hy nlm dkhtym hy gkxank, w gbkihl my gkmó gli kimynxl nk qtbol
glimacl.

»yi nlm qtym híkm dtaxytlm ibigk nlqktal ny haol ikhk, kbiuby dbhaytk,
gbkihl my nyvkiqkfki nlm xkiqynym w nk cyiqy my afk k glxyt gli xbgrk
dtaymk, dltuby kmí my nl qyiík xkihkhl gkxank. w kbi qyiík lthyi nyliynk
uby glxaymy dtaxytl uby gkxank, w uby hy mb nkhl okxám my ubaqkmy; xkm
ynnk, uby yi lqtkm glmkm hy mb cbmql qyiík dbymql yn dyimkxayiql w rkfík
xyiymqyt kubynnkm rltkm w kubyn nbckt dktk lgbdktny yi mbm gliqyiqlm, il
gbxdník qlhkm vygym yn xkihkxayiql hy mb myñltk; kiqym, nlm hyokfk mlnlm,
glxl ma kubynnl ny rbfaytki xkihkhl. xkm nk rliymqk dtymyigak hy gkxank, nk
ctkvyhkh hy mb tlmqtl, nk glxdlmqbtk hy mb dytmlik ytk qkiqk, uby dliík
ptyil k nk nyicbk hy nlqktal.

»dytl yn dtlvygrl uby nkm xbgrkm vatqbhym hy gkxank ragaytli, dliayihl
manyigal yi nk nyicbk hy nlqktal, tyhbihó xám yi hkñl hy nlm hlm, dltuby ma
nk nyicbk gknnkfk, yn dyimkxayiql hamgbttík w qyiík nbckt hy gliqyxdnkt,
dktqy dlt dktqy, qlhlm nlm ymqtyxlm hy flihkh w hy rytxlmbtk uby gkxank
qyiík, fkmqkiqym k yikxltkt bik ymqkqbk hy xátxln, il uby bi gltkeói hy
gktiy.

»xatáfknk nlqktal yi yn nbckt w ymdkgal uby rkfík hy rkfnktnk, w
glimahytkfk gbái hacik ytk hy myt kxkhk; w ymqk glimahytkgaói glxyieó dlgl
k dlgl k hkt kmknqlm k nlm tymdygqlm uby k kimynxl qyiík, w xan vygym ubaml
kbmyiqktmy hy nk gabhkh w atmy hlihy okxám kimynxl ny vaymy k én, ia én
vaymy k gkxank; xkm wk ny rkgík axdyhaxyiql w hyqyiík yn cbmql uby rknnkfk
yi xatktnk. rkgíkmy pbytek w dynykfk glimacl xamxl dlt hymygrkt w il myiqat
yn gliqyiql uby ny nnyvkfk k xatkt k gkxank. gbndáfkmy k mlnkm hy mb
hymkqail, nnkxáfkmy xkn kxacl w kbi xkn gtamqakil; rkgík hamgbtmlm w
glxdktkgaliym yiqty én w kimynxl, w qlhlm dktkfki yi hygat uby xám rkfík
mahl nk nlgbtk w glipakiek hy kimynxl uby mb dlgk pahynahkh, w uby ma kmí
qbvaytk hamgbndk dktk gli halm glxl dktk gli nlm rlxftym hy nl uby dyimkfk
rkgyt, uby il qyxaytk dyik dlt mb gbndk.

»yi ypygql, nk rytxlmbtk w nk flihkh hy gkxank, obiqkxyiqy gli nk lgkmaói
uby yn aciltkiqy xktahl ny rkfík dbymql yi nkm xkilm, haytli gli nk nyknqkh
hy nlqktal yi qayttk. w, mai xatkt k lqtk glmk uby kubynnk k uby mb cbmql
ny aignaikfk, kn gkfl hy qtym híkm hy nk kbmyigak hy kimynxl, yi nlm gbknym
ymqbvl yi gliqaibk fkqknnk dlt tymamqat k mbm hymylm, glxyieó k tyubyftkt k
gkxank, gli qkiqk qbtfkgaói w gli qki kxltlmkm tkeliym uby gkxank ubyhó
mbmdyimk, w il rael lqtk glmk uby nyvkiqktmy hy hlihy ymqkfk w yiqtktmy k
mb kdlmyiql, mai tymdlihynny dknkftk kncbik. xkm il dlt ymqk myubyhkh my
hymxkwó yi nlqktal nk ymdytkiek, uby mayxdty ikgy obiqkxyiqy gli yn kxlt;
kiqym, qbvl yi xám k gkxank. nk gbkn, rkfayihl vamql yi nlqktal nl uby
okxám dyimktk, il mkfík ubé rkgytmy. w, dktygaéihlny il myt glmk mycbtk ia
fayi rygrk hktny lgkmaói ia nbckt k uby lqtk vye nk rkfnkmy, hyqytxaió hy
yivakt kubynnk xymxk ilgry, glxl nl rael, k bi gtakhl mbwl gli bi fannyqy k
kimynxl, hlihy ny ymgtafaó ymqkm tkeliym:





gkdíqbnl zzzav. hlihy my dtlmacby nk ilvynk hyn gbtalml axdytqaiyiqy


»kmí glxl mbyny hygatmy uby dktygy xkn yn yoétgaql mai mb cyiytkn w yn
gkmqannl mai mb gkmqynnkil, hacl wl uby dktygy xbw dylt nk xboyt gkmkhk w
xlek mai mb xktahl, gbkihl obmqímaxkm lgkmaliym il nl axdahyi. wl xy rknnl
qki xkn mai vlm, w qki axdlmafanaqkhk hy il dlhyt mbptat ymqk kbmyigak, uby
ma dtymql il vyiím, xy rkfté hy at k yiqtyqyiyt yi gkmk hy xam dkhtym,
kbiuby hyoy mai cbkthk nk vbymqtk; dltuby nk uby xy hyokmqym, ma ym uby
ubyhó gli qkn qíqbnl, gtyl uby xatk xám dlt mb cbmql uby dlt nl uby k vlm
lm qlgk; w, dbym mlam hamgtyql, il qyicl xám uby hygatlm, ia kbi ym fayi
uby xám lm hack.

»ymqk gktqk tygafaó kimynxl, w yiqyihaó dlt ynnk uby nlqktal rkfík wk
glxyiekhl nk yxdtymk, w uby gkxank hyfík hy rkfyt tymdlihahl glxl én
hymykfk; w, knycty mlftyxkiytk hy qknym ibyvkm, tymdlihaó k gkxank, hy
dknkftk, uby il ragaymy xbhkxayiql hy mb gkmk yi xlhl iaicbil, dltuby én
vlnvytík gli xbgrk ftyvyhkh. khxatkhk ubyhó gkxank hy nk tymdbymqk hy
kimynxl, uby nk dbml yi xám glipbmaói uby dtaxytl, dltuby ia my kqtyvík k
ymqkt yi mb gkmk, ia xyilm atmy k nk hy mbm dkhtym; dltuby yi nk ubyhkhk
glttík dynactl mb rliymqahkh, w yi nk ahk afk gliqtk yn xkihkxayiql hy mb
ymdlml.

»yi pai, my tymlnvaó yi nl uby ny ymqbvl dylt, uby pby yi yn ubyhktmy, gli
hyqytxaikgaói hy il rbat nk dtymyigak hy nlqktal, dlt il hkt uby hygat k
mbm gtakhlm; w wk ny dymkfk hy rkfyt ymgtaql nl uby ymgtafaó k mb ymdlml,
qyxytlmk hy uby il dyimkmy uby nlqktal rkfík vamql yi ynnk kncbik
hymyivlnqbtk uby ny rbfaymy xlvahl k il cbkthknny yn hygltl uby hyfík.
dytl, pakhk yi mb flihkh, my paó yi halm w yi mb fbyi dyimkxayiql, gli uby
dyimkfk tymamqat gknnkihl k qlhl kubynnl uby nlqktal hygatny ubamaymy, mai
hkt xám gbyiqk k mb xktahl, dlt il dliytny yi kncbik dyihyigak w qtkfkol. w
kbi kihkfk fbmgkihl xkiytk glxl hamgbndkt k nlqktal gli kimynxl, gbkihl ny
dtycbiqkmy nk lgkmaói uby ny rkfík xlvahl k ymgtafatny kubyn dkdyn. gli
ymqlm dyimkxayiqlm, xám rlitkhlm uby kgytqkhlm ia dtlvygrlmlm, ymqbvl lqtl
hík ymgbgrkihl k nlqktal, yn gbkn gktcó nk xkil hy xkiytk uby glxyieó k
qaqbfykt nk patxyek hy gkxank, w mb rliymqahkh qbvl rktql uby rkgyt yi
kgbhat k nlm lolm, dktk uby il haymyi xbymqtk hy kncbik kxltlmk glxdkmaói
uby nkm náctaxkm w nkm tkeliym hy nlqktal yi mb dygrl rkfíki hymdytqkhl.
qlhl ymql ilqkfk nlqktal, w qlhl ny yigyihík.

»paiknxyiqy, k én ny dktygaó uby ytk xyiymqyt, yi yn ymdkgal w nbckt uby
hkfk nk kbmyigak hy kimynxl, kdtyqkt yn gytgl k kubynnk pltqknyek. w kmí,
kglxyqaó k mb dtymbigaói gli nkm knkfkiekm hy mb rytxlmbtk, dltuby il rkw
glmk uby xám dtymql taihk w knnkiy nkm yigkmqannkhkm qlttym hy nk vkiahkh
hy nkm rytxlmkm uby nk xymxk vkiahkh, dbymqk yi nkm nyicbkm hy nk
khbnkgaói. yi ypygql, én, gli qlhk hanacyigak, xaió nk tlgk hy mb yiqytyek,
gli qknym dytqtygrlm uby, kbiuby gkxank pbytk qlhk hy ftligy, vaiaytk kn
mbynl. nnltó, tlcó, lptygaó, khbnó, dltpaó, w paicaó nlqktal gli qkiqlm
myiqaxayiqlm, gli xbymqtkm hy qkiqkm vytkm, uby hal kn qtkvém gli yn tygkql
hy gkxank w vail k qtabipkt hy nl uby xyilm my dyimkfk w xám hymykfk.
»taihaómy gkxank, gkxank my taihaó; dytl, ¿ubé xbgrl, ma nk kxamqkh hy
nlqktal il ubyhó yi day? yoyxdnl gnktl uby ilm xbymqtk uby mónl my vyigy nk
dkmaói kxltlmk gli rbannk, w uby ikhay my rk hy dliyt k ftkelm gli qki
dlhytlml yiyxacl, dltuby ym xyiymqyt pbytekm havaikm dktk vyigyt nkm mbwkm
rbxkikm. mónl mbdl nyliynk nk pnkubyek hy mb myñltk, dltuby il my nk
dbhaytli yigbftat nlm hlm xknlm kxaclm w ibyvlm kxkiqym. il ubaml nlqktal
hygat k gkxank nk dtyqyimaói hy kimynxl, ia uby én ny rkfík hkhl nbckt dktk
nnyckt k kubyn dbiql, dltuby il qbvaymy yi xyilm mb kxlt w dyimkmy uby kmí,
kgkml w mai dyimkt, w il hy dtldómaql, nk rkfík mlnagaqkhl.

»vlnvaó hy knní k dlglm híkm kimynxl k mb gkmk, w il ygró hy vyt nl uby
pknqkfk yi ynnk, uby ytk nl uby yi xyilm qyiík w xám ymqaxkfk. pbymy nbycl
k vyt k nlqktal, w rknnóny yi mb gkmk; kftkeátlimy nlm hlm, w yn bil
dtycbiqó dlt nkm ibyvkm hy mb vahk l hy mb xbytqy.

»-nkm ibyvkm uby qy dlhté hkt, ¡lr kxacl kimynxl! -haol nlqktal-, mli hy
uby qayiym bik xboyt uby hacikxyiqy dbyhy myt yoyxdnl w gltlik hy qlhkm nkm
xboytym fbyikm. nkm dknkftkm uby ny ry hagrl my nkm rk nnyvkhl yn katy, nlm
lptygaxayiqlm my rki qyiahl yi dlgl, nkm háhavkm il my rki khxaqahl, hy
kncbikm náctaxkm paicahkm xíkm my rk rygrl fbtnk ilqkfny. yi tymlnbgaói,
kmí glxl gkxank ym gaptk hy qlhk fynnyek, ym ktgravl hlihy kmamqy nk
rliymqahkh w vavy yn glxyhaxayiql w yn tygkql, w qlhkm nkm vatqbhym uby
dbyhyi rkgyt nlkfny w fayi kpltqbikhk k bik rlitkhk xboyt. vbynvy k qlxkt
qbm haiytlm, kxacl, uby kubí nlm qyicl, mai rkfyt qyiahl iygymahkh hy qlgkt
k ynnlm; uby nk yiqytyek hy gkxank il my taihy k glmkm qki fkokm glxl mli
háhavkm ia dtlxymkm. gliqéiqkqy, kimynxl, w il ubaytkm rkgyt xám dtbyfkm hy
nkm rygrkm; w, dbym k day yiobql rkm dkmkhl yn xkt hy nkm hapagbnqkhym w
mlmdygrkm uby hy nkm xboytym mbynyi w dbyhyi qyiytmy, il ubaytkm yiqtkt hy
ibyvl yi yn dtlpbihl daénkcl hy ibyvlm aiglivyiayiqym, ia ubaytkm rkgyt
yzdytayigak gli lqtl danlql hy nk flihkh w pltqknyek hyn ikvíl uby yn gaynl
qy hal yi mbytqy dktk uby yi én dkmkmym nk xkt hymqy xbihl, mail rke gbyiqk
uby ymqám wk yi mycbtl dbytql, w kpéttkqy gli nkm áigltkm hy nk fbyik
glimahytkgaói, w héokqy ymqkt rkmqk uby qy vyicki k dyhat nk hybhk uby il
rkw rahkncbík rbxkik uby hy dkcktnk my ymgbmy.

»gliqyiqímaxl ubyhó kimynxl hy nkm tkeliym hy nlqktal, w kmí my nkm gtywó
glxl ma pbytki hagrkm dlt kncúi ltágbnl. dytl, gli qlhl yml, ny tlcó uby il
hyokmy nk yxdtymk, kbiuby il pbymy xám hy dlt gbtalmahkh w yiqtyqyiaxayiql,
kbiuby il my kdtlvygrkmy hy knní khynkiqy hy qki kraigkhkm hanacyigakm glxl
rkmqk yiqligym; w uby mónl ubytík uby ny ymgtafaymy kncbilm vytmlm yi mb
knkfkiek, hyfkol hyn ilxfty hy gnlta, dltuby én ny hktík k yiqyihyt k
gkxank uby kihkfk yikxltkhl hy bik hkxk, k ubayi ny rkfík dbymql kubyn
ilxfty dlt dlhyt gynyftktnk gli yn hygltl uby k mb rliymqahkh my ny hyfík;
w uby, gbkihl nlqktal il ubamaytk qlxkt qtkfkol hy ymgtafat nlm vytmlm, uby
én nlm rktík.

»-il mytá xyiymqyt yml -haol nlqktal-, dbym il xy mli qki yiyxackm nkm
xbmkm uby kncbilm tkqlm hyn kñl il xy vamaqyi. hany qú k gkxank nl uby rkm
hagrl hyn paicaxayiql hy xam kxltym, uby nlm vytmlm wl nlm rkté; ma il qki
fbyilm glxl yn mbfoyql xytygy, mytái, dlt nl xyilm, nlm xyoltym uby wl
dbhayty.

»ubyhktli hymqy kgbythl yn axdytqaiyiqy w yn qtkahlt kxacl; w, vbynql
kimynxl k mb gkmk, dtycbiqó k gkxank nl uby ynnk wk my xktkvannkfk uby il
my nl rbfaymy dtycbiqkhl: uby pby uby ny haoymy nk lgkmaói dlt uby ny rkfík
ymgtaql yn dkdyn uby ny yivaó. gkxank ny tymdlihaó uby ny rkfík dktygahl
uby nlqktal nk xatkfk bi dlgl xám hymyivbynqkxyiqy uby gbkihl én ymqkfk yi
gkmk; dytl uby wk ymqkfk hymyickñkhk w gtyík uby rkfík mahl axkcaikgaói
mbwk, dltuby wk nlqktal rbík hy vynnk w hy ymqkt gli ynnk k mlnkm. híolny
kimynxl uby fayi dlhík ymqkt mycbtk hy kubynnk mlmdygrk, dltuby én mkfík
uby nlqktal kihkfk yikxltkhl hy bik hligynnk dtaigadkn hy nk gabhkh, k
ubayi én gynyftkfk hyfkol hyn ilxfty hy gnlta, w uby, kbiuby il nl
ymqbvaytk, il rkfík uby qyxyt hy nk vythkh hy nlqktal w hy nk xbgrk kxamqkh
hy yiqtkxflm. w, k il ymqkt kvamkhk gkxank hy nlqktal hy uby ytki paicahlm
kubynnlm kxltym hy gnlta, w uby én my nl rkfík hagrl k kimynxl dlt dlhyt
lgbdktmy kncbilm tkqlm yi nkm xamxkm knkfkiekm hy gkxank, ynnk, mai hbhk,
gkwytk yi nk hymymdytkhk tyh hy nlm gynlm; xkm, dlt ymqkt wk khvytqahk,
dkmó kubyn mlftymknql mai dymkhbxfty.

»lqtl hík, ymqkihl nlm qtym mlfty xymk, tlcó kimynxl k nlqktal haoymy
kncbik glmk hy nkm uby rkfík glxdbymql k mb kxkhk gnlta; uby, dbym gkxank
il nk glilgík, mycbtkxyiqy dlhík hygat nl uby ubamaymy.

»-kbiuby nk glilgaytk -tymdlihaó nlqktal-, il yigbftaytk wl ikhk, dltuby
gbkihl kncúi kxkiqy nlk k mb hkxk hy rytxlmk w nk ilqk hy gtbyn, iaicúi
ldtlftal rkgy k mb fbyi gtéhaql. dytl, myk nl uby pbyty, nl uby mé hygat,
uby kwyt ragy bi mliyql k nk aictkqaqbh hymqk gnlta, uby hagy kimí:
mliyql

   yi yn manyigal hy nk ilgry, gbkihl
   lgbdk yn hbngy mbyñl k nlm xltqknym,
   nk dlfty gbyiqk hy xam taglm xknym
   ymqlw kn gaynl w k xa gnlta hkihl.
   w, kn qayxdl gbkihl yn mln my vk xlmqtkihl
   dlt nkm tlmkhkm dbytqkm ltayiqknym,
   gli mbmdatlm w kgyiqlm hymacbknym,
   vlw nk kiqacbk ubytynnk tyilvkihl.
   w gbkihl yn mln, hy mb ymqtynnkhl kmayiql,
   hytygrlm tkwlm k nk qayttk yivík,
   yn nnkiql gtygy w hlfnl nlm cyxahlm.
   vbynvy nk ilgry, w vbynvl kn qtamqy gbyiql,
   w mayxdty rknnl, yi xa xltqkn dltpík,
   kn gaynl, mlthl; k gnlta, mai líhlm.

»fayi ny dktygaó yn mliyql k gkxank, dytl xyolt k kimynxl, dbym ny knkfó, w
haol uby ytk hyxkmakhkxyiqy gtbyn nk hkxk uby k qki gnktkm vythkhym il
glttymdlihík. k nl uby haol gkxank:

»-nbycl, ¿qlhl kubynnl uby nlm dlyqkm yikxltkhlm hagyi ym vythkh?

»-yi gbkiql dlyqkm, il nk hagyi -tymdlihaó nlqktal-; xkm, yi gbkiql
yikxltkhlm, mayxdty ubyhki qki gltqlm glxl vythkhytlm.

»-il rkw hbhk hyml -tydnagó kimynxl, qlhl dlt kdlwkt w kgtyhaqkt nlm
dyimkxayiqlm hy nlqktal gli gkxank, qki hymgbahkhk hyn ktqapagal hy kimynxl
glxl wk yikxltkhk hy nlqktal.

»w kmí, gli yn cbmql uby hy mbm glmkm qyiík, w xám, qyiayihl dlt yiqyihahl
uby mbm hymylm w ymgtaqlm k ynnk my yigkxaikfki, w uby ynnk ytk nk
vythkhytk gnlta, ny tlcó uby ma lqtl mliyql l lqtlm vytmlm mkfík, nlm
haoymy:

»-mí mé -tymdlihaó nlqktal-, dytl il gtyl uby ym qki fbyil glxl yn dtaxytl,
l, dlt xyolt hygat, xyilm xknl. w dlhtéamnl fayi obeckt, dbym ym émqy:

mliyql

   wl mé uby xbytl; w ma il mlw gtyíhl,
   ym xám gaytql yn xltat, glxl ym xám gaytql
   vytxy k qbm daym, ¡lr fynnk aictkqk!, xbytql,
   kiqym uby hy khltktqy kttydyiqahl.
   dlhté wl vytxy yi nk tycaói hy lnvahl,
   hy vahk w cnltak w hy pkvlt hymaytql,
   w knní vytmy dlhtá yi xa dygrl kfaytql
   góxl qb rytxlml tlmqtl ymqá ymgbndahl.
   uby ymqk tynaubak cbkthl dktk yn hbtl
   qtkigy uby xy kxyikek xa dltpík,
   uby yi qb xamxl taclt my pltqknygy.
   ¡kw hy kubyn uby ikvyck, yn gaynl ymgbtl,
   dlt xkt il bmkhl w dynactlmk vík,
   khlihy iltqy l dbytql il my lptygy!

»qkxfaéi knkfó ymqy mycbihl mliyql kimynxl, glxl rkfík rygrl yn dtaxytl, w
hymqk xkiytk afk kñkhayihl ymnkfói k ymnkfói k nk gkhyik gli uby my
yinkekfk w qtkfkfk mb hymrlitk, dbym gbkihl xám nlqktal ny hymrlitkfk,
yiqligym ny hygík uby ymqkfk xám rlitkhl; w, gli ymql, qlhlm nlm ymgknliym
uby gkxank fkokfk rkgak yn gyiqtl hy mb xyilmdtygal, nlm mbfík, yi nk
ldaiaói hy mb xktahl, rkgak nk gbxfty hy nk vatqbh w hy mb fbyik pkxk.
»mbgyhaó yi ymql uby, rknnáihlmy bik vye, yiqty lqtkm, mlnk gkxank gli mb
hligynnk, ny haol:

»-glttahk ymqlw, kxack nyliynk, hy vyt yi gbái dlgl ry mkfahl ymqaxktxy,
dbym maubaytk il ragy uby gli yn qayxdl glxdtktk nlqktal nk yiqytk dlmymaói
uby ny ha qki dtymql hy xa vlnbiqkh. qyxl uby rk hy ymqaxkt xa dtymqyek l
nacytyek, mai uby ygry hy vyt nk pbytek uby én xy rael dktk il dlhyt
tymamqatny.

»-il qy hé dyik yml, myñltk xík -tymdlihaó nyliynk-, uby il ymqá nk xliqk,
ia ym gkbmk dktk xyicbkt nk ymqaxkgaói, hktmy nl uby my hk dtymql, ma, yi
ypygql, nl uby my hk ym fbyil, w ynnl dlt mí hacil hy ymqaxktmy. w kbi
mbyny hygatmy uby yn uby nbycl hk, hk hlm vygym.

»-qkxfaéi my mbyny hygat -haol gkxank- uby nl uby gbymqk dlgl my ymqaxk yi
xyilm.

»-il gltty dlt qa ymk tkeói -tymdlihaó nyliynk-, dltuby yn kxlt, mycúi ry
líhl hygat, bikm vygym vbynk w lqtkm kihk, gli émqy gltty w gli kubén vk
hymdkgal, k bilm yiqafak w k lqtlm kftkmk, k bilm rayty w k lqtlm xkqk, yi
bi xymxl dbiql glxayiek nk gkttytk hy mbm hymylm w yi kubyn xymxl dbiql nk
kgkfk w glignbwy, dlt nk xkñkik mbyny dliyt yn gytgl k bik pltqknyek w k nk
ilgry nk qayiy tyihahk, dltuby il rkw pbytek uby ny tymamqk. w, mayihl kmí,
¿hy ubé qy ymdkiqkm, l hy ubé qyxym, ma nl xamxl hyfy hy rkfyt kgliqygahl k
nlqktal, rkfayihl qlxkhl yn kxlt dlt aimqtbxyiql hy tyihatilm nk kbmyigak
hy xa myñlt? w ytk pltelml uby yi ynnk my glignbwymy nl uby yn kxlt qyiík
hyqytxaikhl, mai hkt qayxdl kn qayxdl dktk uby kimynxl ny qbvaymy hy
vlnvyt, w gli mb dtymyigak ubyhkmy axdytpygqk nk lftk. dltuby yn kxlt il
qayiy lqtl xyolt xaiamqtl dktk yoygbqkt nl uby hymyk uby ym nk lgkmaói: hy
nk lgkmaói my matvy yi qlhlm mbm rygrlm, dtaigadknxyiqy yi nlm dtaigadalm.
qlhl ymql mé wl xbw fayi, xám hy yzdytayigak uby hy líhkm, w kncúi hík qy
nl haté, myñltk, uby wl qkxfaéi mlw hy gktiy w hy mkicty xlek. gbkiql xám,
myñltk gkxank, uby il qy yiqtyckmqy ia hamqy qki nbycl, uby dtaxytl il
rbfaymym vamql yi nlm lolm, yi nlm mbmdatlm, yi nkm tkeliym w yi nkm
dtlxymkm w háhavkm hy nlqktal qlhk mb knxk, vayihl yi ynnk w yi mbm
vatqbhym gbái hacil ytk nlqktal hy myt kxkhl. dbym ma ymql ym kimí, il qy
kmknqyi nk axkcaikgaói ymlm ymgtbdbnlmlm w xynaihtlmlm dyimkxayiqlm, mail
kmycútkqy uby nlqktal qy ymqaxk glxl qú ny ymqaxkm k én, w vavy gli
gliqyiql w mkqampkgaói hy uby, wk uby gkímqy yi yn nkel kxltlml, ym yn uby
qy kdtayqk hy vknlt w hy ymqaxk. w uby il mónl qayiy nkm gbkqtl ymym uby
hagyi uby rki hy qyiyt nlm fbyilm yikxltkhlm, mail qlhl bi kfg yiqytl: ma
il, ymgúgrkxy w vytám glxl qy ny hacl hy gltl. Én ym, mycúi wl vyl w k xí
xy dktygy, kctkhygahl, fbyil, gkfknnytl, hkhavlml, yikxltkhl, patxy,
cknnkthl, rlitkhl, anbmqty, nykn, xlel, ilfny, liymql, dtaigadkn,
ubkiqalml, tagl, w nkm ymym uby hagyi; w nbycl, qágaql, vythkhytl. nk z il
ny gbkhtk, dltuby ym nyqtk ámdytk; nk w wk ymqá hagrk; nk e, eynkhlt hy qb
rlitk.

»taómy gkxank hyn kfg hy mb hligynnk, w qúvlnk dlt xám dnáqagk yi nkm glmkm
hy kxlt uby ynnk hygík; w kmí nl glipymó ynnk, hymgbftayihl k gkxank glxl
qtkqkfk kxltym gli bi xkigyfl fayi ikgahl, hy nk xymxk gabhkh; hy nl gbkn
my qbtfó gkxank, qyxayihl uby ytk kubén gkxail dlt hlihy mb rlitk dlhík
glttyt taymcl. kdbtónk ma dkmkfki mbm dnáqagkm k xám uby mytnl. ynnk, gli
dlgk vytcüyiek w xbgrk hymyivlnqbtk, ny tymdlihaó uby mí dkmkfki; dltuby ym
glmk wk gaytqk uby nlm hymgbahlm hy nkm myñltkm ubaqki nk vytcüyiek k nkm
gtakhkm, nkm gbknym, gbkihl vyi k nkm kxkm ygrkt qtkmdaém, il my nym hk
ikhk k ynnkm hy gloykt, ia hy uby nl mydki.

»il dbhl rkgyt lqtk glmk gkxank mail tlckt k nyliynk il haoymy ikhk hy mb
rygrl kn uby hygík myt mb kxkiqy, w uby qtkqkmy mbm glmkm gli mygtyql,
dltuby il vaiaymyi k ilqagak hy kimynxl ia hy nlqktal. nyliynk tymdlihaó
uby kmí nl rktík, xkm gbxdnaónl hy xkiytk uby rael gaytql yn qyxlt hy
gkxank hy uby dlt ynnk rkfík hy dythyt mb gtéhaql. dltuby nk hymrliymqk w
kqtyvahk nyliynk, hymdbém uby val uby yn dtlgyhyt hy mb kxk il ytk yn uby
mlník, kqtyvaómy k yiqtkt w dliyt hyiqtl hy gkmk k mb kxkiqy, glipakhk uby,
kbiuby mb myñltk ny vaymy, il rkfík hy lmkt hymgbftanny; uby ymqy hkñl
kgkttyki, yiqty lqtlm, nlm dygkhlm hy nkm myñltkm: uby my rkgyi ymgnkvkm hy
mbm xymxkm gtakhkm w my lfnacki k yigbftatnym mbm hymrliymqahkhym w
vanyekm, glxl kgliqygaó gli gkxank; uby, kbiuby val bik w xbgrkm vygym uby
mb nyliynk ymqkfk gli mb cknái yi bi kdlmyiql hy mb gkmk, il mónl il nk
lmkfk tyñat, xkm háfkny nbckt k uby nl yigyttkmy, w ubaqáfkny qlhlm nlm
ymqltflm, dktk uby il pbymy vamql hy mb xktahl.

»dytl il nlm dbhl ubaqkt uby nlqktal il ny vaymy bik vye mknat, kn tlxdyt
hyn knfk; yn gbkn, mai glilgyt ubaéi ytk, dyimó dtaxytl uby hyfík hy myt
kncbik pkiqkmxk; xkm, gbkihl ny val gkxaikt, yxflektmy w yigbftatmy gli
gbahkhl w tygkql, gkwó hy mb maxdny dyimkxayiql w hal yi lqtl, uby pbytk nk
dythagaói hy qlhlm ma gkxank il nl tyxyhaktk. dyimó nlqktal uby kubyn
rlxfty uby rkfík vamql mknat qki k hymrltk hy gkmk hy kimynxl il rkfík
yiqtkhl yi ynnk dlt nyliynk, ia kbi my kglthó ma nyliynk ytk yi yn xbihl;
mónl gtywó uby gkxank, hy nk xamxk xkiytk uby rkfík mahl págan w nacytk gli
én, nl ytk dktk lqtl; uby ymqkm kñkhahbtkm qtky glimacl nk xknhkh hy nk
xboyt xknk: uby daythy yn gtéhaql hy mb rlitk gli yn xymxl k ubayi my
yiqtycó tlckhk w dytmbkhahk, w gtyy uby gli xkwlt pkganahkh my yiqtyck k
lqtlm, w hk aipknafny gtéhaql k gbknubaytk mlmdygrk uby hymql ny vyick. w
il dktygy mail uby ny pknqó k nlqktal yi ymqy dbiql qlhl mb fbyi
yiqyihaxayiql, w my ny pbytli hy nk xyxltak qlhlm mbm khvytqahlm hamgbtmlm,
dbym, mai rkgyt kncbil uby fbyil pbymy, ia kbi tkelikfny, mai xám ia xám,
kiqym uby kimynxl my nyvkiqkmy, axdkgayiqy w gaycl hy nk gynlmk tkfak uby
nkm yiqtkñkm ny tlík, xbtayihl dlt vyicktmy hy gkxank, uby yi iaicbik glmk
ny rkfík lpyihahl, my pby k kimynxl w ny haol:

»-máfyqy, kimynxl, uby rk xbgrlm híkm uby ry kihkhl dynykihl glixacl xymxl,
rkgaéihlxy pbytek k il hygatqy nl uby wk il ym dlmafny ia obmql uby xám qy
yigbftk. máfyqy uby nk pltqknyek hy gkxank ymqá wk tyihahk w mboyqk k qlhl
kubynnl uby wl ubamayty rkgyt hynnk; w ma ry qkthkhl yi hymgbftatqy ymqk
vythkh, rk mahl dlt vyt ma ytk kncúi navakil kiqlol mbwl, l ma nl rkgík dlt
dtlfktxy w vyt ma ytki gli dtldómaql patxy qtkqkhlm nlm kxltym uby, gli qb
nagyigak, gli ynnk ry glxyiekhl. gtyí, kimaxamxl, uby ynnk, ma pbytk nk uby
hyfík w nk uby yiqtkxflm dyimáfkxlm, wk qy rbfaytk hkhl gbyiqk hy xa
mlnagaqbh, dytl, rkfayihl vamql uby my qkthk, glilegl uby mli vythkhytkm
nkm dtlxymkm uby xy rk hkhl hy uby, gbkihl lqtk vye rkckm kbmyigak hy qb
gkmk, xy rkfnktá yi nk tygáxktk, hlihy ymqá yn tydbymql hy qbm knrkokm -w
ytk nk vythkh, uby knní ny mlník rkfnkt gkxank-; w il ubaytl uby
dtygadaqlmkxyiqy glttkm k rkgyt kncbik vyickiek, dbym il ymqá kúi glxyqahl
yn dygkhl mail gli dyimkxayiql, w dlhtík myt uby, hymhy émqy rkmqk yn
qayxdl hy dliytny dlt lftk, my xbhkmy yn hy gkxank w ikgaymy yi mb nbckt yn
kttydyiqaxayiql. w kmí, wk uby, yi qlhl l yi dktqy, rkm mycbahl mayxdty xam
glimyolm, macby w cbkthk bil uby krltk qy haté, dktk uby mai yickñl w gli
xyhtlml khvytqaxyiql qy mkqampkckm hy kubynnl uby xám vaytym uby qy
glivyick. paicy uby qy kbmyiqkm dlt hlm l qtym híkm, glxl lqtkm vygym
mbynym, w rke hy xkiytk uby qy ubyhym ymglihahl yi qb tygáxktk, dbym nlm
qkdagym uby knní rkw w lqtkm glmkm gli uby qy dbyhkm yigbftat qy lptygyi
xbgrk glxlhahkh, w yiqligym vytám dlt qbm xamxlm lolm, w wl dlt nlm xílm,
nl uby gkxank ubayty; w ma pbyty nk xknhkh uby my dbyhy qyxyt kiqym uby
ymdytkt, gli manyigal, mkckgahkh w hamgtygaói dlhtám myt yn vythbcl hy qb
kctkval.

»kfmltql, mbmdyiml w khxatkhl ubyhó kimynxl gli nkm tkeliym hy nlqktal,
dltuby ny glcaytli yi qayxdl hlihy xyilm nkm ymdytkfk lít, dltuby wk qyiík
k gkxank dlt vyigyhltk hy nlm paicahlm kmknqlm hy nlqktal w glxyiekfk k
clekt nk cnltak hyn vyigaxayiql. gknnkihl ymqbvl dlt bi fbyi ymdkgal,
xatkihl kn mbynl mai xlvyt dymqkñk, w kn gkfl haol:

»-qú nl rkm rygrl, nlqktal, glxl wl ymdytkfk hy qb kxamqkh; yi qlhl ry hy
mycbat qb glimyol: rke nl uby ubamaytym w cbkthk kubyn mygtyql uby vym uby
glivayiy yi gkml qki il dyimkhl.

»dtlxyqaómynl nlqktal, w, yi kdktqáihlmy hén, my kttydaiqaó qlqknxyiqy hy
gbkiql ny rkfík hagrl, vayihl gbái iygakxyiqy rkfík kihkhl, dbym dbhaytk én
vyicktmy hy gkxank, w il dlt gkxail qki gtbyn w qki hymrlitkhl. xknhygík mb
yiqyihaxayiql, kpykfk mb nacytk hyqytxaikgaói, w il mkfík ubé xyhal qlxktmy
dktk hymrkgyt nl rygrl, l dktk hknny kncbik tkelikfny mknahk. kn pai,
kglthó hy hkt gbyiqk hy qlhl k gkxank; w, glxl il pknqkfk nbckt dktk
dlhytnl rkgyt, kubyn xamxl hík nk rknnó mlnk, w ynnk, kmí glxl val uby ny
dlhík rkfnkt, ny haol.

»-mkfyh, kxacl nlqktal, uby qyicl bik dyik yi yn gltkeói uby xy ny kdtayqk
hy mbytqy uby dktygy uby ubayty tyvyiqkt yi yn dygrl, w rk hy myt xktkvannk
ma il nl rkgy, dbym rk nnyckhl nk hymvytcüyiek hy nyliynk k qkiql, uby gkhk
ilgry yigayttk k bi cknái mbwl yi ymqk gkmk w my ymqá gli én rkmqk yn hík,
qki k glmqk hy xa gtéhaql gbkiql ny ubyhktá gkxdl kfaytql hy obecktnl kn
uby ny vayty mknat k rltkm qki aibmaqkhkm hy xa gkmk. w nl uby xy pkqack ym
uby il nk dbyhl gkmqackt ia tyñat: uby yn myt ynnk mygtyqktal hy ibymqtlm
qtkqlm xy rk dbymql bi ptyil yi nk flgk dktk gknnkt nlm mbwlm, w qyxl uby
hy kubí rk hy ikgyt kncúi xkn mbgyml.

»kn dtaigadal uby gkxank ymql hygík gtywó nlqktal uby ytk ktqapagal dktk
hymxyiqanny uby yn rlxfty uby rkfík vamql mknat ytk hy nyliynk, w il mbwl;
dytl, vaéihlnk nnltkt w kpnacatmy, w dyhatny tyxyhal, vail k gtyyt nk
vythkh, w, yi gtywéihlnk, kgkfó hy ymqkt glipbml w kttydyiqahl hyn qlhl.
dytl, gli qlhl ymql, tymdlihaó k gkxank uby il qbvaymy dyik, uby én
lthyiktík tyxyhal dktk kqkokt nk aimlnyigak hy nyliynk. híolny kmaxamxl nl
uby, aimqackhl hy nk pbtalmk tkfak hy nlm gynlm, rkfík hagrl k kimynxl, w
góxl ymqkfk gligytqkhl hy ymglihytmy yi nk tygáxktk, dktk vyt hymhy knní k
nk gnktk nk dlgk nyknqkh uby ynnk ny cbkthkfk. dahaóny dythói hymqk nlgbtk,
w glimyol dktk dlhyt tyxyhaknnk w mknat fayi hy qki tyvbynql nkfytaiql glxl
mb xkn hamgbtml ny rkfík dbymql.

»ymdkiqkhk ubyhó gkxank hy lít nl uby nlqktal ny hygík, w gli xbgrl yilol w
xbgrkm w hamgtyqkm tkeliym ny tañó w kpyó mb xkn dyimkxayiql w nk maxdny w
xknk hyqytxaikgaói uby rkfík qyiahl. dytl, glxl ikqbtknxyiqy qayiy nk xboyt
aicyial dtymql dktk yn fayi w dktk yn xkn xám uby yn vktói, dbymql uby ny
vk pknqkihl gbkihl hy dtldómaql my dliy k rkgyt hamgbtmlm, nbycl kn
aimqkiqy rknnó gkxank yn xlhl hy tyxyhakt qki kn dktygyt aityxyhakfny
iyclgal, w haol k nlqktal uby dtlgbtkmy uby lqtl hík my ymglihaymy kimynxl
hlihy hygík, dltuby ynnk dyimkfk mkgkt hy mb ymglihaxayiql glxlhahkh dktk
uby hymhy knní yi khynkiqy nlm hlm my clekmyi mai mlftymknql kncbil; w, mai
hygnktktny hyn qlhl mb dyimkxayiql, ny khvatqaó uby qbvaymy gbahkhl uby, yi
ymqkihl kimynxl ymglihahl, én vaiaymy gbkihl nyliynk ny nnkxkmy, w uby k
gbkiql ynnk ny haoymy ny tymdlihaymy glxl tymdlihaytk kbiuby il mbdaytk uby
kimynxl ny ymgbgrkfk. dltpaó nlqktal uby ny kgkfkmy hy hygnktkt mb
aiqyigaói, dltuby gli xám mycbtahkh w kvaml cbkthkmy qlhl nl uby vaymy myt
iygymktal.

»-hacl -haol gkxank- uby il rkw xám uby cbkthkt, ma il pbyty tymdlihytxy
glxl wl lm dtycbiqkty (il ubytayihl gkxank hktny kiqym gbyiqk hy nl uby
dyimkfk rkgyt, qyxytlmk uby il ubamaymy mycbat yn dktygyt uby k ynnk qki
fbyil ny dktygík, w macbaymy l fbmgkmy lqtlm uby il dlhtíki myt qki
fbyilm).

»gli ymql, my pby nlqktal; w kimynxl, lqtl hík, gli nk ymgbmk hy at kubynnk
knhyk hy mb kxacl, my dktqaó w vlnvaó k ymglihytmy: uby nl dbhl rkgyt gli
glxlhahkh, dltuby hy aihbmqtak my nk haytli gkxank w nyliynk.
»ymglihahl, dbym, kimynxl, gli kubyn mlftymknql uby my dbyhy axkcaikt uby
qyihtík yn uby ymdytkfk vyt dlt mbm lolm rkgyt ilqlxík hy nkm yiqtkñkm hy
mb rlitk, ífkmy k dauby hy dythyt yn mbxl fayi uby én dyimkfk uby qyiík yi
mb ubytahk gkxank. mycbtkm wk w gaytqkm gkxank w nyliynk uby kimynxl ymqkfk
ymglihahl, yiqtktli yi nk tygáxktk; w kdyikm rbfl dbymql nlm daym yi ynnk
gkxanak, gbkihl, hkihl bi ctkihy mbmdatl, haol:

»-¡kw, nyliynk kxack! ¿il mytík xyolt uby, kiqym uby nnyckmy k dliyt yi
yoygbgaói nl uby il ubaytl uby mydkm, dltuby il dtlgbtym ymqltfktnl, uby
qlxkmym nk hkck hy kimynxl, uby qy ry dyhahl, w dkmkmym gli ynnk ymqy
aipkxy dygrl xíl? dytl il rkckm qkn, uby il mytá tkeói uby wl nnyvy nk dyik
hy nk koyik gbndk. dtaxytl ubaytl mkfyt ubé ym nl uby vaytli yi xí nlm
kqtyvahlm w hymrliymqlm lolm hy nlqktal uby pbymy gkbmk hy hktny
kqtyvaxayiql k hymgbftatxy bi qki xkn hymyl glxl ym yn uby xy rk
hymgbfaytql, yi hymdtygal hy mb kxacl w yi hymrlitk xík. dliqy, nyliynk, k
ymk vyiqkik w nnáxkny, uby, mai hbhk kncbik, én hyfy hy ymqkt yi nk gknny,
ymdytkihl dliyt yi ypyql mb xknk aiqyigaói. dytl dtaxytl my dlihtá nk gtbyn
gbkiql rlitkhk xík.

»-¡kw, myñltk xík! -tymdlihaó nk mkcke w khvytqahk nyliynk-, w ¿ubé ym nl
uby ubaytym rkgyt gli ymqk hkck? ¿ubaytym dlt vyiqbtk ubaqktqy nk vahk l
ubaqátmynk k nlqktal? uby gbknubaytk hymqkm glmkm uby ubaytkm rk hy
tyhbihkt yi déthahk hy qb gtéhaql w pkxk. xyolt ym uby hamaxbnym qb
kctkval, w il hym nbckt k uby ymqy xkn rlxfty yiqty krltk yi ymqk gkmk w
ilm rknny mlnkm. xatk, myñltk, uby mlxlm pnkgkm xboytym, w én ym rlxfty w
hyqytxaikhl; w, glxl vayiy gli kubyn xkn dtldómaql, gaycl w kdkmalikhl,
ubaeá kiqym uby qú dlickm yi yoygbgaói yn qbwl, rktá én nl uby qy ymqktík
xám xkn uby ubaqktqy nk vahk. ¡xkn rkwk xa myñlt kimynxl, uby qkiql xkn rk
ubytahl hkt k ymqy hymbynnkgktkm yi mb gkmk! w wk, myñltk, uby ny xkqym,
glxl wl dayiml uby ubaytym rkgyt, ¿ubé ryxlm hy rkgyt hén hymdbém hy
xbytql?

»-¿ubé, kxack? -tymdlihaó gkxank-: hyoktéxlmny dktk uby kimynxl ny
yiqaytty, dbym mytá obmql uby qyick dlt hymgkiml yn qtkfkol uby qlxkty yi
dliyt hyfkol hy nk qayttk mb xamxk aipkxak. nnáxkny, kgkfk, uby qlhl yn
qayxdl uby qkthl yi qlxkt nk hyfahk vyickiek hy xa kctkval dktygy uby
lpyihl k nk nyknqkh uby k xa ymdlml hyfl.

»qlhl ymql ymgbgrkfk kimynxl, w, k gkhk dknkftk uby gkxank hygík, my ny
xbhkfki nlm dyimkxayiqlm; xkm, gbkihl yiqyihaó uby ymqkfk tymbynqk yi xkqkt
k nlqktal, ubaml mknat w hymgbftatmy, dltuby qkn glmk il my ragaymy; dytl
hyqúvlny yn hymyl hy vyt yi ubé dktkfk qkiqk cknnkthík w rliymqk
tymlnbgaói, gli dtldómaql hy mknat k qayxdl uby nk ymqltfkmy.

»qlxóny yi ymql k gkxank bi pbytqy hymxkwl, w, kttloáihlmy yigaxk hy bik
gkxk uby knní ymqkfk, glxyieó nyliynk k nnltkt xbw kxktckxyiqy w k hygat:
»-¡kw, hymhagrkhk hy xí ma pbymy qki mai vyiqbtk uby my xy xbtaymy kubí
yiqty xam ftkelm nk pnlt hy nk rliymqahkh hyn xbihl, nk gltlik hy nkm
fbyikm xboytym, yn yoyxdnl hy nk gkmqahkh...!

»gli lqtkm glmkm k émqkm myxyokiqym, uby iaicbil nk ymgbgrktk uby il nk
qbvaytk dlt nk xám nkmqaxkhk w nykn hligynnk hyn xbihl, w k mb myñltk dlt
lqtk ibyvk w dytmycbahk dyiénldy. dlgl qkthó yi vlnvyt hy mb hymxkwl
gkxank; w, kn vlnvyt yi mí, haol:

»-¿dlt ubé il vkm, nyliynk, k nnkxkt kn xám nykn kxacl hy kxacl uby val yn
mln l gbftaó nk ilgry? kgkfk, gltty, kcbaok, gkxaik, il my ymplcby gli nk
qkthkiek yn pbycl hy nk gónytk uby qyicl, w my dkmy yi kxyikekm w
xknhagaliym nk obmqk vyickiek uby ymdytl.

»-wk vlw k nnkxktny, myñltk xík -haol nyliynk-, xkm rkmxy hy hkt dtaxytl
ymk hkck, dltuby il rkckm glmk, yi qkiql uby pknql, uby hyoym gli ynnk uby
nnltkt qlhk nk vahk k qlhlm nlm uby fayi qy ubaytyi.

»-vy mycbtk, nyliynk kxack, uby il rkté -tymdlihaó gkxank-; dltuby, wk uby
myk kqtyvahk w maxdny k qb dktygyt yi vlnvyt dlt xa rlitk, il nl ry hy myt
qkiql glxl kubynnk nbgtygak hy ubayi hagyi uby my xkqó mai rkfyt glxyqahl
yttlt kncbil, w mai rkfyt xbytql dtaxytl k ubayi qbvl nk gkbmk hy mb
hymctkgak. wl xltaté, ma xbytl, dytl rk hy myt vyickhk w mkqampygrk hyn uby
xy rk hkhl lgkmaói hy vyiat k ymqy nbckt k nnltkt mbm kqtyvaxayiqlm,
ikgahlm qki mai gbndk xík.

»xbgrl my rael hy tlckt nyliynk kiqym uby mknaymy k nnkxkt k nlqktal, dytl,
yi pai, mknaó; w, yiqty qkiql uby vlnvík, ubyhó gkxanak hagayihl, glxl uby
rkfnkfk glimacl xamxk:

»-¡vánkxy halm! ¿il pbytk xám kgytqkhl rkfyt hymdyhahl k nlqktal, glxl
lqtkm xbgrkm vygym nl ry rygrl, uby il dliytny yi glihagaói, glxl wk ny ry
dbymql, uby xy qyick dlt hymrliymqk w xknk, maubaytk ymqy qayxdl uby ry hy
qkthkt yi hymyickñktny? xyolt pbytk, mai hbhk; dytl il ubyhktk wl vyickhk,
ia nk rlitk hy xa xktahl mkqampygrk, ma qki k xkilm nkvkhkm w qki k dkml
nnkil my vlnvaytk k mknat hy hlihy mbm xknlm dyimkxayiqlm ny yiqtktli.
dkcby yn qtkahlt gli nk vahk nl uby aiqyiqó gli qki nkmgavl hymyl: mydk yn
xbihl, ma kgkml nnyckty k mkfytnl, hy uby gkxank il mónl cbkthó nk nyknqkh
k mb ymdlml, mail uby ny hal vyickiek hyn uby my kqtyvaó k lpyihynny. xkm,
gli qlhl, gtyl uby pbytk xyolt hkt gbyiqk hymql k kimynxl, dytl wk my nk
kdbiqé k hkt yi nk gktqk uby ny ymgtafí kn knhyk, w gtyl uby yn il kgbhat
én kn tyxyhal hyn hkñl uby knní ny myñkné, hyfaó hy myt uby, hy dbtl fbyil
w glipakhl, il ubaml ia dbhl gtyyt uby yi yn dygrl hy mb qki patxy kxacl
dbhaymy gkfyt céiytl hy dyimkxayiql uby gliqtk mb rlitk pbymy; ia kbi wl nl
gtyí hymdbém, dlt xbgrlm híkm, ia nl gtywytk okxám, ma mb aimlnyigak il
nnycktk k qkiql, uby nkm xkiapaymqkm háhavkm w nkm nktckm dtlxymkm w nkm
gliqaibkm náctaxkm il xy nl xkiapymqktki. xkm, ¿dktk ubé rkcl wl krltk
ymqlm hamgbtmlm? ¿qayiy, dlt vyiqbtk, bik tymbnbgaói cknnkthk iygymahkh hy
glimyol kncbil? il, dlt gaytql. ¡kpbytk, dbym, qtkahltym; kubí, vyickiekm!
¡yiqty yn pknml, vyick, nnycby, xbytk w kgkfy, w mbgyhk nl uby mbgyhayty!
naxdak yiqté yi dlhyt hyn uby yn gaynl xy hal dlt xíl, naxdak ry hy mknat
hén; w, gbkihl xbgrl, mknhté fkñkhk yi xa gkmqk mkicty, w yi nk axdbtk hyn
xám pknml kxacl uby val nk kxamqkh yi yn xbihl.

»w, hagayihl ymql, my dkmykfk dlt nk mknk gli nk hkck hymyivkaikhk, hkihl
qki hymgligytqkhlm w hymkpltkhlm dkmlm, w rkgayihl qknym khyxkiym, uby il
dktygík mail uby ny pknqkfk yn obagal, w uby il ytk xboyt hynagkhk, mail bi
tbpaái hymymdytkhl.

»qlhl nl xatkfk kimynxl, gbfaytql hyqtám hy bilm qkdagym hlihy my rkfík
ymglihahl, w hy qlhl my khxatkfk, w wk ny dktygík uby nl uby rkfík vamql w
líhl ytk fkmqkiqy mkqampkgaói dktk xkwltym mlmdygrkm; w wk ubamaytk uby nk
dtbyfk hy vyiat nlqktal pknqktk, qyxytlml hy kncúi xkn tydyiqail mbgyml. w,
ymqkihl wk dktk xkiapymqktmy w mknat, dktk kftkekt w hymyickñkt k mb
ymdlmk, my hyqbvl dltuby val uby nyliynk vlnvík gli nlqktal hy nk xkil; w,
kmí glxl gkxank ny val, rkgayihl gli nk hkck yi yn mbynl bik ctki tkwk
hynkiqy hynnk, ny haol:

»-nlqktal, khvaytqy nl uby qy hacl: ma k hagrk qy kqtyvaytym k dkmkt hymqk
tkwk uby vym, ia kbi nnyckt k ynnk, yi yn dbiql uby vayty uby nl aiqyiqkm,
yi ymy xamxl xy dkmkté yn dygrl gli ymqk hkck uby yi nkm xkilm qyicl. w,
kiqym uby k ymql xy tymdlihkm dknkftk, ubaytl uby lqtkm kncbikm xy
ymgbgrym; uby hymdbém tymdlihytám nl uby xám qy kctkhkty. nl dtaxytl,
ubaytl, nlqktal, uby xy hackm ma glilgym k kimynxl, xa xktahl, w yi ubé
ldaiaói ny qayiym; w nl mycbihl, ubaytl mkfyt qkxfaéi ma xy glilgym k xí.
tymdóihyxy k ymql, w il qy qbtfym, ia dayimym xbgrl nl uby rkm hy
tymdlihyt, dbym il mli hapagbnqkhym nkm uby qy dtycbiql.

»il ytk qki aciltkiqy nlqktal uby, hymhy yn dtaxyt dbiql uby gkxank ny haol
uby ragaymy ymglihyt k kimynxl, il rbfaymy hkhl yi nk gbyiqk hy nl uby ynnk
dyimkfk rkgyt; w kmí, glttymdlihaó gli mb aiqyigaói qki hamgtyqkxyiqy, w
qki k qayxdl, uby ragaytki nlm hlm dkmkt kubynnk xyiqatk dlt xám uby gaytqk
vythkh; w kmí, tymdlihaó k gkxank hymqk xkiytk:

»-il dyimé wl, rytxlmk gkxank, uby xy nnkxkfkm dktk dtycbiqktxy glmkm qki
pbytk hy nk aiqyigaói gli uby wl kubí vyicl. ma nl rkgym dlt hankqktxy nk
dtlxyqahk xytgyh, hymhy xám nyolm dbhaytkm yiqtyqyiytnk, dltuby qkiql xám
pkqack yn fayi hymykhl gbkiql nk ymdytkiek ymqá xám gytgk hy dlmyynnl;
dytl, dltuby il hackm uby il tymdlihl k qbm dtycbiqkm, hacl uby glilegl k
qb ymdlml kimynxl, w ilm glilgyxlm nlm hlm hymhy ibymqtlm xám qaytilm kñlm;
w il ubaytl hygat nl uby qú qki fayi mkfym hy ibymqtk kxamqkh, dlt il xy
rkgyt qymqacl hyn kctkval uby yn kxlt rkgy uby ny rkck, dlhytlmk hamgbndk
hy xkwltym wyttlm. k qa qy glilegl w qyicl yi nk xamxk dlmymaói uby én qy
qayiy; uby, k il myt kmí, dlt xyilm dtyihkm uby nkm qbwkm il rkfík wl hy at
gliqtk nl uby hyfl k myt ubayi mlw w gliqtk nkm mkiqkm nywym hy nk
vythkhytk kxamqkh, krltk dlt qki dlhytlml yiyxacl glxl yn kxlt dlt xí
tlxdahkm w valnkhkm.

»-ma yml glipaymkm -tymdlihaó gkxank-, yiyxacl xltqkn hy qlhl kubynnl uby
obmqkxyiqy xytygy myt kxkhl, ¿gli ubé tlmqtl lmkm dktygyt kiqy ubayi mkfym
uby ym yn ymdyol hlihy my xatk kubyn yi ubayi qú qy hyfaytkm xatkt, dktk
uby vaytkm gli gbái dlgk lgkmaói ny kctkvakm? dytl wk gkwl, ¡kw, hymhagrkhk
hy xí!, yi nk gbyiqk hy ubaéi qy rk rygrl qyiyt qki dlgk gli nl uby k qa
xamxl hyfym, uby hyfy hy rkfyt mahl kncbik hymyivlnqbtk xík, uby il ubaytl
nnkxktnk hymrliymqahkh, dbym il rkftá dtlgyhahl hy hynafytkhk
hyqytxaikgaói, mail hy kncúi hymgbahl hy nlm uby nkm xboytym uby dayimki
uby il qayiyi hy ubaéi tygkqktmy mbynyi rkgyt aikhvytqahkxyiqy. ma il,
haxy: ¿gbáihl, ¡lr qtkahlt!, tymdlihí k qbm tbyclm gli kncbik dknkftk l
myñkn uby dbhaymy hymdytqkt yi qa kncbik mlxftk hy ymdytkiek hy gbxdnat qbm
aipkxym hymylm? ¿gbáihl qbm kxltlmkm dknkftkm il pbytli hymrygrkm w
tydtyryihahkm hy nkm xíkm gli taclt w gli kmdytyek? ¿gbáihl qbm xbgrkm
dtlxymkm w xkwltym háhavkm pbytli hy xí gtyíhkm, ia khxaqahkm? dytl, dlt
dktygytxy uby kncbil il dbyhy dytmyvytkt yi yn aiqyiql kxltlml nbyicl
qayxdl, ma il ym mbmqyiqkhl hy kncbik ymdytkiek, ubaytl kqtafbatxy k xí nk
gbndk hy qb axdytqaiyigak, dbym, mai hbhk, kncúi hymgbahl xíl rk mbmqyiqkhl
qkiql qayxdl qb gbahkhl; w kmí, ubaytl gkmqacktxy w hktxy nk dyik uby qb
gbndk xytygy. w, dltuby vaymym uby, mayihl glixacl qki airbxkik, il ytk
dlmafny hyokt hy mytnl gliqacl, ubamy qtkytqy k myt qymqacl hyn mkgtapagal
uby dayiml rkgyt k nk lpyihahk rlitk hy xa qki rlitkhl xktahl, kctkvakhl hy
qa gli yn xkwlt gbahkhl uby qy rk mahl dlmafny, w hy xí qkxfaéi gli yn dlgl
tygkql uby ry qyiahl hyn rbat nk lgkmaói, ma kncbik qy ha, dktk pkvltygyt w
gkiliaekt qbm xknkm aiqyigaliym. qltil k hygat uby nk mlmdygrk uby qyicl
uby kncúi hymgbahl xíl yicyihtó yi qa qki hymvktakhlm dyimkxayiqlm ym nk
uby xám xy pkqack, w nk uby wl xám hymyl gkmqackt gli xam dtldakm xkilm,
dltuby, gkmqacáihlxy lqtl vythbcl, ubaeá mytík xám dúfnagk xa gbndk; dytl,
kiqym uby ymql rkck, ubaytl xkqkt xbtayihl, w nnyvkt glixacl ubayi xy kgkfy
hy mkqampkgyt yn hymyl hy nk vyickiek uby ymdytl w qyicl, vayihl knná,
hlihyubaytk uby pbyty, nk dyik uby hk nk obmqagak hymaiqytymkhk w uby il my
hlfnk kn uby yi qétxailm qki hymymdytkhlm xy rk dbymql.

»w, hagayihl ymqkm tkeliym, gli bik aigtyífny pbytek w nacytyek kttyxyqaó k
nlqktal gli nk hkck hymyivkaikhk, gli qknym xbymqtkm hy ubytyt yignkvátmynk
yi yn dygrl, uby gkma én ymqbvl yi hbhk ma kubynnkm hyxlmqtkgaliym ytki
pknmkm l vythkhytkm, dltuby ny pby pltelml vknytmy hy mb aihbmqtak w hy mb
pbytek dktk ymqltfkt uby gkxank il ny haymy. nk gbkn qki vavkxyiqy paicík
kubyn ymqtkñl yxfbmqy w pyknhkh uby, dlt hknny glnlt hy vythkh, nk ubaml
xkqaekt gli mb xamxk mkicty; dltuby, vayihl uby il dlhík rkfyt k nlqktal, l
paicayihl uby il dlhík, haol:

»-dbym nk mbytqy il ubayty mkqampkgyt hyn qlhl xa qki obmql hymyl, k nl
xyilm, il mytá qki dlhytlmk uby, yi dktqy, xy ubaqy uby il ny mkqampkck.
w, rkgayihl pbytek dktk mlnqkt nk xkil hy nk hkck, uby nlqktal nk qyiík
kmahk, nk mkgó, w, cbakihl mb dbiqk dlt dktqy uby dbhaymy rytat il
dtlpbihkxyiqy, my nk yiqtó w ymglihaó dlt xám kttafk hy nk amnannk hyn nkhl
aeubaythl, obiql kn rlxftl, w nbycl my hyoó gkyt yi yn mbynl, glxl
hymxkwkhk.

»ymqkfki nyliynk w nlqktal mbmdyimlm w kqóiaqlm hy qkn mbgyml, w qlhkvík
hbhkfki hy nk vythkh hy kubyn rygrl, vayihl k gkxank qyihahk yi qayttk w
fkñkhk yi mb mkicty. kgbhaó nlqktal gli xbgrk dtymqyek, hymdkvltahl w mai
knayiql, k mkgkt nk hkck, w, yi vyt nk dyubyñk rytahk, mknaó hyn qyxlt uby
rkmqk yiqligym qyiík, w hy ibyvl my khxató hy nk mkckgahkh, dtbhyigak w
xbgrk hamgtygaói hy nk rytxlmk gkxank; w, dlt kgbhat gli nl uby k én ny
qlgkfk, glxyieó k rkgyt bik nktck w qtamqy nkxyiqkgaói mlfty yn gbytdl hy
gkxank, glxl ma ymqbvaytk hapbiqk, ygráihlmy xbgrkm xknhagaliym, il mónl k
én, mail kn uby rkfík mahl gkbmk hy rkfynny dbymql yi kubyn qétxail. w,
glxl mkfík uby ny ymgbgrkfk mb kxacl kimynxl, hygík glmkm uby yn uby ny
lwytk ny qbvaytk xbgrk xám námqaxk uby k gkxank, kbiuby dlt xbytqk nk
obecktk.

»nyliynk nk qlxó yi ftkelm w nk dbml yi yn nygrl, mbdnagkihl k nlqktal
pbymy k fbmgkt ubayi mygtyqkxyiqy k gkxank gbtkmy; dyhíkny kmaxamxl glimyol
w dktygyt hy nl uby hatíki k kimynxl hy kubynnk rytahk hy mb myñltk, ma
kgkml vaiaymy kiqym uby ymqbvaymy mkik. Én tymdlihaó uby haoymyi nl uby
ubamaymyi, uby én il ymqkfk dktk hkt glimyol uby hy dtlvygrl pbymy; mónl ny
haol uby dtlgbtkmy qlxktny nk mkicty, dltuby én my afk khlihy cyiqym il ny
vaymyi. w, gli xbymqtkm hy xbgrl hlnlt w myiqaxayiql, my mknaó hy gkmk; w,
gbkihl my val mlnl w yi dktqy hlihy ikhay ny vyík, il gymkfk hy rkgytmy
gtbgym, xktkvannáihlmy hy nk aihbmqtak hy gkxank w hy nlm khyxkiym qki
dtldtalm hy nyliynk. glimahytkfk gbái yiqytkhl rkfík hy ubyhkt kimynxl hy
uby qyiík dlt xboyt k bik mycbihk dltgak, w hymykfk vytmy gli én dktk
gynyftkt nlm hlm nk xyiqatk w nk vythkh xám hamaxbnkhk uby okxám dbhaytk
axkcaiktmy.

»nyliynk qlxó, glxl my rk hagrl, nk mkicty k mb myñltk, uby il ytk xám hy
kubynnl uby fkmqó dktk kgtyhaqkt mb yxfbmqy; w, nkvkihl gli bi dlgl hy vail
nk rytahk, my nk kqó nl xyolt uby mbdl, hagayihl qknym tkeliym, yi qkiql
uby nk gbtkfk, uby, kbiuby il rbfaytki dtygyhahl lqtkm, fkmqktki k rkgyt
gtyyt k kimynxl uby qyiík yi gkxank bi maxbnkgtl hy nk rliymqahkh.
»obiqátlimy k nkm dknkftkm hy nyliynk lqtkm hy gkxank, nnkxáihlmy glfkthy w
hy dlgl áiaxl, dbym ny rkfík pknqkhl kn qayxdl uby pbytk xám iygymktal
qyiytny, dktk ubaqktmy nk vahk, uby qki kflttygahk qyiík. dyhík glimyol k
mb hligynnk ma hktík, l il, qlhl kubyn mbgyml k mb ubytahl ymdlml; nk gbkn
ny haol uby il my nl haoymy, dltuby ny dlihtík yi lfnackgaói hy vyicktmy hy
nlqktal, nl gbkn il dlhtík myt mai xbgrl taymcl mbwl, w uby nk fbyik xboyt
ymqkfk lfnackhk k il hkt lgkmaói k mb xktahl k uby tañymy, mail k ubaqknny
qlhkm kubynnkm uby ny pbymy dlmafny.

»tymdlihaó gkxank uby ny dktygík xbw fayi mb dktygyt w uby ynnk ny
mycbatík; dytl uby yi qlhl gkml glivyiík fbmgkt ubé hygat k kimynxl hy nk
gkbmk hy kubynnk rytahk, uby én il dlhtík hyokt hy vyt; k nl uby nyliynk
tymdlihík uby ynnk, ia kbi fbtnkihl, il mkfík xyiqat.

»-dbym wl, rytxkik -tydnagó gkxank-, ¿ubé qyicl hy mkfyt, uby il xy
kqtyvyté k pltokt ia mbmqyiqkt bik xyiqatk, ma xy pbymy yi ynnl nk vahk? w
ma ym uby il ryxlm hy mkfyt hkt mknahk k ymql, xyolt mytá hygatny nk vythkh
hymibhk, uby il uby ilm kngkigy yi xyiqatlmk gbyiqk.

»-il qyickm dyik, myñltk: hy kubí k xkñkik -tymdlihaó nyliynk- wl dyimkté
ubé ny hackxlm, w ubaeá uby, dlt myt nk rytahk hlihy ym, nk dlhtám
yigbftat mai uby én nk vyk, w yn gaynl mytá mytvahl hy pkvltygyt k ibymqtlm
qki obmqlm w qki rlitkhlm dyimkxayiqlm. mlmaéckqy, myñltk xík, w dtlgbtk
mlmyckt qb knqytkgaói, dltuby xa myñlt il qy rknny mlftymknqkhk, w nl hyxám
héoknl k xa gktcl, w kn hy halm, uby mayxdty kgbhy k nlm fbyilm hymylm.
»kqyiqímaxl rkfík ymqkhl kimynxl k ymgbgrkt w k vyt tydtymyiqkt nk qtkcyhak
hy nk xbytqy hy mb rlitk; nk gbkn gli qki ymqtkñlm w ypagkgym kpygqlm nk
tydtymyiqktli nlm dytmlikoym hynnk, uby dktygaó uby my rkfíki qtkimpltxkhl
yi nk xamxk vythkh hy nl uby paicíki. hymykfk xbgrl nk ilgry, w yn qyiyt
nbckt dktk mknat hy mb gkmk, w at k vytmy gli mb fbyi kxacl nlqktal,
glictkqbnáihlmy gli én hy nk xktcktaqk dtygalmk uby rkfík rknnkhl yi yn
hymyickñl hy nk flihkh hy mb ymdlmk. qbvaytli gbahkhl nkm hlm hy hktny
nbckt w glxlhahkh k uby mknaymy, w én, mai dythynnk, mknaó w nbycl pby k
fbmgkt k nlqktal, yn gbkn rknnkhl, il my dbyhy fbyikxyiqy gliqkt nlm
kftkelm uby ny hal, nkm glmkm uby hy mb gliqyiql ny haol, nkm knkfkiekm uby
hal k gkxank. qlhl nl gbkn ymgbgró nlqktal mai dlhyt hkt xbymqtkm hy kncbik
knyctík, dltuby my ny tydtymyiqkfk k nk xyxltak gbái yickñkhl ymqkfk mb
kxacl w gbái aiobmqkxyiqy én ny kctkvakfk. w, kbiuby kimynxl vyík uby
nlqktal il my knyctkfk, gtyík myt nk gkbmk dlt rkfyt hyokhl k gkxank rytahk
w rkfyt én mahl nk gkbmk; w kmí, yiqty lqtkm tkeliym, ny haol uby il
qbvaymy dyik hyn mbgyml hy gkxank, dltuby, mai hbhk, nk rytahk ytk nacytk,
dbym ubyhkfki hy gligaytql hy yigbftítmynk k én; w uby, mycúi ymql, il
rkfík hy ubé qyxyt, mail uby hy knní khynkiqy my clekmy w knyctkmy gli én,
dbym dlt mb aihbmqtak w xyhal én my vyík nyvkiqkhl k nk xám knqk pynagahkh
uby kgytqktk hymyktmy, w ubytík uby il pbymyi lqtlm mbm yiqtyqyiaxayiqlm
uby yi rkgyt vytmlm yi knkfkiek hy gkxank, uby nk ragaymyi yqytik yi nk
xyxltak hy nlm macnlm vyiahytlm. nlqktal knkfó mb fbyik hyqytxaikgaói w
haol uby én, dlt mb dktqy, kwbhktík k nyvkiqkt qki anbmqty yhapagal.
»gli ymql ubyhó kimynxl yn rlxfty xám mkftlmkxyiqy yickñkhl uby dbhl rkfyt
yi yn xbihl: én xamxl nnyvó dlt nk xkil k mb gkmk, gtywyihl uby nnyvkfk yn
aimqtbxyiql hy mb cnltak, qlhk nk dythagaói hy mb pkxk. tygyfíkny gkxank
gli tlmqtl, kn dktygyt, qltgahl, kbiuby gli knxk tambyñk. hbtó ymqy yickñl
kncbilm híkm, rkmqk uby, kn gkfl hy dlglm xymym, vlnvaó pltqbik mb tbyhk w
mknaó k dnkek nk xknhkh gli qkiql ktqapagal rkmqk knní gbfaytqk, w k
kimynxl ny glmqó nk vahk mb axdytqaiyiqy gbtalmahkh.»





gkdíqbnl zzzv. hlihy my hk pai k nk ilvynk hyn gbtalml axdytqaiyiqy


dlgl xám ubyhkfk dlt nyyt hy nk ilvynk, gbkihl hyn gktkxkigrói hlihy
tydlmkfk hli ubaolqy mknaó mkigrl dkiek qlhl knfltlqkhl, hagayihl k vlgym:

-kgbhah, myñltym, dtymql w mlglttyh k xa myñlt, uby kihk yivbynql yi nk xám
tyñahk w qtkfkhk fkqknnk uby xam lolm rki vamql. ¡vavy halm, uby rk hkhl
bik gbgrannkhk kn cackiqy yiyxacl hy nk myñltk dtaigymk xaglxaglik, uby ny
rk qkokhl nk gkfyek, gytgyi k gytgyi, glxl ma pbytk bi ikfl!

-¿ubé hagym, rytxkil? -haol yn gbtk, hyokihl hy nyyt nl uby hy nk ilvynk
ubyhkfk-. ¿ymqáam yi vlm, mkigrl? ¿góxl hakfnlm dbyhy myt yml uby hygím,
ymqkihl yn cackiqy hlm xan nycbkm hy kubí?

yi ymql, lwytli bi ctki tbahl yi yn kdlmyiql, w uby hli ubaolqy hygík k
vlgym:

-¡qyiqy, nkhtói, xknkihtíi, plnnói, uby kubí qy qyicl, w il qy rk hy vknyt
qb gaxaqkttk!

w dktygík uby hkfk ctkihym gbgrannkhkm dlt nkm dktyhym. w haol mkigrl:

-il qayiyi uby dktktmy k ymgbgrkt, mail yiqtyi k hymdktqat nk dynyk, l k
kwbhkt k xa kxl; kbiuby wk il mytá xyiymqyt, dltuby, mai hbhk kncbik, yn
cackiqy ymqá wk xbytql, w hkihl gbyiqk k halm hy mb dkmkhk w xknk vahk, uby
wl va glttyt nk mkicty dlt yn mbynl, w nk gkfyek gltqkhk w gkíhk k bi nkhl,
uby ym qkxkñk glxl bi ctki gbytl hy vail.

-uby xy xkqyi -haol k ymqk mkeói yn vyiqytl- ma hli ubaolqy, l hli hakfnl,
il rk hkhl kncbik gbgrannkhk yi kncbil hy nlm gbytlm hy vail qaiql uby k mb
gkfygytk ymqkfki nnyilm, w yn vail hyttkxkhl hyfy hy myt nl uby ny dktygy
mkicty k ymqy fbyi rlxfty.

w, gli ymql, yiqtó yi yn kdlmyiql, w qlhlm qtkm én, w rknnktli k hli
ubaolqy yi yn xám ymqtkñl qtkoy hyn xbihl: ymqkfk yi gkxamk, nk gbkn il ytk
qki gbxdnahk uby dlt hynkiqy ny kgkfkmy hy gbftat nlm xbmnlm, w dlt hyqtám
qyiík myam hyhlm xyilm; nkm daytikm ytki xbw nktckm w pnkgkm, nnyikm hy
vynnl w il ikhk naxdakm; qyiík yi nk gkfyek bi fliyqannl glnltkhl,
ctkmayiql, uby ytk hyn vyiqytl; yi yn ftkel aeubaythl qyiík tyvbynqk nk
xkiqk hy nk gkxk, gli ubayi qyiík loytaek mkigrl, w én my mkfík fayi yn
dltubé; w yi nk hytygrk, hymyivkaikhk nk ymdkhk, gli nk gbkn hkfk
gbgrannkhkm k qlhkm dktqym, hagayihl dknkftkm glxl ma vythkhytkxyiqy
ymqbvaytk dynykihl gli kncúi cackiqy. w ym nl fbyil uby il qyiík nlm lolm
kfaytqlm, dltuby ymqkfk hbtxayihl w mlñkihl uby ymqkfk yi fkqknnk gli yn
cackiqy; uby pby qki aiqyimk nk axkcaikgaói hy nk kvyiqbtk uby afk k
pyiygyt, uby ny rael mlñkt uby wk rkfík nnyckhl kn tyail hy xaglxagói, w
uby wk ymqkfk yi nk dynyk gli mb yiyxacl. w rkfík hkhl qkiqkm gbgrannkhkm
yi nlm gbytlm, gtywyihl uby nkm hkfk yi yn cackiqy, uby qlhl yn kdlmyiql
ymqkfk nnyil hy vail; nl gbkn vamql dlt yn vyiqytl, qlxó qkiql yilol uby
kttyxyqaó gli hli ubaolqy, w k dbñl gyttkhl ny glxyieó k hkt qkiqlm clndym
uby ma gkthyial w yn gbtk il my ny ubaqktki, én kgkfktk nk cbyttk hyn
cackiqy; w, gli qlhl kubynnl, il hymdytqkfk yn dlfty gkfknnytl, rkmqk uby
yn fktfytl qtbol bi ctki gknhytl hy kcbk ptík hyn dlel w my ny ygró dlt
qlhl yn gbytdl hy clndy, gli nl gbkn hymdytqó hli ubaolqy; xkm il gli qkiql
kgbythl uby ygrkmy hy vyt hy nk xkiytk uby ymqkfk.

hltlqyk, uby val gbái gltqk w mlqanxyiqy ymqkfk vymqahl, il ubaml yiqtkt k
vyt nk fkqknnk hy mb kwbhkhlt w hy mb gliqtktal.

kihkfk mkigrl fbmgkihl nk gkfyek hyn cackiqy dlt qlhl yn mbynl, w, glxl il
nk rknnkfk, haol:

-wk wl mé uby qlhl nl hymqk gkmk ym yigkiqkxyiql; uby nk lqtk vye, yi ymqy
xymxl nbckt hlihy krltk xy rknnl, xy haytli xbgrlm xloagliym w dlttkelm,
mai mkfyt ubaéi xy nlm hkfk, w ibigk dbhy vyt k ikhay; w krltk il dktygy
dlt kubí ymqk gkfyek uby va gltqkt dlt xam xamxímaxlm lolm, w nk mkicty
glttík hyn gbytdl glxl hy bik pbyiqy.

-¿ubé mkicty ia ubé pbyiqy hagym, yiyxacl hy halm w hy mbm mkiqlm? -haol yn
vyiqytl-. ¿il vyym, nkhtói, uby nk mkicty w nk pbyiqy il ym lqtk glmk uby
ymqlm gbytlm uby kubí ymqái rltkhkhlm w yn vail qaiql uby ikhk yi ymqy
kdlmyiql, uby ikhkihl vyk wl yn knxk yi nlm aipaytilm hy ubayi nlm rltkhó?
-il mé ikhk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; mónl mé uby vyihté k myt qki hymhagrkhl
uby, dlt il rknnkt ymqk gkfyek, my xy rk hy hymrkgyt xa glihkhl glxl nk mkn
yi yn kcbk.

w ymqkfk dylt mkigrl hymdaytql uby mb kxl hbtxayihl: qkn ny qyiíki nkm
dtlxymkm uby mb kxl ny rkfík rygrl. yn vyiqytl my hymymdytkfk hy vyt nk
pnyxk hyn ymgbhytl w yn xknypagal hyn myñlt, w obtkfk uby il rkfík hy myt
glxl nk vye dkmkhk, uby my ny pbytli mai dkckt; w uby krltk il ny rkfíki hy
vknyt nlm dtyvanycalm hy mb gkfknnytík dktk hyokt hy dkckt nl bil w nl
lqtl, kbi rkmqk nl uby dbhaymyi glmqkt nkm flqkikm uby my rkfíki hy ygrkt k
nlm tlqlm gbytlm.

qyiík yn gbtk hy nkm xkilm k hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn, gtywyihl uby wk rkfík
kgkfkhl nk kvyiqbtk, w uby my rknnkfk hynkiqy hy nk dtaigymk xaglxaglik, my
raigó hy tlhannkm hynkiqy hyn gbtk, hagayihl:

-fayi dbyhy nk vbymqtk ctkihyek, knqk w pkxlmk myñltk, vavat, hy rlw xám,
mycbtk uby ny dbyhk rkgyt xkn ymqk xkn ikgahk gtakqbtk; w wl qkxfaéi, hy
rlw xám, mlw ubaql hy nk dknkftk uby lm ha, dbym, gli yn kwbhk hyn knql
halm w gli yn pkvlt hy kubynnk dlt ubayi wl vavl w tymdatl, qki fayi nk ry
gbxdnahl.

-¿il nl haoy wl? -haol lwyihl ymql mkigrl-. mí uby il ymqkfk wl flttkgrl:
¡xatkh ma qayiy dbymql wk yi mkn xa kxl kn cackiqy! ¡gaytqlm mli nlm qltlm:
xa glihkhl ymqá hy xlnhy!

¿ubaéi il rkfík hy tyít gli nlm hamdktkqym hy nlm hlm, kxl w xlel? qlhlm
tyíki mail yn vyiqytl, uby my hkfk k mkqkiám. dytl, yi pai, qkiql ragaytli
yn fktfytl, gkthyial w yn gbtk uby, gli il dlgl qtkfkol, haytli gli hli
ubaolqy yi nk gkxk, yn gbkn my ubyhó hltxahl, gli xbymqtkm hy ctkihímaxl
gkimkigal. hyoátliny hltxat, w mknaétlimy kn dltqkn hy nk vyiqk k glimlnkt
k mkigrl dkiek hy il rkfyt rknnkhl nk gkfyek hyn cackiqy; kbiuby xám
qbvaytli uby rkgyt yi kdnkgkt kn vyiqytl, uby ymqkfk hymymdytkhl dlt nk
tydyiqaik xbytqy hy mbm gbytlm. w nk vyiqytk hygík yi vle w yi ctaql:
-yi xkn dbiql w yi rltk xyicbkhk yiqtó yi xa gkmk ymqy gkfknnytl kihkiqy,
uby ibigk xam lolm ny rbfaytki vamql, uby qki gktl xy gbymqk. nk vye dkmkhk
my pby gli yn glmql hy bik ilgry, hy gyik, gkxk, dkok w gyfkhk, dktk én w
dktk mb ymgbhytl, w bi tlgíi w bi obxyiql, hagayihl uby ytk gkfknnytl
kvyiqbtytl (uby xknk vyiqbtk ny hé halm k én w k gbkiqlm kvyiqbtytlm rkw yi
yn xbihl) w uby dlt ymql il ymqkfk lfnackhl k dkckt ikhk, uby kmí ymqkfk
ymgtaql yi nlm ktkigynym hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqymgk. w krltk, dlt mb
tymdyql, vail ymqlqtl myñlt w xy nnyvó xa glnk, w ráxynk vbynql gli xám hy
hlm gbktqannlm hy hkñl, qlhk dynkhk, uby il dbyhy mytvat dktk nl uby nk
ubayty xa xktahl. w, dlt pai w tyxkqy hy qlhl, tlxdytxy xam gbytlm w
hyttkxktxy xa vail; uby hyttkxkhk ny vyk wl mb mkicty. ¡dbym il my dayimy;
uby, dlt nlm rbymlm hy xa dkhty w dlt yn macnl hy xa xkhty, ma il xy nl rki
hy dkckt bi gbktql mlfty lqtl, l il xy nnkxktík wl glxl xy nnkxl ia mytík
raok hy ubayi mlw!

ymqkm w lqtkm tkeliym qknym hygík nk vyiqytk gli ctkihy yilol, w kwbháfknk
mb fbyik gtakhk xktaqltiym. nk raok gknnkfk, w hy gbkihl yi gbkihl my
mlityík. yn gbtk nl mlmycó qlhl, dtlxyqayihl hy mkqampkgytnym mb déthahk nl
xyolt uby dbhaymy, kmí hy nlm gbytlm glxl hyn vail, w dtaigadknxyiqy hyn
xyilmgkfl hy nk glnk, hy ubayi qkiqk gbyiqk rkgíki. hltlqyk glimlnó k
mkigrl dkiek hagaéihlny uby gkhk w gbkihl uby dktygaymy rkfyt mahl vythkh
uby mb kxl rbfaymy hymgkfyekhl kn cackiqy, ny dtlxyqík, yi vaéihlmy
dkgípagk yi mb tyail, hy hktny yn xyolt glihkhl uby yi én rbfaymy.
glimlnómy gli ymql mkigrl, w kmycbtó k nk dtaigymk uby qbvaymy dlt gaytql
uby én rkfík vamql nk gkfyek hyn cackiqy, w uby, dlt xám myñkm, qyiík bik
fktfk uby ny nnyckfk k nk gaiqbtk; w uby ma il dktygík, ytk dltuby qlhl
gbkiql yi kubynnk gkmk dkmkfk ytk dlt vík hy yigkiqkxyiql, glxl én nl rkfík
dtlfkhl lqtk vye uby rkfík dlmkhl yi ynnk. hltlqyk haol uby kmí nl gtyík, w
uby il qbvaymy dyik, uby qlhl my rktík fayi w mbgyhytík k dyhat hy flgk.
mlmyckhlm qlhlm, yn gbtk ubaml kgkfkt hy nyyt nk ilvynk, dltuby val uby
pknqkfk dlgl. gkthyial, hltlqyk w qlhlm nlm hyxám ny tlcktli nk kgkfkmy.
Én, uby k qlhlm ubaml hkt cbmql, w dlt yn uby én qyiík hy nyytnk, dtlmacbaó
yn gbyiql, uby kmí hygík:

«mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, dlt nk mkqampkgaói uby kimynxl qyiík hy nk flihkh hy
gkxank, vavík bik vahk gliqyiqk w hymgbahkhk, w gkxank, hy aihbmqtak, rkgík
xkn tlmqtl k nlqktal, dltuby kimynxl yiqyihaymy kn tyvém hy nk vlnbiqkh uby
ny qyiík; w, dktk xám glipatxkgaói hy mb rygrl, dahaó nagyigak nlqktal dktk
il vyiat k mb gkmk, dbym gnktkxyiqy my xlmqtkfk nk dymkhbxfty uby gli mb
vamqk gkxank tygyfík; xkm yn yickñkhl kimynxl ny haol uby yi iaicbik xkiytk
qkn ragaymy. w, hymqk xkiytk, dlt xan xkiytkm ytk kimynxl yn pkftagkhlt hy
mb hymrlitk, gtywyihl uby nl ytk hy mb cbmql.

»yi ymql, yn uby qyiík nyliynk hy vytmy gbknapagkhk, il hy gli mbm kxltym,
nnycó k qkiql uby, mai xatkt k lqtk glmk, my afk qtkm én k mbynqk tayihk,
pakhk yi uby mb myñltk nk yigbftík, w kbi nk khvytqík hyn xlhl uby gli dlgl
tygynl dbhaymy dliytny yi yoygbgaói. yi pai, bik ilgry maiqaó kimynxl dkmlm
yi yn kdlmyiql hy nyliynk, w, ubytayihl yiqtkt k vyt ubaéi nlm hkfk, maiqaó
uby ny hyqyiíki nk dbytqk, glmk uby ny dbml xám vlnbiqkh hy kftatnk; w
qkiqk pbytek rael, uby nk kftaó, w yiqtó hyiqtl k qayxdl uby val uby bi
rlxfty mknqkfk dlt nk vyiqkik k nk gknny; w, kgbhayihl gli dtymqyek k
kngkiektny l glilgytny, il dbhl glimycbat nl bil ia nl lqtl, dltuby nyliynk
my kftkeó gli én, hagaéihlny:

»-mlmaéckqy, myñlt xíl, w il qy knfltlqym, ia mackm kn uby hy kubí mknqó;
ym glmk xík, w qkiql, uby ym xa ymdlml.

»il nl ubaml gtyyt kimynxl; kiqym, gaycl hy yilol, mkgó nk hkck w ubaml
rytat k nyliynk, hagaéihlny uby ny haoymy nk vythkh, ma il, uby nk xkqktík.
ynnk, gli yn xayhl, mai mkfyt nl uby my hygík, ny haol:

»-il xy xkqym, myñlt, uby wl qy haté glmkm hy xám axdltqkigak hy nkm uby
dbyhym axkcaikt.

»-hankm nbycl -haol kimynxl-; ma il, xbytqk ytym.

»-dlt krltk mytá axdlmafny -haol nyliynk-, mycúi ymqlw hy qbtfkhk; héokxy
rkmqk xkñkik, uby yiqligym mkftám hy xí nl uby qy rk hy khxatkt; w ymqá
mycbtl uby yn uby mknqó dlt ymqk vyiqkik ym bi xkigyfl hymqk gabhkh, uby xy
rk hkhl nk xkil hy myt xa ymdlml.

»mlmycómy gli ymql kimynxl w ubaml kcbkthkt yn qétxail uby my ny dyhík,
dltuby il dyimkfk lít glmk uby gliqtk gkxank pbymy, dlt ymqkt hy mb flihkh
qki mkqampygrl w mycbtl; w kmí, my mknaó hyn kdlmyiql w hyoó yigyttkhk yi
én k nyliynk, hagaéihlny uby hy knní il mknhtík rkmqk uby ny haoymy nl uby
qyiík uby hygatny.

»pby nbycl k vyt k gkxank w k hygatny, glxl ny haol, qlhl kubynnl uby gli
mb hligynnk ny rkfík dkmkhl, w nk dknkftk uby ny rkfík hkhl hy hygatny
ctkihym glmkm w hy axdltqkigak. ma my qbtfó gkxank l il, il rkw dktk ubé
hygatnl, dltuby pby qkiql yn qyxlt uby glftó, gtywyihl vythkhytkxyiqy -w
ytk hy gtyyt- uby nyliynk rkfík hy hygat k kimynxl qlhl nl uby mkfík hy mb
dlgk py, uby il qbvl áiaxl dktk ymdytkt ma mb mlmdygrk mkník pknmk l il. w
kubynnk xymxk ilgry, gbkihl ny dktygaó uby kimynxl hltxík, obiqó nkm
xyoltym olwkm uby qyiík w kncbilm haiytlm, w, mai myt hy ikhay myiqahk,
mknaó hy gkmk w my pby k nk hy nlqktal, k ubayi gliqó nl uby dkmkfk, w ny
dahaó uby nk dbmaymy yi glftl, l uby my kbmyiqkmyi nlm hlm hlihy hy kimynxl
dbhaymyi ymqkt mycbtlm. nk glipbmaói yi uby gkxank dbml k nlqktal pby qkn,
uby il ny mkfík tymdlihyt dknkftk, ia xyilm mkfík tymlnvytmy yi nl uby
rktík.

»yi pai, kglthó hy nnyvkt k gkxank k bi xliymqytal, yi ubayi ytk dtaltk bik
mb rytxkik. glimaiqaó gkxank yi ynnl, w, gli nk dtymqyek uby yn gkml dyhík,
nk nnyvó nlqktal w nk hyoó yi yn xliymqytal, w én, kimaxymxl, my kbmyiqó
nbycl hy nk gabhkh, mai hkt dktqy k ikhay hy mb kbmyigak.

»gbkihl kxkiygaó, mai ygrkt hy vyt kimynxl uby gkxank pknqkfk hy mb nkhl,
gli yn hymyl uby qyiík hy mkfyt nl uby nyliynk ubytík hygatny, my nyvkiqó w
pby khlihy nk rkfík hyokhl yigyttkhk. kftaó w yiqtó yi yn kdlmyiql, dytl il
rknnó yi én k nyliynk: mónl rknnó dbymqkm bikm máfkikm kñbhkhkm k nk
vyiqkik, aihagal w myñkn uby dlt knní my rkfík hymglnckhl y ahl. vlnvaó
nbycl xbw qtamqy k hygítmynl k gkxank, w, il rknnáihlnk yi nk gkxk ia yi
qlhk nk gkmk, ubyhó kmlxftkhl.dtycbiqó k nlm gtakhlm hy gkmk dlt ynnk, dytl
ikhay ny mbdl hkt tkeói hy nl uby dyhík.

»kgytqó kgkml, kihkihl k fbmgkt k gkxank, uby val mbm glptym kfaytqlm w uby
hynnlm pknqkfki nkm xám hy mbm olwkm, w gli ymql kgkfó hy gkyt yi nk gbyiqk
hy mb hymctkgak, w yi uby il ytk nyliynk nk gkbmk hy mb hymvyiqbtk. w, kimí
glxl ymqkfk, mai kgkfktmy hy vymqat, qtamqy w dyimkqavl, pby k hkt gbyiqk
hy mb hymhagrk k mb kxacl nlqktal. xkm, gbkihl il ny rknnó, w mbm gtakhlm
ny haoytli uby kubynnk ilgry rkfík pknqkhl hy gkmk w rkfík nnyvkhl glimacl
qlhlm nlm haiytlm uby qyiík, dyimó dythyt yn obagal. w, dktk kgkfkt hy
glignbat gli qlhl, vlnvaéihlmy k mb gkmk, il rknnó yi ynnk iaicbil hy
gbkiqlm gtakhlm ia gtakhkm qyiík, mail nk gkmk hymaytqk w mlnk.

»il mkfík ubé dyimkt, ubé hygat, ia ubé rkgyt, w dlgl k dlgl my ny afk
vlnvayihl yn obagal. gliqyxdnáfkmy w xatáfkmy yi bi aimqkiqy mai xboyt, mai
kxacl w mai gtakhlm; hymkxdktkhl, k mb dktygyt, hyn gaynl uby ny gbftík, w
mlfty qlhl mai rlitk, dltuby yi nk pknqk hy gkxank val mb dythagaói.

»tymlnvaómy, yi pai, k gkfl hy bik ctki dayek, hy atmy k nk knhyk hy mb
kxacl, hlihy rkfík ymqkhl gbkihl hal nbckt k uby my xkubaikmy qlhk kubynnk
hymvyiqbtk. gyttó nkm dbytqkm hy mb gkmk, mbfaó k gkfknnl, w gli hymxkwkhl
knayiql my dbml yi gkxail; w, kdyikm rbfl kihkhl nk xaqkh, gbkihl, kglmkhl
hy mbm dyimkxayiqlm, ny pby pltelml kdyktmy w kttyihkt mb gkfknnl k bi
átfln, k gbwl qtligl my hyoó gkyt, hkihl qaytilm w hlnltlmlm mbmdatlm, w
knní my ymqbvl rkmqk gkma uby kilgrygík; w kubynnk rltk val uby vyiík bi
rlxfty k gkfknnl hy nk gabhkh, w, hymdbém hy rkfytny mknbhkhl, ny dtycbiqó
ubé ibyvkm rkfík yi pnltyigak. yn gabhkhkil tymdlihaó:

»-nkm xám ymqtkñkm uby xbgrlm híkm rk my rki líhl yi ynnk; dltuby my hagy
dúfnagkxyiqy uby nlqktal, kubyn ctkihy kxacl hy kimynxl yn tagl, uby vavík
k mki obki, my nnyvó ymqk ilgry k gkxank, xboyt hy kimynxl, yn gbkn qkxdlgl
dktygy. qlhl ymql rk hagrl bik gtakhk hy gkxank, uby kilgry nk rknnó yn
clfytikhlt hymglncáihlmy gli bik máfkik dlt nkm vyiqkikm hy nk gkmk hy
kimynxl. yi ypyql, il mé dbiqbknxyiqy góxl dkmó yn iyclgal; mónl mé uby
qlhk nk gabhkh ymqá khxatkhk hymqy mbgyml, dltuby il my dlhík ymdytkt qkn
rygrl hy nk xbgrk w pkxanakt kxamqkh hy nlm hlm, uby hagyi uby ytk qkiqk,
uby nlm nnkxkfki nlm hlm kxaclm.

»-¿máfymy, dlt vyiqbtk -haol kimynxl-, yn gkxail uby nnyvki nlqktal w
gkxank?

»-ia dlt dayiml -haol yn gabhkhkil-, dbymql uby yn clfytikhlt rk bmkhl hy
xbgrk hanacyigak yi fbmgktnlm

»-k halm vkam, myñlt -haol kimynxl.

»-gli Én ubyhéam -tymdlihaó yn gabhkhkil, w pbymy.

»gli qki hymhagrkhkm ibyvkm, gkma gkma nnycó k qétxailm kimynxl, il mónl hy
dythyt yn obagal, mail hy kgkfkt nk vahk. nyvkiqómy glxl dbhl w nnycó k
gkmk hy mb kxacl, uby kúi il mkfík mb hymctkgak; xkm, glxl ny val nnyckt
kxktannl, glimbxahl w mygl, yiqyihaó uby hy kncúi ctkvy xkn vyiík pkqackhl.
dahaó nbycl kimynxl uby ny kglmqkmyi, w uby ny haymyi khytyel hy ymgtafat.
ríelmy kmí, w hyoátliny kglmqkhl w mlnl, dltuby én kmí nl ubaml, w kbi uby
ny gyttkmyi nk dbytqk. vaéihlmy, dbym, mlnl, glxyieó k gktckt qkiql nk
axkcaikgaói hy mb hymvyiqbtk, uby gnktkxyiqy glilgaó uby my ny afk kgkfkihl
nk vahk; w kmí, lthyió hy hyokt ilqagak hy nk gkbmk hy mb ymqtkñk xbytqy;
w, glxyiekihl k ymgtafat, kiqym uby kgkfkmy hy dliyt qlhl nl uby ubytík, ny
pknqó yn knayiql w hyoó nk vahk yi nkm xkilm hyn hlnlt uby ny gkbmó mb
gbtalmahkh axdytqaiyiqy.

»vayihl yn myñlt hy gkmk uby ytk wk qkthy w uby kimynxl il nnkxkfk, kglthó
hy yiqtkt k mkfyt ma dkmkfk khynkiqy mb aihamdlmagaói, w rknnóny qyihahl
flgk kfkol, nk xaqkh hyn gbytdl yi nk gkxk w nk lqtk xaqkh mlfty yn fbpyqy,
mlfty yn gbkn ymqkfk gli yn dkdyn ymgtaql w kfaytql, w én qyiík kúi nk
dnbxk yi nk xkil. nnycómy yn rbémdyh k én, rkfaéihlny nnkxkhl dtaxytl; w,
qtkfáihlny dlt nk xkil, vayihl uby il ny tymdlihík w rknnáihlny ptíl, val
uby ymqkfk xbytql. khxatómy w glicloómy yi ctki xkiytk, w nnkxó k nk cyiqy
hy gkmk dktk uby vaymyi nk hymctkgak k kimynxl mbgyhahk; w, paiknxyiqy,
nywó yn dkdyn, uby glilgaó uby hy mb xymxk xkil ymqkfk ymgtaql, yn gbkn
gliqyiík ymqkm tkeliym:

bi iygal y axdytqaiyiqy hymyl xy ubaqó nk vahk. ma nkm ibyvkm hy xa xbytqy
nnycktyi k nlm líhlm hy gkxank, mydk uby wl nk dythlil, dltuby il ymqkfk
ynnk lfnackhk k rkgyt xankctlm, ia wl qyiík iygymahkh hy ubytyt uby ynnk
nlm ragaymy; w, dbym wl pba yn pkftagkhlt hy xa hymrlitk, il rkw dktk
ubé...

»rkmqk kubí ymgtafaó kimynxl, dlt hlihy my ygró hy vyt uby yi kubyn dbiql,
mai dlhyt kgkfkt nk tkeói, my ny kgkfó nk vahk. lqtl hík hal kvaml mb kxacl
k nlm dktayiqym hy kimynxl hy mb xbytqy, nlm gbknym wk mkfíki mb hymctkgak,
w yn xliymqytal hlihy gkxank ymqkfk, gkma yi yn qétxail hy kglxdkñkt k mb
ymdlml yi kubyn pltelml vakoy, il dlt nkm ibyvkm hyn xbytql ymdlml, xkm dlt
nkm uby mbdl hyn kbmyiqy kxacl. hígymy uby, kbiuby my val vabhk, il ubaml
mknat hyn xliymqytal, ia, xyilm, rkgyt dtlpymaói hy xliok, rkmqk uby, il hy
knní k xbgrlm híkm, ny vaiaytli ibyvkm uby nlqktal rkfík xbytql yi bik
fkqknnk uby yi kubyn qayxdl hal xlimabt hy nkbqtyg kn ctki gkdaqái clieknl
pytiáihye hy góthlfk yi yn tyail hy iádlnym, hlihy rkfík ahl k dktkt yn
qkthy kttydyiqahl kxacl; nl gbkn mkfahl dlt gkxank, rael dtlpymaói, w kgkfó
yi ftyvym híkm nk vahk k nkm tacbtlmkm xkilm hy qtamqyekm w xynkiglníkm.
Émqy pby yn pai uby qbvaytli qlhlm, ikgahl hy bi qki hymkqaikhl dtaigadal.»

-fayi -haol yn gbtk- xy dktygy ymqk ilvynk, dytl il xy dbyhl dytmbkhat uby
ymql myk vythkh; w ma ym paicahl, paicaó xkn yn kbqlt, dltuby il my dbyhy
axkcaikt uby rkwk xktahl qki iygal uby ubaytk rkgyt qki glmqlmk yzdytayigak
glxl kimynxl. ma ymqy gkml my dbmaytk yiqty bi cknái w bik hkxk, dbhaétkmy
nnyvkt, dytl yiqty xktahl w xboyt, kncl qayiy hyn axdlmafny; w, yi nl uby
qlgk kn xlhl hy gliqktny, il xy hymgliqyiqk.





gkdíqbnl zzzva. uby qtkqk hy nk ftkvk w hymglxbikn fkqknnk uby hli ubaolqy
qbvl gli bilm gbytlm hy vail qaiql, gli lqtlm tktlm mbgymlm uby yi nk vyiqk
ny mbgyhaytli


ymqkihl yi ymql, yn vyiqytl, uby ymqkfk k nk dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, haol:

-ymqk uby vayiy ym bik rytxlmk qtldk hy rbémdyhym: ma ynnlm dktki kubí,
ckbhykxbm qyiyxlm.

-¿ubé cyiqy ym? -haol gkthyial.

-gbkqtl rlxftym -tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl- vayiyi k gkfknnl, k nk oaiyqk, gli
nkiekm w khktckm, w qlhlm gli kiqapkgym iyctlm; w obiql gli ynnlm vayiy bik
xboyt vymqahk hy fnkigl, yi bi mannói, kimaxymxl gbfaytql yn tlmqtl, w
lqtlm hlm xlelm hy k day.

-¿vayiyi xbw gytgk? -dtycbiqó yn gbtk.

-qki gytgk -tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl-, uby wk nnycki.

lwyihl ymql hltlqyk, my gbftaó yn tlmqtl, w gkthyial my yiqtó yi yn
kdlmyiql hy hli ubaolqy; w gkma il rkfíki qyiahl nbckt dktk ymql, gbkihl
yiqtktli yi nk vyiqk qlhlm nlm uby yn vyiqytl rkfík hagrl; w, kdyáihlmy nlm
gbkqtl hy k gkfknnl, uby hy xbw cyiqan qknny w hamdlmagaói ytki, pbytli k
kdykt k nk xboyt uby yi yn mannói vyiík; w, qlxáihlnk bil hynnlm yi mbm
ftkelm, nk myiqó yi bik mannk uby ymqkfk k nk yiqtkhk hyn kdlmyiql hlihy
gkthyial my rkfík ymglihahl. yi qlhl ymqy qayxdl, ia ynnk ia ynnlm my
rkfíki ubaqkhl nlm kiqapkgym, ia rkfnkhl dknkftk kncbik; mónl uby, kn
myiqktmy nk xboyt yi nk mannk, hal bi dtlpbihl mbmdatl w hyoó gkyt nlm
ftkelm, glxl dytmlik yipytxk w hymxkwkhk. nlm xlelm hy k day nnyvktli nlm
gkfknnlm k nk gkfknnytaek.

vayihl ymql yn gbtk, hymylml hy mkfyt ubé cyiqy ytk kubynnk uby gli qkn
qtkoy w qkn manyigal ymqkfk, my pby hlihy ymqkfki nlm xlelm, w k bil hynnlm
ny dtycbiqó nl uby wk hymykfk; yn gbkn ny tymdlihaó:

-dkthaye, myñlt, wl il mkfté hygatlm ubé cyiqy myk émqk; mónl mé uby
xbymqtk myt xbw dtaigadkn, ymdygaknxyiqy kubyn uby nnycó k qlxkt yi mbm
ftkelm k kubynnk myñltk uby rkféam vamql; w ymql híclnl dltuby qlhlm nlm
hyxám ny qayiyi tymdyql, w il my rkgy lqtk glmk xám hy nk uby én lthyik w
xkihk.

-w nk myñltk, ¿ubaéi ym? -dtycbiqó yn gbtk.

-qkxdlgl mkfté hygat yml -tymdlihaó yn xlel-, dltuby yi qlhl yn gkxail il
nk ry vamql yn tlmqtl; mbmdatkt mí nk ry líhl xbgrkm vygym, w hkt bilm
cyxahlm uby dktygy uby gli gkhk bil hynnlm ubayty hkt yn knxk. w il ym hy
xktkvannkt uby il mydkxlm xám hy nl uby rkfyxlm hagrl, dltuby xa glxdkñytl
w wl il rk xám hy hlm híkm uby nlm kglxdkñkxlm; dltuby, rkfaéihlnlm
yigliqtkhl yi yn gkxail, ilm tlcktli w dytmbkhaytli uby vaiaémyxlm gli
ynnlm rkmqk yn kihknbgík, lptygaéihlmy k dkcátilmnl xbw fayi.

-¿w rkféam líhl ilxftkt k kncbil hynnlm? -dtycbiqó yn gbtk.

-il, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó yn xlel-, dltuby qlhlm gkxaiki gli qkiql
manyigal uby ym xktkvannk, dltuby il my lwy yiqty ynnlm lqtk glmk uby nlm
mbmdatlm w mlnnlelm hy nk dlfty myñltk, uby ilm xbyvyi k námqaxk; w mai
hbhk qyiyxlm gtyíhl uby ynnk vk pltekhk hlihyubaytk uby vk, w, mycúi my
dbyhy glnycat dlt mb ráfaql, ynnk ym xliok, l vk k mytnl, uby ym nl xám
gaytql, w ubaeá dltuby il ny hyfy hy ikgyt hy vlnbiqkh yn xlioíl, vk
qtamqy, glxl dktygy.

-qlhl dlhtík myt -haol yn gbtk.

w, hyoáihlnlm, my vlnvaó khlihy ymqkfk hltlqyk, nk gbkn, glxl rkfík líhl
mbmdatkt k nk yxflekhk, xlvahk hy ikqbtkn glxdkmaói, my nnycó k ynnk w ny
haol:

-¿ubé xkn myiqím, myñltk xík? xatkh ma ym kncbil hy ubayi nkm xboytym
mbynyi qyiyt bml w yzdytayigak hy gbtktny, uby hy xa dktqy lm lptyegl bik
fbyik vlnbiqkh hy mytvatlm.

k qlhl ymql gknnkfk nk nkmqaxkhk myñltk; w, kbiuby hltlqyk qltió gli
xkwltym lptygaxayiqlm, qlhkvík my ymqkfk yi mb manyigal, rkmqk uby nnycó yn
gkfknnytl yxflekhl uby haol yn xlel uby nlm hyxám lfyhygíki, w haol k
hltlqyk:

-il lm gkiméam, myñltk, yi lptygyt ikhk k ymk xboyt, dltuby qayiy dlt
glmqbxfty hy il kctkhygyt glmk uby dlt ynnk my rkgy, ia dtlgbtéam uby lm
tymdlihk, ma il ubytéam lít kncbik xyiqatk hy mb flgk.

-okxám nk haoy -haol k ymqk mkeói nk uby rkmqk knní rkfík ymqkhl gknnkihl-;
kiqym, dlt myt qki vythkhytk w qki mai qtkekm xyiqatlmkm, xy vyl krltk yi
qkiqk hymvyiqbtk; w hymql vlm xymxl ubaytl uby myáam yn qymqacl, dbym xa
dbtk vythkh lm rkgy k vlm myt pknml w xyiqatlml.

lwó ymqkm tkeliym gkthyial fayi gnktk w hamqaiqkxyiqy, glxl ubayi ymqkfk
qki obiql hy ubayi nkm hygík uby mlnk nk dbytqk hyn kdlmyiql hy hli ubaolqy
ymqkfk yi xyhal; w, kmí glxl nkm lwó, hkihl bik ctki vle haol:

-¡vánckxy halm! ¿ubé ym ymql uby lacl? ¿ubé vle ym ymqk uby rk nnyckhl k
xam líhlm?

vlnvaó nk gkfyek k ymqlm ctaqlm kubynnk myñltk, qlhk mlftymknqkhk, w, il
vayihl ubaéi nkm hkfk, my nyvkiqó yi day w pbymy k yiqtkt yi yn kdlmyiql;
nl gbkn vamql dlt yn gkfknnytl, nk hyqbvl, mai hyoktnk xlvyt bi dkml. k
ynnk, gli nk qbtfkgaói w hymkmlmaycl, my ny gkwó yn qkpyqái gli uby qtkík
gbfaytql yn tlmqtl, w hymgbftaó bik rytxlmbtk aiglxdktkfny w bi tlmqtl
xankctlml, kbiuby hymglnltahl w kmlxftkhl, dltuby gli nlm lolm kihkfk
tlhykihl qlhlm nlm nbcktym hlihy kngkiekfk gli nk vamqk, gli qkiql kríigl,
uby dktygík dytmlik pbytk hy obagal; gbwkm myñknym, mai mkfyt dlt ubé nkm
rkgík, dbmaytli ctki námqaxk yi hltlqyk w yi gbkiqlm nk xatkfki. qyiíknk yn
gkfknnytl pbytqyxyiqy kmahk dlt nkm ymdknhkm, w, dlt ymqkt qki lgbdkhl yi
qyiytnk, il dbhl kgbhat k knektmy yn yxflel, uby my ny gkík, glxl, yi
ypyql, my ny gkwó hyn qlhl; w, knekihl nlm lolm hltlqyk, uby kftkekhk gli
nk myñltk ymqkfk, val uby yn uby kftkekhk kimaxymxl nk qyiík ytk mb ymdlml
hli pytikihl; w, kdyikm ny rbfl glilgahl, gbkihl, kttlokihl hy nl íiqaxl hy
mbm yiqtkñkm bi nbyicl w qtamqímaxl ''¡kw!'', my hyoó gkyt hy ymdknhkm
hymxkwkhk; w, k il rknnktmy knní obiql yn fktfytl, uby nk tyglcaó yi nlm
ftkelm, ynnk haytk glimacl yi yn mbynl.

kgbhaó nbycl yn gbtk k ubaqktny yn yxflel, dktk ygrktny kcbk yi yn tlmqtl,
w kmí glxl nk hymgbftaó nk glilgaó hli pytikihl, uby ytk yn uby ymqkfk
kftkekhl gli nk lqtk, w ubyhó glxl xbytql yi vytnk; dytl il dltuby hyokmy,
gli qlhl ymql, hy qyiyt k nbmgaihk, uby ytk nk uby dtlgbtkfk mlnqktmy hy
mbm ftkelm; nk gbkn rkfík glilgahl yi yn mbmdatl k gkthyial, w én nk rkfík
glilgahl k ynnk. lwó kmaxymxl gkthyial yn ¡kw! uby hal hltlqyk gbkihl my
gkwó hymxkwkhk, w, gtywyihl uby ytk mb nbmgaihk, mknaó hyn kdlmyiql
hymdkvltahl, w nl dtaxytl uby val pby k hli pytikihl, uby qyiík kftkekhk k
nbmgaihk. qkxfaéi hli pytikihl glilgaó nbycl k gkthyial; w qlhlm qtym,
nbmgaihk, gkthyial w hltlqyk, ubyhktli xbhlm w mbmdyimlm, gkma mai mkfyt nl
uby nym rkfík kgliqygahl.

gknnkfki qlhlm w xatáfkimy qlhlm: hltlqyk k hli pytikihl, hli pytikihl k
gkthyial, gkthyial k nbmgaihk w nbmgaihk k gkthyial. xkm ubayi dtaxytl
tlxdaó yn manyigal pby nbmgaihk, rkfnkihl k hli pytikihl hymqk xkiytk:

-hyokhxy, myñlt hli pytikihl, dlt nl uby hyféam k myt ubayi mlam, wk uby
dlt lqtl tymdyql il nl rkcáam; hyokhxy nnyckt kn xbtl hy ubayi wl mlw
wyhtk, kn kttaxl hy ubayi il xy rki dlhahl kdktqkt vbymqtkm
axdltqbikgaliym, vbymqtkm kxyikekm, vbymqtkm dtlxymkm ia vbymqtkm háhavkm.
ilqkh góxl yn gaynl, dlt hymbmkhlm w k ilmlqtlm yigbfaytqlm gkxailm, xy rk
dbymql k xa vythkhytl ymdlml hynkiqy. w fayi mkféam dlt xan glmqlmkm
yzdytayigakm uby mlnk nk xbytqy pbytk fkmqkiqy dktk flttktny hy xa xyxltak.
myki, dbym, dktqy qki gnktlm hymyickñlm dktk uby vlnváam, wk uby il dlháam
rkgyt lqtk glmk, yn kxlt yi tkfak, nk vlnbiqkh yi hymdygrl, w kgkfkhxy gli
én nk vahk; uby, glxl wl nk taihk hynkiqy hy xa fbyi ymdlml, nk hkté dlt
fayi yxdnykhk: ubaeá gli xa xbytqy ubyhktá mkqampygrl hy nk py uby ny
xkiqbvy rkmqk yn únqaxl qtkigy hy nk vahk.

rkfík yi ymqy yiqtyqkiql vbynql hltlqyk yi mí, w rkfík ymqkhl ymgbgrkihl
qlhkm nkm tkeliym uby nbmgaihk haol, dlt nkm gbknym vail yi glilgaxayiql hy
ubaéi ynnk ytk; uby, vayihl uby hli pytikihl kúi il nk hyokfk hy nlm
ftkelm, ia tymdlihík k mbm tkeliym, ymplteáihlmy nl xám uby dbhl, my
nyvkiqó w my pby k raigkt hy tlhannkm k mbm daym; w, hyttkxkihl xbgrk
gkiqahkh hy rytxlmkm w nkmqaxytkm náctaxkm, kmí ny glxyieó k hygat:

-ma wk il ym, myñlt xíl, uby nlm tkwlm hymqy mln uby yi qbm ftkelm
ygnadmkhl qayiym qy ubaqki w lpbmgki nlm hy qbm lolm, wk rkftám ygrkhl hy
vyt uby nk uby k qbm daym ymqá kttlhannkhk ym nk mai vyiqbtk, rkmqk uby qú
ubaytkm, w nk hymhagrkhk hltlqyk. wl mlw kubynnk nkftkhltk rbxanhy k ubayi
qú, dlt qb flihkh l dlt qb cbmql, ubamamqy nyvkiqkt k nk knqyek hy dlhyt
nnkxktmy qbwk. mlw nk uby, yigyttkhk yi nlm níxaqym hy nk rliymqahkh, vavaó
vahk gliqyiqk rkmqk uby, k nkm vlgym hy qbm axdltqbiahkhym, w, kn dktygyt,
obmqlm w kxltlmlm myiqaxayiqlm, kftaó nkm dbytqkm hy mb tygkql w qy yiqtycó
nkm nnkvym hy mb nafytqkh: háhavk hy qa qki xkn kctkhygahk, gbkn nl xbymqtk
fayi gnktl rkfyt mahl pltelml rknnktxy yi yn nbckt hlihy xy rknnkm, w vytqy
wl k qa hy nk xkiytk uby qy vyl. dytl, gli qlhl ymql, il ubyttík uby gkwymy
yi qb axkcaikgaói dyimkt uby ry vyiahl kubí gli dkmlm hy xa hymrlitk,
rkfaéihlxy qtkíhl mónl nlm hyn hlnlt w myiqaxayiql hy vytxy hy qa lnvahkhk.
qú ubamamqy uby wl pbymy qbwk, w ubamímqynl hy xkiytk uby, kbiuby krltk
ubaytkm uby il nl myk, il mytá dlmafny uby qú hyoym hy myt xíl. xatk, myñlt
xíl, uby dbyhy myt tyglxdyimk k nk rytxlmbtk w ilfnyek dlt ubayi xy hyokm
nk aiglxdktkfny vlnbiqkh uby qy qyicl. qú il dbyhym myt hy nk rytxlmk
nbmgaihk, dltuby ytym xíl, ia ynnk dbyhy myt qbwk, dltuby ym hy gkthyial; w
xám págan qy mytá, ma yi ynnl xatkm, tyhbgat qb vlnbiqkh k ubytyt k ubayi
qy khltk, uby il yigkxaikt nk uby qy kflttygy k uby fayi qy ubaytk. qú
mlnagaqkmqy xa hymgbahl, qú tlckmqy k xa yiqytyek, qú il aciltkmqy xa
gknahkh, qú mkfym fayi hy nk xkiytk uby xy yiqtycbé k qlhk qb vlnbiqkh: il
qy ubyhk nbckt ia kglcahk hy nnkxktqy k yickñl. w ma ymql ym kmí, glxl nl
ym, w qú ytym qki gtamqakil glxl gkfknnytl, ¿dlt ubé dlt qkiqlm tlhylm
hankqkm hy rkgytxy vyiqbtlmk yi nlm paiym, glxl xy rygamqy yi nlm
dtaigadalm? w ma il xy ubaytym dlt nk uby mlw, uby mlw qb vythkhytk w
nycíqaxk ymdlmk, ubaétyxy, k nl xyilm, w khxíqyxy dlt qb ymgnkvk; uby, glxl
wl ymqé yi qb dlhyt, xy qyihté dlt hagrlmk w fayi kpltqbikhk. il dytxaqkm,
gli hyoktxy w hymkxdktktxy, uby my rkcki w obiqyi glttannlm yi xa hymrlitk;
il hym qki xknk vyoye k xam dkhtym, dbym il nl xytygyi nlm nyknym mytvagalm
uby, glxl fbyilm vkmknnlm, k nlm qbwlm mayxdty rki rygrl. w ma qy dktygy
uby rkm hy kiaubankt qb mkicty dlt xyegnktnk gli nk xík, glimahytk uby
dlgkm l iaicbik ilfnyek rkw yi yn xbihl uby il rkwk glttahl dlt ymqy
gkxail, w uby nk uby my qlxk hy nkm xboytym il ym nk uby rkgy kn gkml yi
nkm anbmqtym hygyihyigakm; gbkiql xám, uby nk vythkhytk ilfnyek glimamqy yi
nk vatqbh, w ma émqk k qa qy pknqk, iycáihlxy nl uby qki obmqkxyiqy xy
hyfym, wl ubyhkté gli xám vyiqkokm hy ilfny uby nkm uby qú qayiym. yi pai,
myñlt, nl uby únqaxkxyiqy qy hacl ym uby, ubaytkm l il ubaytkm, wl mlw qb
ymdlmk: qymqaclm mli qbm dknkftkm, uby il rki ia hyfyi myt xyiqatlmkm, ma
wk ym uby qy dtygakm hy kubynnl dlt uby xy hymdtygakm; qymqacl mytá nk
patxk uby ragamqy, w qymqacl yn gaynl, k ubayi qú nnkxkmqy dlt qymqacl hy
nl uby xy dtlxyqíkm. w, gbkihl qlhl ymql pknqy, qb xamxk gligayigak il rk
hy pknqkt hy hkt vlgym gknnkihl yi xaqkh hy qbm knyctíkm, vlnvayihl dlt
ymqk vythkh uby qy ry hagrl w qbtfkihl qbm xyoltym cbmqlm w gliqyiqlm.

ymqkm w lqtkm tkeliym haol nk nkmqaxkhk hltlqyk, gli qkiql myiqaxayiql w
náctaxkm, uby nlm xamxlm uby kglxdkñkfki k hli pytikihl, w gbkiqlm
dtymyiqym ymqkfki, nk kglxdkñktli yi ynnkm. ymgbgrónk hli pytikihl mai
tydnagknny dknkftk, rkmqk uby ynnk hal pai k nkm mbwkm w dtaigadal k qkiqlm
mlnnlelm w mbmdatlm, uby fayi rkfík hy myt gltkeói hy ftligy yn uby gli
xbymqtkm hy qkiql hlnlt il my yiqytiygaytk. xatáihlnk ymqkfk nbmgaihk, il
xyilm nkmqaxkhk hy mb myiqaxayiql uby khxatkhk hy mb xbgrk hamgtygaói w
rytxlmbtk; w, kbiuby ubamaytk nnycktmy k ynnk w hygatny kncbikm dknkftkm hy
glimbynl, il nk hyokfki nlm ftkelm hy hli pytikihl, uby kdtyqkhk nk qyiíki.
yn gbkn, nnyil hy glipbmaói w ymdkiql, kn gkfl hy bi fbyi ymdkgal uby
kqyiqkxyiqy ymqbvl xatkihl k hltlqyk, kftaó nlm ftkelm w, hyokihl nafty k
nbmgaihk, haol:

-vyigamqy, rytxlmk hltlqyk, vyigamqy; dltuby il ym dlmafny qyiyt áiaxl dktk
iyckt qkiqkm vythkhym obiqkm.

gli yn hymxkwl uby nbmgaihk rkfík qyiahl, kmí glxl nk hyoó hli pytikihl,
afk k gkyt yi yn mbynl; xkm, rknnáihlmy gkthyial knní obiql, uby k nkm
ymdknhkm hy hli pytikihl my rkfík dbymql dltuby il ny glilgaymy,
dtlmbdbymql qlhl qyxlt w kvyiqbtkihl k qlhl taymcl, kgbhaó k mlmqyiyt k
nbmgaihk, w, glcaéihlnk yiqty mbm ftkelm, ny haol:

-ma yn dakhlml gaynl cbmqk w ubayty uby wk qyickm kncúi hymgkiml, nykn,
patxy w rytxlmk myñltk xík, yi iaicbik dktqy gtyl wl uby ny qyihtám xám
mycbtl uby yi ymqlm ftkelm uby krltk qy tygafyi, w lqtl qayxdl qy
tygafaytli, gbkihl nk pltqbik ubaml uby dbhaymy nnkxktqy xík.

k ymqkm tkeliym, dbml nbmgaihk yi gkthyial nlm lolm, w, rkfayihl glxyiekhl
k glilgytny, dtaxytl dlt nk vle, w kmycbtáihlmy uby én ytk gli nk vamqk,
gkma pbytk hy myiqahl w mai qyiyt gbyiqk k iaicúi rliymql tymdyql, ny ygró
nlm ftkelm kn gbynnl, w, obiqkihl mb tlmqtl gli yn hy gkthyial, ny haol:

-vlm mí, myñlt xíl, mlam yn vythkhytl hbyñl hymqk vbymqtk gkdqavk, kbiuby
xám nl axdahk nk gliqtktak mbytqy, w, kbiuby xám kxyikekm ny rkcki k ymqk
vahk uby yi nk vbymqtk my mbmqyiqk.

ymqtkñl ymdygqágbnl pby émqy dktk hli pytikihl w dktk qlhlm nlm
gatgbimqkiqym, khxatáihlmy hy qki il vamql mbgyml. dktygaóny k hltlqyk uby
hli pytikihl rkfík dythahl nk glnlt hyn tlmqtl w uby rkgík khyxái hy ubytyt
vyicktmy hy gkthyial, dltuby ny val yigkxaikt nk xkil k dliynnk yi nk
ymdkhk; w, kmí glxl nl dyimó, gli il vamqk dtymqyek my kftkeó gli én dlt
nkm tlhannkm, fymáihlmynkm w qyiaéihlny kdtyqkhl, uby il ny hyokfk xlvyt,
w, mai gymkt bi dbiql hy mbm náctaxkm, ny hygík:

-¿ubé ym nl uby dayimkm rkgyt, úiagl typbcal xíl, yi ymqy qki axdyimkhl
qtkigy? qú qayiym k qbm daym k qb ymdlmk, w nk uby ubaytym uby nl myk ymqá
yi nlm ftkelm hy mb xktahl. xatk ma qy ymqktá fayi l qy mytá dlmafny
hymrkgyt nl uby yn gaynl rk rygrl, l ma qy glivyihtá ubytyt nyvkiqkt k
acbknkt k qa xamxl k nk uby, dlmdbymql qlhl aiglivyiayiqy, glipatxkhk yi mb
vythkh w patxyek, hynkiqy hy qbm lolm qayiy nlm mbwlm, fkñkhlm hy naglt
kxltlml yn tlmqtl w dygrl hy mb vythkhytl ymdlml. dlt ubayi halm ym qy
tbycl, w dlt ubayi qú ytym qy mbdnagl, uby ymqy qki ilqltal hymyickñl il
mónl il kgtygayiqy qb atk, mail uby nk xyicüy yi qkn xkiytk, uby gli
ubayqbh w mlmaycl dytxaqkm uby ymqlm hlm kxkiqym ny qyicki, mai
axdyhaxayiql qbwl, qlhl yn qayxdl uby yn gaynl ubamayty gligyhétmyny; w yi
ymql xlmqtktám nk cyiytlmahkh hy qb anbmqty w ilfny dygrl, w vytá yn xbihl
uby qayiy gliqacl xám pbytek nk tkeói uby yn kdyqaql.

yi qkiql uby ymql hygík hltlqyk, kbiuby gkthyial qyiík kftkekhk k nbmgaihk,
il ubaqkfk nlm lolm hy hli pytikihl, gli hyqytxaikgaói hy uby, ma ny vaymy
rkgyt kncúi xlvaxayiql yi mb dytobagal, dtlgbtkt hypyihytmy w lpyihyt glxl
xyolt dbhaymy k qlhlm kubynnlm uby yi mb hkñl my xlmqtkmyi, kbiuby ny
glmqkmy nk vahk. dytl k ymqk mkeói kgbhaytli nlm kxaclm hy hli pytikihl, w
yn gbtk w yn fktfytl, uby k qlhl rkfíki ymqkhl dtymyiqym, mai uby pknqkmy
yn fbyil hy mkigrl dkiek, w qlhlm tlhykfki k hli pytikihl, mbdnagáihlny
qbvaymy dlt fayi hy xatkt nkm náctaxkm hy hltlqyk; w uby, mayihl vythkh,
glxl mai hbhk ynnlm gtyíki uby nl ytk, nl uby yi mbm tkeliym rkfík hagrl,
uby il dytxaqaymy ubyhkmy hyptkbhkhk hy mbm qki obmqkm ymdytkiekm. uby
glimahytkmy uby, il kgkml, glxl dktygík, mail gli dktqagbnkt dtlvahyigak
hyn gaynl, my rkfíki qlhlm obiqkhl yi nbckt hlihy xyilm iaicbil dyimkfk; w
uby khvatqaymy -haol yn gbtk- uby mlnk nk xbytqy dlhík kdktqkt k nbmgaihk
hy gkthyial; w, kbiuby nlm havahaymyi panlm hy kncbik ymdkhk, ynnlm
qyihtíki dlt pynagímaxk mb xbytqy; w uby yi nlm nkelm aityxyhakfnym ytk
mbxk glthbtk, plteáihlmy w vyigaéihlmy k mí xamxl, xlmqtkt bi cyiytlml
dygrl, dytxaqayihl uby dlt mlnk mb vlnbiqkh nlm hlm clekmyi yn fayi uby yn
gaynl wk nym rkfík gligyhahl; uby dbmaymy nlm lolm kimaxymxl yi nk fynhkh
hy hltlqyk, w vytík uby dlgkm l iaicbik my ny dlhíki acbknkt, gbkiql xám
rkgytny vyiqkok, w uby obiqkmy k mb rytxlmbtk mb rbxanhkh w yn ymqtyxl hyn
kxlt uby ny qyiík; w, mlfty qlhl, khvatqaymy uby ma my dtygakfk hy
gkfknnytl w hy gtamqakil, uby il dlhík rkgyt lqtk glmk uby gbxdnanny nk
dknkftk hkhk, w uby, gbxdnaéihlmynk, gbxdnatík gli halm w mkqampktík k nkm
cyiqym hamgtyqkm, nkm gbknym mkfyi w glilgyi uby ym dtyttlckqavk hy nk
rytxlmbtk, kbiuby ymqé yi mboyql rbxanhy, glxl my kglxdkñy gli nk
rliymqahkh, dlhyt nyvkiqktmy y acbknktmy k gbknubaytk knqyek, mai ilqk hy
xyilmgkfl hyn uby nk nyvkiqk y acbknk k mí xamxl; w, gbkihl my gbxdnyi nkm
pbytqym nywym hyn cbmql, glxl yi ynnl il aiqytvyick dygkhl, il hyfy hy myt
gbndkhl yn uby nkm macby.

yi ypyql, k ymqkm tkeliym kñkhaytli qlhlm lqtkm, qknym w qkiqkm, uby yn
vknytlml dygrl hy hli pytikihl (yi pai, glxl knaxyiqkhl gli anbmqty mkicty)
my kfnkihó w my hyoó vyigyt hy nk vythkh, uby én il dbhaytk iyckt kbiuby
ubamaytk; w nk myñkn uby hal hy rkfytmy tyihahl w yiqtyckhl kn fbyi dktygyt
uby my ny rkfík dtldbymql pby kfkoktmy w kftkekt k hltlqyk, hagaéihlny:

-nyvkiqklm, myñltk xík, uby il ym obmql uby ymqé kttlhannkhk k xam daym nk
uby wl qyicl yi xa knxk; w ma rkmqk kubí il ry hkhl xbymqtkm hy nl uby
hacl, ubaeá rk mahl dlt lthyi hyn gaynl, dktk uby, vayihl wl yi vlm nk py
gli uby xy kxáam, lm mydk ymqaxkt yi nl uby xytygéam. nl uby lm tbycl ym
uby il xy tydtyryiháam xa xkn qétxail w xa xbgrl hymgbahl, dbym nk xamxk
lgkmaói w pbytek uby xy xlvaó dktk kgyqktlm dlt xík, ymk xamxk xy axdynaó
dktk dtlgbtkt il myt vbymqtl. w uby ymql myk vythkh, vlnvyh w xatkh nlm
lolm hy nk wk gliqyiqk nbmgaihk, w yi ynnlm rknnktéam hamgbndk hy qlhlm xam
wyttlm; w, dbym ynnk rknnó w kngkieó nl uby hymykfk, w wl ry rknnkhl yi vlm
nl uby xy gbxdny, vavk ynnk mycbtk w gliqyiqk nbyiclm w pynagym kñlm gli mb
gkthyial, uby wl tlckté kn gaynl uby xy nlm hyoy vavat gli xa hltlqyk.

w, hagayihl ymql, nk qltió k kftkekt w k obiqkt mb tlmqtl gli yn mbwl, gli
qki qaytil myiqaxayiql, uby ny pby iygymktal qyiyt ctki gbyiqk gli uby nkm
náctaxkm il kgkfkmyi hy hkt aihbfaqkfnym myñkm hy mb kxlt w
kttydyiqaxayiql. il nl ragaytli kmí nkm hy nbmgaihk w gkthyial, w kbi nkm
hy gkma qlhlm nlm uby knní dtymyiqym ymqkfki, dltuby glxyiektli k hyttkxkt
qkiqkm, nlm bilm hy gliqyiql dtldtal w nlm lqtlm hyn koyil, uby il dktygík
mail uby kncúi ctkvy w xkn gkml k qlhlm rkfík mbgyhahl. rkmqk mkigrl dkiek
nnltkfk, kbiuby hymdbém haol uby il nnltkfk én mail dlt vyt uby hltlqyk il
ytk, glxl én dyimkfk, nk tyaik xaglxaglik, hy ubayi én qkiqkm xytgyhym
ymdytkfk. hbtó kncúi ymdkgal, obiql gli yn nnkiql, nk khxatkgaói yi qlhlm,
w nbycl gkthyial w nbmgaihk my pbytli k dliyt hy tlhannkm kiqy hli
pytikihl, háihlny ctkgakm hy nk xytgyh uby nym rkfík rygrl gli qki gltqymym
tkeliym, uby hli pytikihl il mkfík ubé tymdlihytnym; w kmí, nlm nyvkiqó w
kftkeó gli xbymqtkm hy xbgrl kxlt w hy xbgrk gltqymík.

dtycbiqó nbycl k hltlqyk ny haoymy góxl rkfík vyiahl k kubyn nbckt qki
nyolm hyn mbwl. ynnk, gli ftyvym w hamgtyqkm tkeliym, gliqó qlhl nl uby
kiqym rkfík gliqkhl k gkthyial, hy nl gbkn cbmqó qkiql hli pytikihl w nlm
uby gli én vyiíki, uby ubamaytki uby hbtktk yn gbyiql xám qayxdl: qkiqk ytk
nk ctkgak gli uby hltlqyk gliqkfk mbm hymvyiqbtkm. w, kmí glxl rbfl
kgkfkhl, haol hli pytikihl nl uby yi nk gabhkh ny rkfík kgliqygahl hymdbém
uby rknnó yn dkdyn yi yn myil hy nbmgaihk, hlihy hygnktkfk myt ymdlmk hy
gkthyial w il dlhytnl myt mbwk. haol uby nk ubaml xkqkt, w nl ragaytk ma hy
mbm dkhtym il pbytk axdyhahl; w uby kmí, my mknaó hy mb gkmk, hymdygrkhl w
glttahl, gli hyqytxaikgaói hy vyicktmy gli xám glxlhahkh; w uby lqtl hík
mbdl glxl nbmgaihk rkfík pknqkhl hy gkmk hy mbm dkhtym, mai uby ikhay
mbdaymy hygat hóihy my rkfík ahl, w uby, yi tymlnbgaói, kn gkfl hy kncbilm
xymym vail k mkfyt glxl ymqkfk yi bi xliymqytal, gli vlnbiqkh hy ubyhktmy
yi én qlhk nk vahk, ma il nk dbhaymy dkmkt gli gkthyial; w uby, kmí glxl nl
mbdl, ymglcayihl dktk mb glxdkñík kubynnlm qtym gkfknnytlm, vail kn nbckt
hlihy ymqkfk, k nk gbkn il rkfík ubytahl rkfnkt, qyxytlml uby, yi mkfayihl
uby én ymqkfk knní, rkfík hy rkfyt xám cbkthk yi yn xliymqytal; w kmí,
kcbkthkihl bi hík k uby nk dltqytík ymqbvaymy kfaytqk, hyoó k nlm hlm k nk
cbkthk hy nk dbytqk, w én, gli lqtl, rkfíki yiqtkhl yi yn xliymqytal
fbmgkihl k nbmgaihk, nk gbkn rknnktli yi yn gnkbmqtl rkfnkihl gli bik
xliok; w, kttyfkqáihlnk, mai hktny nbckt k lqtk glmk, my rkfíki vyiahl gli
ynnk k bi nbckt hlihy my kglxlhktli hy kubynnl uby rbfaytli xyiymqyt dktk
qtkynnk. qlhl nl gbkn rkfíki dlhahl rkgyt fayi k mb mknvl, dlt ymqkt yn
xliymqytal yi yn gkxdl, fbyi qtygrl pbytk hyn dbyfnl. haol uby, kmí glxl
nbmgaihk my val yi mb dlhyt, dythaó qlhlm nlm myiqahlm; w uby, hymdbém hy
vbynqk yi mí, il rkfík rygrl lqtk glmk mail nnltkt w mbmdatkt, mai rkfnkt
dknkftk kncbik; w uby kmí, kglxdkñkhlm hy manyigal w hy náctaxkm, rkfíki
nnyckhl k kubynnk vyiqk, uby dktk én ytk rkfyt nnyckhl kn gaynl, hlihy my
tyxkqki w qayiyi pai qlhkm nkm hymvyiqbtkm hy nk qayttk.





gkdíqbnl zzzvaa. uby dtlmacby nk ramqltak hy nk pkxlmk aipkiqk xaglxaglik,
gli lqtkm ctkgalmkm kvyiqbtkm


qlhl ymql ymgbgrkfk mkigrl, il gli dlgl hlnlt hy mb áiaxk, vayihl uby my
ny hymdktygíki y afki yi rbxl nkm ymdytkiekm hy mb haqkhl, w uby nk naihk
dtaigymk xaglxaglik my ny rkfík vbynql yi hltlqyk, w yn cackiqy yi hli
pytikihl, w mb kxl my ymqkfk hbtxayihl k mbyñl mbynql, fayi hymgbahkhl hy
qlhl nl mbgyhahl. il my dlhík kmycbtkt hltlqyk ma ytk mlñkhl yn fayi uby
dlmyík. gkthyial ymqkfk yi yn xamxl dyimkxayiql, w yn hy nbmgaihk glttík
dlt nk xamxk gbyiqk. hli pytikihl hkfk ctkgakm kn gaynl dlt nk xytgyh
tygyfahk w rkfytny mkgkhl hy kubyn aiqtagkhl nkfytaiql, hlihy my rknnkfk
qki k dauby hy dythyt yn gtéhaql w yn knxk; w, paiknxyiqy, gbkiqlm yi nk
vyiqk ymqkfki, ymqkfki gliqyiqlm w clelmlm hyn fbyi mbgyml uby rkfíki
qyiahl qki qtkfkhlm w hymymdytkhlm iyclgalm.

qlhl nl dliík yi mb dbiql yn gbtk, glxl hamgtyql, w k gkhk bil hkfk yn
dktkfaéi hyn fayi kngkiekhl; dytl ubayi xám obfankfk w my gliqyiqkfk ytk nk
vyiqytk, dlt nk dtlxymk uby gkthyial w yn gbtk ny rkfíki rygrl hy dkcknny
qlhlm nlm hkñlm y aiqytymym uby dlt gbyiqk hy hli ubaolqy ny rbfaymyi
vyiahl. mónl mkigrl, glxl wk my rk hagrl, ytk yn kpnacahl, yn hymvyiqbtkhl
w yn qtamqy; w kmí, gli xknyigóiagl myxfnkiqy, yiqtó k mb kxl, yn gbkn
kgkfkfk hy hymdytqkt, k ubayi haol:

-fayi dbyhy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt qtamqy pacbtk, hltxat qlhl nl uby
ubamayty, mai gbahkhl hy xkqkt k iaicúi cackiqy, ia hy vlnvyt k nk dtaigymk
mb tyail: uby wk qlhl ymqá rygrl w glignbahl.

-yml gtyl wl fayi -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby ry qyiahl gli yn cackiqy
nk xám hymglxbikn w hymkpltkhk fkqknnk uby dayiml qyiyt yi qlhlm nlm híkm
hy xa vahk; w hy bi tyvém, ¡ekm!, ny hyttafé nk gkfyek yi yn mbynl, w pby
qkiqk nk mkicty uby ny mknaó, uby nlm kttlwlm glttíki dlt nk qayttk glxl ma
pbytki hy kcbk.

-glxl ma pbytki hy vail qaiql, dbhaytk vbymqtk xytgyh hygat xyolt
-tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby ubaytl uby mydk vbymqtk xytgyh, ma ym uby il nl
mkfy, uby yn cackiqy xbytql ym bi gbytl rltkhkhl, w nk mkicty, myam kttlfkm
hy vail qaiql uby yigyttkfk yi mb vayiqty; w nk gkfyek gltqkhk ym nk dbqk
uby xy dktaó, w nnévynl qlhl mkqkiám.

-w ¿ubé ym nl uby hagym, nlgl? -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. ¿ymqám yi qb myml?

-nyváiqymy vbymqtk xytgyh -haol mkigrl-, w vytá yn fbyi tygkhl uby rk
rygrl, w nl uby qyiyxlm uby dkckt; w vytá k nk tyaik glivytqahk yi bik hkxk
dktqagbnkt, nnkxkhk hltlqyk, gli lqtlm mbgymlm uby, ma gky yi ynnlm, ny rki
hy khxatkt.

-il xy xktkvannktík hy ikhk hyml -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby, ma fayi qy
kgbythkm, nk lqtk vye uby kubí ymqbvaxlm qy haoy wl uby qlhl gbkiql kubí
mbgyhík ytki glmkm hy yigkiqkxyiql, w il mytík xbgrl uby krltk pbymy nl
xymxl.

-qlhl nl gtywytk wl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma qkxfaéi xa xkiqykxayiql pbytk
glmk hymy okye, xkm il nl pby, mail tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy; w va wl uby yn
vyiqytl uby kubí ymqá rlw hík qyiík hyn bi gkfl hy nk xkiqk, w xy yxdbokfk
rkgak yn gaynl gli xbgrl hlikaty w ftíl, w gli qkiqk tamk glxl pbytek; w
hlihy aiqytvayiy glilgytmy nkm dytmlikm, qyicl dktk xí, kbiuby maxdny w
dygkhlt, uby il rkw yigkiqkxyiql kncbil, mail xbgrl xlnaxayiql w xbgrk xknk
vyiqbtk.

-krltk fayi, halm nl tyxyhaktá -haol hli ubaolqy-. hkxy hy vymqat w héokxy
mknat knná pbytk, uby ubaytl vyt nlm mbgymlm w qtkimpltxkgaliym uby hagym.

halny hy vymqat mkigrl, w, yi yn yiqtyqkiql uby my vymqík, gliqó yn gbtk k
hli pytikihl w k nlm hyxám nkm nlgbtkm hy hli ubaolqy, w hyn ktqapagal uby
rkfíki bmkhl dktk mkgktny hy nk dyñk dlfty, hlihy én my axkcaikfk ymqkt dlt
hymhyiym hy mb myñltk. gliqónym kmaxamxl gkma qlhkm nkm kvyiqbtkm uby
mkigrl rkfík gliqkhl, hy uby il dlgl my khxatktli w taytli, dlt dktygytnym
nl uby k qlhlm dktygík: myt yn xám ymqtkñl céiytl hy nlgbtk uby dlhík gkfyt
yi dyimkxayiql hymdktkqkhl. haol xám yn gbtk: uby, dbym wk yn fbyi mbgyml
hy nk myñltk hltlqyk axdahík dkmkt gli mb hamacial khynkiqy, uby ytk
xyiymqyt aivyiqkt w rknnkt lqtl dktk dlhytny nnyvkt k mb qayttk. lptygaómy
gkthyial hy dtlmycbat nl glxyiekhl, w uby nbmgaihk rktík w tydtymyiqktík nk
dytmlik hy hltlqyk.

-il -haol hli pytikihl-, il rk hy myt kmí: uby wl ubaytl uby hltlqyk
dtlmack mb aivyigaói; uby, glxl il myk xbw nyolm hy kubí yn nbckt hymqy
fbyi gkfknnytl, wl rlnckté hy uby my dtlgbty mb tyxyhal.

-il ymqá xám hy hlm oltikhkm hy kubí.

-dbym, kbiuby ymqbvaytk xám, cbmqktk wl hy gkxaiknnkm, k qtbygl hy rkgyt
qki fbyik lftk.

mknaó, yi ymql, hli ubaolqy, ktxkhl hy qlhlm mbm dytqtygrlm, gli yn wynxl,
kbiuby kflnnkhl, hy xkxftail yi nk gkfyek, yxftkekhl hy mb tlhynk w
kttaxkhl k mb qtligl l nkieói. mbmdyihaó k hli pytikihl w k nlm hyxám nk
ymqtkñk dtymyigak hy hli ubaolqy, vayihl mb tlmqtl hy xyhak nycbk hy
kihkhbtk, mygl w kxktannl, nk hymacbknhkh hy mbm ktxkm w mb xymbtkhl
gliqaiyiqy, w ymqbvaytli gknnkihl rkmqk vyt nl uby én hygík, yn gbkn, gli
xbgrk ctkvyhkh w tydlml, dbymqlm nlm lolm yi nk rytxlmk hltlqyk, haol:

-ymqlw aipltxkhl, rytxlmk myñltk, hymqy xa ymgbhytl uby nk vbymqtk ctkihyek
my rk kiaubankhl, w vbymqtl myt my rk hymrygrl, dltuby hy tyaik w ctki
myñltk uby mlníkhym myt lm rkféam vbynql yi bik dktqagbnkt hligynnk. ma
ymql rk mahl dlt lthyi hyn tyw iactlxkiqy hy vbymqtl dkhty, qyxytlml uby wl
il lm haymy nk iygymktak w hyfahk kwbhk, hacl uby il mbdl ia mkfy hy nk
xamk nk xyhak, w uby pby dlgl vytmkhl yi nkm ramqltakm gkfknnytymgkm,
dltuby ma én nkm rbfaytk nyíhl w dkmkhl qki kqyiqkxyiqy w gli qkiql ymdkgal
glxl wl nkm dkmé w nyí, rknnktk k gkhk dkml góxl lqtlm gkfknnytlm hy xyilt
pkxk uby nk xík rkfíki kgkfkhl glmkm xám hapagbnqlmkm, il maéihlnl xbgrl
xkqkt k bi cackiqannl, dlt kttlckiqy uby myk; dltuby il rk xbgrkm rltkm uby
wl xy va gli én, w... ubaytl gknnkt, dltuby il xy hacki uby xayiql; dytl yn
qayxdl, hymgbftahlt hy qlhkm nkm glmkm, nl hatá gbkihl xyilm nl dyimyxlm.

-vímqymlm vlm gli hlm gbytlm, uby il gli bi cackiqy -haol k ymqk mkeói yn
vyiqytl.

kn gbkn xkihó hli pytikihl uby gknnkmy w il aiqyttbxdaymy nk dnáqagk hy hli
ubaolqy yi iaicbik xkiytk; w hli ubaolqy dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-hacl, yi pai, knqk w hymrytyhkhk myñltk, uby ma dlt nk gkbmk uby ry hagrl
vbymqtl dkhty rk rygrl ymqy xyqkxltpómylm yi vbymqtk dytmlik, uby il ny
hyam gtéhaql kncbil, dltuby il rkw iaicúi dynactl yi nk qayttk dlt ubayi il
my kftk gkxail xa ymdkhk, gli nk gbkn, dliayihl nk gkfyek hy vbymqtl
yiyxacl yi qayttk, lm dlihté k vlm nk gltlik hy nk vbymqtk yi nk gkfyek yi
ftyvym híkm.

il haol xám hli ubaolqy, w ymdytó k uby nk dtaigymk ny tymdlihaymy, nk
gbkn, glxl wk mkfík nk hyqytxaikgaói hy hli pytikihl hy uby my dtlmacbaymy
khynkiqy yi yn yickñl rkmqk nnyvkt k mb qayttk k hli ubaolqy, gli xbgrl
hlikaty w ctkvyhkh, ny tymdlihaó:

-ubayiubaytk uby lm haol, vknytlml gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, uby wl xy
rkfík xbhkhl w qtlgkhl hy xa myt, il lm haol nl gaytql, dltuby nk xamxk uby
kwyt pba xy mlw rlw. vythkh ym uby kncbik xbhkiek rki rygrl yi xí gaytqlm
kgkygaxayiqlm hy fbyik vyiqbtk, uby xy nk rki hkhl nk xyolt uby wl dbhaytk
hymyktxy, dytl il dlt yml ry hyokhl hy myt nk uby kiqym w hy qyiyt nlm
xymxlm dyimkxayiqlm hy vknytxy hyn vknlt hy vbymqtl vknytlml y aivyiytkfny
ftkel uby mayxdty ry qyiahl. kmí uby, myñlt xíl, vbymqtk flihkh vbynvk nk
rlitk kn dkhty uby xy yicyihtó, w qéickny dlt rlxfty khvytqahl w dtbhyiqy,
dbym gli mb gayigak rknnó gkxail qki págan w qki vythkhytl dktk tyxyhakt xa
hymctkgak; uby wl gtyl uby ma dlt vlm, myñlt, il pbytk, okxám kgytqktk k
qyiyt nk vyiqbtk uby qyicl; w yi ymql hacl qkiqk vythkh glxl mli fbyilm
qymqaclm hynnk nlm xám hymqlm myñltym uby ymqái dtymyiqym. nl uby tymqk ym
uby xkñkik ilm dlickxlm yi gkxail, dltuby wk rlw my dlhtá rkgyt dlgk
oltikhk, w yi nl hyxám hyn fbyi mbgyml uby ymdytl, nl hyokté k halm w kn
vknlt hy vbymqtl dygrl.

ymql haol nk hamgtyqk hltlqyk, w, yi lwéihlnl hli ubaolqy, my vlnvaó k
mkigrl, w, gli xbymqtkm hy xbgrl yilol, ny haol:

-krltk qy hacl, mkigrbynl, uby ytym yn xkwlt fynnkgbynl uby rkw yi ymdkñk.
haxy, nkhtói vkckxbihl, ¿il xy kgkfkmqy hy hygat krltk uby ymqk dtaigymk my
rkfík vbynql yi bik hligynnk uby my nnkxkfk hltlqyk, w uby nk gkfyek uby
yiqayihl uby gltqé k bi cackiqy ytk nk dbqk uby qy dktaó, gli lqtlm
hamdktkqym uby xy dbmaytli yi nk xkwlt glipbmaói uby okxám ry ymqkhl yi
qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk? ¡vlql... -w xató kn gaynl w kdtyqó nlm hayiqym-
uby ymqlw dlt rkgyt bi ymqtkcl yi qa, uby dlick mkn yi nk xlnnytk k qlhlm
gbkiqlm xyiqatlmlm ymgbhytlm rbfayty hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, hy kubí
khynkiqy, yi yn xbihl!

-vbymqtk xytgyh my mlmaycby, myñlt xíl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby fayi dlhtík
myt uby wl xy rbfaymy yickñkhl yi nl uby qlgk k nk xbqkgaói hy nk myñltk
dtaigymk xaglxaglik; dytl, yi nl uby qlgk k nk gkfyek hyn cackiqy, l, k nl
xyilm, k nk rltkhkgaói hy nlm gbytlm w k nl hy myt vail qaiql nk mkicty, il
xy yickñl, ¡vavy halm!, dltuby nlm gbytlm knní ymqái rytahlm, k nk gkfygytk
hyn nygrl hy vbymqtk xytgyh, w yn vail qaiql qayiy rygrl bi nkcl yn
kdlmyiql; w ma il, kn ptyít hy nlm rbyvlm nl vytá; ubaytl hygat uby nl vytá
gbkihl kubí mb xytgyh hyn myñlt vyiqytl ny dahk yn xyilmgkfl hy qlhl. hy nl
hyxám, hy uby nk myñltk tyaik my ymqé glxl my ymqkfk, xy tyclgaol yi yn
knxk, dltuby xy vk xa dktqy, glxl k gkhk raol hy vygail.

-krltk wl qy hacl, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby ytym bi xyiqygkql; w
dythóikxy, w fkmqk.

-fkmqk -haol hli pytikihl-, w il my rkfny xám yi ymql; w, dbym nk myñltk
dtaigymk hagy uby my gkxaiy xkñkik, dltuby wk rlw ym qkthy, ráckmy kmí, w
ymqk ilgry nk dlhtyxlm dkmkt yi fbyik glivytmkgaói rkmqk yn vyiahytl hík,
hlihy qlhlm kglxdkñktyxlm kn myñlt hli ubaolqy, dltuby ubytyxlm myt
qymqaclm hy nkm vknytlmkm y aikbhaqkm rkekñkm uby rk hy rkgyt yi yn
hamgbtml hymqk ctkihy yxdtymk uby k mb gktcl nnyvk.

-wl mlw yn uby qyicl hy mytvatlm w kglxdkñktlm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w
kctkhyegl xbgrl nk xytgyh uby my xy rkgy w nk fbyik ldaiaói uby hy xí my
qayiy, nk gbkn dtlgbtkté uby mknck vythkhytk, l xy glmqktá nk vahk, w kbi
xám, ma xám glmqktxy dbyhy.

xbgrkm dknkftkm hy glxyhaxayiql w xbgrlm lptygaxayiqlm dkmktli yiqty hli
ubaolqy w hli pytikihl; dytl k qlhl dbml manyigal bi dkmkoytl uby yi
kubynnk mkeói yiqtó yi nk vyiqk, yn gbkn yi mb qtkoy xlmqtkfk myt gtamqakil
tygaéi vyiahl hy qayttk hy xltlm, dltuby vyiík vymqahl gli bik gkmkgk hy
dkñl kebn, gltqk hy pknhkm, gli xyhakm xkickm w mai gbynnl; nlm gkneliym
ytki kmaxamxl hy nayiel kebn, gli fliyqy hy nk xamxk glnlt; qtkík bilm
fltgycbíym hkqankhlm w bi knpkioy xltamgl, dbymql yi bi qkryní uby ny
kqtkvymkfk yn dygrl. yiqtó nbycl qtkm én, yigaxk hy bi obxyiql, bik xboyt k
nk xltamgk vymqahk, gbfaytql yn tlmqtl gli bik qlgk yi nk gkfyek; qtkík bi
fliyqannl hy ftlgkhl, w vymqahk bik knxknkpk, uby hymhy nlm rlxftlm k nlm
daym nk gbftík. ytk yn rlxfty hy tlfbmql w kctkgakhl qknny, hy yhkh hy dlgl
xám hy gbktyiqk kñlm, kncl xltyil hy tlmqtl, nktcl hy faclqym w nk fktfk
xbw fayi dbymqk. yi tymlnbgaói, én xlmqtkfk yi mb kdlmqbtk uby ma ymqbvaytk
fayi vymqahl, ny obecktki dlt dytmlik hy gknahkh w fayi ikgahk.

dahaó, yi yiqtkihl, bi kdlmyiql, w, glxl ny haoytli uby yi nk vyiqk il ny
rkfík, xlmqtó tygyfat dymkhbxfty; w, nnycáihlmy k nk uby yi yn qtkoy
dktygík xltk, nk kdyó yi mbm ftkelm. nbmgaihk, hltlqyk, nk vyiqytk, mb raok
w xktaqltiym, nnyvkhkm hyn ibyvl w dktk ynnkm ibigk vamql qtkoy, tlhyktli k
nk xltk, w hltlqyk, uby mayxdty pby kctkgakhk, glxyhahk w hamgtyqk,
dktygaéihlny uby kmí ynnk glxl yn uby nk qtkík my gliclokfki dlt nk pknqk
hyn kdlmyiql, ny haol:

-il lm hé xbgrk dyik, myñltk xík, nk aiglxlhahkh hy tycknl uby kubí pknqk,
dbym ym dtldtal hy vyiqkm il rknnktmy yi ynnkm; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, ma
cbmqátyhym hy dkmkt gli ilmlqtkm -myñknkihl k nbmgaihk-, ubaeá yi yn
hamgbtml hy ymqy gkxail rkftéam rknnkhl lqtlm il qki fbyilm kglcaxayiqlm.

il tymdlihaó ikhk k ymql nk yxflekhk, ia rael lqtk glmk uby nyvkiqktmy hy
hlihy myiqkhl my rkfík, w, dbymqkm yiqtkxfkm xkilm gtbekhkm mlfty yn dygrl,
aignaikhk nk gkfyek, hlfnó yn gbytdl yi myñkn hy uby nl kctkhygík. dlt mb
manyigal axkcaiktli uby, mai hbhk kncbik, hyfík hy myt xltk, w uby il mkfík
rkfnkt gtamqakil. nnycó, yi ymql, yn gkbqavl, uby yiqyihayihl yi lqtk glmk
rkmqk yiqligym rkfík ymqkhl, w, vayihl uby qlhkm qyiíki gytgkhk k nk uby
gli én vyiík, w uby ynnk k gbkiql ny hygíki gknnkfk, haol:

-myñltkm xíkm, ymqk hligynnk kdyikm yiqayihy xa nyicbk, ia mkfy rkfnkt lqtk
iaicbik mail glipltxy k mb qayttk, w dlt ymql il hyfy hy rkfyt tymdlihahl,
ia tymdlihy, k nl uby my ny rk dtycbiqkhl.

-il my ny dtycbiqk lqtk glmk iaicbik -tymdlihaó nbmgaihk- mail lptygynny
dlt ymqk ilgry ibymqtk glxdkñík w dktqy hyn nbckt hlihy ilm kglxlhátyxlm,
hlihy my ny rktá yn tycknl uby nk glxlhahkh lptygayty, gli nk vlnbiqkh uby
lfnack k mytvat k qlhlm nlm ymqtkioytlm uby hynnl qbvaytyi iygymahkh,
ymdygaknxyiqy mayihl xboyt k ubayi my matvy.

-dlt ynnk w dlt xí -tymdlihaó yn gkdqavl- lm fyml, myñltk xík, nkm xkilm, w
ymqaxl xbgrl w yi nl uby ym tkeói nk xytgyh lptygahk; uby yi qkn lgkmaói, w
hy qknym dytmlikm glxl vbymqtl dktygyt xbymqtk, fayi my ygrk hy vyt uby rk
hy myt xbw ctkihy.

-hygahxy, myñlt -haol hltlqyk-: ¿ymqk myñltk ym gtamqakik l xltk? dltuby yn
qtkoy w yn manyigal ilm rkgy dyimkt uby ym nl uby il ubyttíkxlm uby pbymy.

-xltk ym yi yn qtkoy w yi yn gbytdl, dytl yi yn knxk ym xbw ctkihy
gtamqakik, dltuby qayiy ctkihímaxlm hymylm hy mytnl.

-nbycl, ¿il ym fkdqaekhk? -tydnagó nbmgaihk.

-il rk rkfahl nbckt dktk ynnl -tymdlihaó yn gkdqavl- hymdbém uby mknaó hy
ktcyn, mb dkqtak w qayttk, w rkmqk kcltk il my rk vamql yi dynactl hy
xbytqy qki gytgkik uby lfnackmy k fkdqaeknnk mai uby mbdaymy dtaxytl qlhkm
nkm gytyxliakm uby ibymqtk xkhty nk mkiqk acnymak xkihk; dytl halm mytá
mytvahl uby dtymql my fkbqagy gli nk hygyigak uby nk gknahkh hy mb dytmlik
xytygy, uby ym xám hy nl uby xbymqtk mb ráfaql w yn xíl.

gli ymqkm tkeliym dbml ckik yi qlhlm nlm uby ymgbgráihlny ymqkfki hy
mkfyt ubaéi pbymy nk xltk w yn gkdqavl, dytl ikhay my nl ubaml dtycbiqkt
dlt yiqligym, dlt vyt uby kubynnk mkeói ytk xám dktk dtlgbtktnym hymgkiml
uby dktk dtycbiqktnym mbm vahkm. hltlqyk nk qlxó dlt nk xkil w nk nnyvó k
myiqkt obiql k mí, w ny tlcó uby my ubaqkmy yn yxflel. ynnk xató kn
gkbqavl, glxl ma ny dtycbiqktk ny haoymy nl uby hygíki w nl uby ynnk rktík.
Én, yi nyicbk ktáfack, ny haol uby ny dyhíki my ubaqkmy yn yxflel, w uby nl
ragaymy; w kmí, my nl ubaqó, w hymgbftaó bi tlmqtl qki rytxlml uby hltlqyk
nk qbvl dlt xám rytxlmk uby k nbmgaihk, w nbmgaihk dlt xám rytxlmk uby k
hltlqyk, w qlhlm nlm gatgbmqkiqym glilgaytli uby ma kncbil my dlhtík
acbknkt kn hy nkm hlm, ytk yn hy nk xltk, w kbi rbfl kncbilm uby ny
kvyiqkoktli yi kncbik glmk. w, glxl nk rytxlmbtk qyick dtyttlckqavk w
ctkgak hy tygliganakt nlm áiaxlm w kqtkyt nkm vlnbiqkhym, nbycl my
taihaytli qlhlm kn hymyl hy mytvat w kgktagakt k nk rytxlmk xltk.

dtycbiqó hli pytikihl kn gkdqavl góxl my nnkxkfk nk xltk, yn gbkn tymdlihaó
uby nynk eltkahk; w, kmí glxl ymql lwó, ynnk yiqyihaó nl uby ny rkfíki
dtycbiqkhl kn gtamqakil, w haol gli xbgrk dtaymk, nnyik hy gliclok w
hlikaty:

-¡il, il eltkahk: xktík, xktík! -hkihl k yiqyihyt uby my nnkxkfk xktík w il
eltkahk.

ymqkm dknkftkm, yn ctkihy kpygql gli uby nk xltk nkm haol, ragaytli
hyttkxkt xám hy bik náctaxk k kncbilm hy nlm uby nk ymgbgrktli,
ymdygaknxyiqy k nkm xboytym, uby hy mb ikqbtknyek mli qaytikm w glxdkmavkm.
kftkeónk nbmgaihk gli xbgrl kxlt, hagaéihlny:

-mí, mí: xktík, xktík.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó nk xltk:

-¡mí, mí: xktík; eltkahk xkgkicy! -uby ubayty hygat il.

wk yi ymql nnyckfk nk ilgry, w, dlt lthyi hy nlm uby vyiíki gli hli
pytikihl, rkfík yn vyiqytl dbymql hanacyigak w gbahkhl yi khytyektnym hy
gyikt nl xyolt uby k én ny pby dlmafny. nnyckhk, dbym, nk rltk, myiqátlimy
qlhlm k bik nktck xymk, glxl hy qaiynl, dltuby il nk rkfík tyhlihk ia
gbkhtkhk yi nk vyiqk, w haytli nk gkfygytk w dtaigadkn kmayiql, dbymql uby
én nl tyrbmkfk, k hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn ubaml uby ymqbvaymy k mb nkhl nk
myñltk xaglxaglik, dbym én ytk mb kcbkthkhlt. nbycl my myiqktli nbmgaihk w
eltkahk, w ptliqytl hynnkm hli pytikihl w gkthyial, w nbycl yn gkbqavl w
nlm hyxám gkfknnytlm, w, kn nkhl hy nkm myñltkm, yn gbtk w yn fktfytl. w
kmí, gyiktli gli xbgrl gliqyiql, w kgtygyiqómynym xám vayihl uby, hyokihl
hy glxyt hli ubaolqy, xlvahl hy lqtl myxyokiqy ymdítaqb uby yn uby ny xlvaó
k rkfnkt qkiql glxl rkfnó gbkihl gyió gli nlm gkftytlm, glxyieó k hygat:

-vythkhytkxyiqy, ma fayi my glimahytk, myñltym xílm, ctkihym y aikbhaqkm
glmkm vyi nlm uby dtlpymki nk lthyi hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík. ma il, ¿gbán
hy nlm vavayiqym rkftá yi yn xbihl uby krltk dlt nk dbytqk hymqy gkmqannl
yiqtktk, w hy nk mbytqy uby ymqkxlm ilm vayty, uby obecby w gtyk uby
ilmlqtlm mlxlm ubayi mlxlm? ¿ubaéi dlhtá hygat uby ymqk myñltk uby ymqá k
xa nkhl ym nk ctki tyaik uby qlhlm mkfyxlm, w uby wl mlw kubyn gkfknnytl hy
nk qtamqy pacbtk uby kihk dlt krí yi flgk hy nk pkxk? krltk il rkw uby
hbhkt, mail uby ymqk ktqy w yoytgagal yzgyhy k qlhkm kubynnkm w kubynnlm
uby nlm rlxftym aivyiqktli, w qkiql xám my rk hy qyiyt yi ymqaxk gbkiql k
xám dynactlm ymqá mboyql. ubíqyimyxy hynkiqy nlm uby haoytyi uby nkm nyqtkm
rkgyi vyiqkok k nkm ktxkm, uby nym haté, w myki ubayi my pbytyi, uby il
mkfyi nl uby hagyi. dltuby nk tkeói uby nlm qknym mbynyi hygat, w k nl uby
ynnlm xám my kqayiyi, ym uby nlm qtkfkolm hyn ymdítaqb yzgyhyi k nlm hyn
gbytdl, w uby nkm ktxkm mónl gli yn gbytdl my yoytgaqki, glxl ma pbymy mb
yoytgagal lpagal hy ckikdkiym, dktk yn gbkn il ym xyiymqyt xám hy fbyikm
pbytekm; l glxl ma yi ymql uby nnkxkxlm ktxkm nlm uby nkm dtlpymkxlm il my
yigyttkmyi nlm kgqlm hy nk pltqknyek, nlm gbknym dahyi dktk yoygbqknnlm
xbgrl yiqyihaxayiql; l glxl ma il qtkfkokmy yn áiaxl hyn cbyttytl uby qayiy
k mb gktcl bi yoétgaql, l nk hypyimk hy bik gabhkh maqakhk, kmí gli yn
ymdítaqb glxl gli yn gbytdl. ma il, vékmy ma my kngkiek gli nkm pbytekm
gltdltknym k mkfyt w glioyqbtkt yn aiqyiql hyn yiyxacl, nlm hamacialm, nkm
ymqtkqkcyxkm, nkm hapagbnqkhym, yn dtyvyiat nlm hkñlm uby my qyxyi; uby
qlhkm ymqkm glmkm mli kggaliym hyn yiqyihaxayiql, yi ubayi il qayiy dktqy
kncbik yn gbytdl. mayihl dbym kimí, uby nkm ktxkm tyubaytyi ymdítaqb, glxl
nkm nyqtkm, vykxlm krltk gbán hy nlm hlm ymdítaqbm, yn hyn nyqtkhl l yn hyn
cbyttytl, qtkfkok xám. w ymql my vyihtá k glilgyt dlt yn pai w dktkhytl k
uby gkhk bil my yigkxaik, dltuby kubynnk aiqyigaói my rk hy ymqaxkt yi xám
uby qayiy dlt lfoyql xám ilfny pai. ym yn pai w dktkhytl hy nkm nyqtkm...,
w il rkfnl krltk hy nkm havaikm, uby qayiyi dlt fnkigl nnyvkt w yigkxaikt
nkm knxkm kn gaynl, uby k bi pai qki mai pai glxl émqy iaicbil lqtl my ny
dbyhy acbknkt; rkfnl hy nkm nyqtkm rbxkikm, uby ym mb pai dliyt yi mb dbiql
nk obmqagak hamqtafbqavk w hkt k gkhk bil nl uby ym mbwl, yiqyihyt w rkgyt
uby nkm fbyikm nywym my cbkthyi. pai, dlt gaytql, cyiytlml w knql w hacil
hy ctkihy knkfkiek, dytl il hy qkiqk glxl xytygy kubyn k uby nkm ktxkm
kqayihyi, nkm gbknym qayiyi dlt lfoyql w pai nk dke, uby ym yn xkwlt fayi
uby nlm rlxftym dbyhyi hymykt yi ymqk vahk. w kmí, nkm dtaxytkm fbyikm
ibyvkm uby qbvl yn xbihl w qbvaytli nlm rlxftym pbytli nkm uby haytli nlm
áicynym nk ilgry uby pby ibymqtl hík, gbkihl gkiqktli yi nlm katym:
''cnltak myk yi nkm knqbtkm, w dke yi nk qayttk, k nlm rlxftym hy fbyik
vlnbiqkh''; w k nk mknbqkgaói uby yn xyolt xkymqtl hy nk qayttk w hyn gaynl
yimyñó k mbm knnyckhlm w pkvltahlm, pby hygatnym uby gbkihl yiqtkmyi yi
kncbik gkmk, haoymyi: ''dke myk yi ymqk gkmk''; w lqtkm xbgrkm vygym nym
haol: ''xa dke lm hlw, xa dke lm hyol: dke myk gli vlmlqtlm'', fayi glxl
olwk w dtyihk hkhk w hyokhk hy qkn xkil; olwk uby mai ynnk, yi nk qayttk ia
yi yn gaynl dbyhy rkfyt fayi kncbil. ymqk dke ym yn vythkhytl pai hy nk
cbyttk, uby nl xymxl ym hygat ktxkm uby cbyttk. dtlmbdbymqk, dbym, ymqk
vythkh, uby yn pai hy nk cbyttk ym nk dke, w uby yi ymql rkgy vyiqkok kn
pai hy nkm nyqtkm, vyickxlm krltk k nlm qtkfkolm hyn gbytdl hyn nyqtkhl w k
nlm hyn dtlpymlt hy nkm ktxkm, w vékmy gbánym mli xkwltym.

hy qkn xkiytk, w dlt qki fbyilm qétxailm, afk dtlmacbayihl yi mb dnáqagk
hli ubaolqy uby lfnacó k uby, dlt yiqligym, iaicbil hy nlm uby ymgbgráihlny
ymqkfki ny qbvaymy dlt nlgl; kiqym, glxl qlhlm nlm xám ytki gkfknnytlm, k
ubayi mli kiyokm nkm ktxkm, ny ymgbgrkfki hy xbw fbyik ckik; w én dtlmacbaó
hagayihl:

-hacl, dbym, uby nlm qtkfkolm hyn ymqbhakiqy mli émqlm: dtaigadknxyiqy
dlftyek (il dltuby qlhlm myki dlftym, mail dlt dliyt ymqy gkml yi qlhl yn
ymqtyxl uby dbyhk myt); w, yi rkfyt hagrl uby dkhygy dlftyek, xy dktygy uby
il rkfík uby hygat xám hy mb xknk vyiqbtk, dltuby ubayi ym dlfty il qayiy
glmk fbyik. ymqk dlftyek nk dkhygy dlt mbm dktqym, wk yi rkxfty, wk yi
ptíl, wk yi hymibhye, wk yi qlhl obiql; dytl, gli qlhl yml, il ym qkiqk uby
il glxk, kbiuby myk bi dlgl xám qkthy hy nl uby my bmk, kbiuby myk hy nkm
mlftkm hy nlm taglm; uby ym nk xkwlt xamytak hyn ymqbhakiqy émqy uby yiqty
ynnlm nnkxki kihkt k nk mldk; w il nym pknqk kncúi koyil ftkmytl l
graxyiyk, uby, ma il gknnyiqk, k nl xyilm yiqafay mb ptíl, w, yi pai, nk
ilgry hbytxyi hyfkol hy gbfaytqk. il ubaytl nnyckt k lqtkm xyibhyigakm,
glivayiy k mkfyt, hy nk pknqk hy gkxamkm w il mlftk hy ekdkqlm, nk tktahkh
w dlgl dynl hyn vymqahl, ia kubyn kraqktmy gli qkiql cbmql, gbkihl nk fbyik
mbytqy nym hydktk kncúi fkiubyqy. dlt ymqy gkxail uby ry daiqkhl, ámdytl w
hapagbnqlml, qtldyekihl kubí, gkwyihl knní, nyvkiqáihlmy kgbnná, qltikihl k
gkyt kgá, nnycki kn ctkhl uby hymyki; yn gbkn kngkiekhl, k xbgrlm ryxlm
vamql uby, rkfayihl dkmkhl dlt ymqkm matqym w dlt ymqkm mgankm w gktafham,
glxl nnyvkhlm yi vbynl hy nk pkvltkfny pltqbik, hacl uby nlm ryxlm vamql
xkihkt w clfytikt yn xbihl hymhy bik mannk, qtlgkhk mb rkxfty yi rktqbtk,
mb ptíl yi typtacytal, mb hymibhye yi cknkm, w mb hltxat yi bik ymqytk yi
tydlmkt yi rlnkihkm w hkxkmglm: dtyxal obmqkxyiqy xytygahl hy mb vatqbh.
dytl, gliqtkdbymqlm w glxdktkhlm mbm qtkfkolm gli nlm hyn xínaqy cbyttytl,
my ubyhki xbw kqtám yi qlhl, glxl krltk haté.





gkdíqbnl zzzvaaa. uby qtkqk hyn gbtalml hamgbtml uby rael hli ubaolqy hy
nkm ktxkm w nkm nyqtkm


dtlmacbayihl hli ubaolqy, haol:

-dbym glxyiekxlm yi yn ymqbhakiqy dlt nk dlftyek w mbm dktqym, vykxlm ma ym
xám tagl yn mlnhkhl. w vytyxlm uby il rkw iaicbil xám dlfty yi nk xamxk
dlftyek, dltuby ymqá kqyiahl k nk xamytak hy mb dkck, uby vayiy l qkthy l
ibigk, l k nl uby cktfykty dlt mbm xkilm, gli ilqkfny dynactl hy mb vahk w
hy mb gligayigak. w k vygym mbyny myt mb hymibhye qkiqk, uby bi glnyql
kgbgrannkhl ny matvy hy cknk w hy gkxamk, w yi nk xaqkh hyn aivaytil my
mbyny tydktkt hy nkm aignyxyigakm hyn gaynl, ymqkihl yi nk gkxdkñk tkmk,
gli mónl yn knayiql hy mb flgk, uby, glxl mkny hy nbckt vkgíl, qyicl dlt
kvytacbkhl uby hyfy hy mknat ptíl, gliqtk qlhk ikqbtknyek. dbym ymdytkh uby
ymdyty uby nnycby nk ilgry, dktk tymqkbtktmy hy qlhkm ymqkm aiglxlhahkhym,
yi nk gkxk uby ny kcbkthk, nk gbkn, ma il ym dlt mb gbndk, okxám dygktá hy
ymqtygrk; uby fayi dbyhy xyhat yi nk qayttk nlm daym uby ubamayty, w
tyvlnvytmy yi ynnk k mb mkflt, mai qyxlt uby my ny yigloki nkm máfkikm.
nnécbymy, dbym, k qlhl ymql, yn hík w nk rltk hy tygyfat yn ctkhl hy mb
yoytgagal; nnécbymy bi hík hy fkqknnk, uby knní ny dlihtái nk fltnk yi nk
gkfyek, rygrk hy rankm, dktk gbtktny kncúi fknkel, uby ubaeá ny rkftá
dkmkhl nkm mayiym, l ny hyoktá ymqtldykhl hy ftkel l daytik. w, gbkihl ymql
il mbgyhk, mail uby yn gaynl dakhlml ny cbkthy w glimytvy mkil w vavl,
dlhtá myt uby my ubyhy yi nk xymxk dlftyek uby kiqym ymqkfk, w uby myk
xyiymqyt uby mbgyhk bil w lqtl tyigbyiqtl, bik w lqtk fkqknnk, w uby hy
qlhkm mknck vyigyhlt, dktk xyhtkt yi kncl; dytl ymqlm xankctlm vyimy tktkm
vygym. dytl, hygahxy, myñltym, ma rkféam xatkhl yi ynnl: ¿gbái xyilm mli
nlm dtyxakhlm dlt nk cbyttk uby nlm uby rki dytygahl yi ynnk? mai hbhk,
rkféam hy tymdlihyt uby il qayiyi glxdktkgaói, ia my dbyhyi tyhbgat k
gbyiqk nlm xbytqlm, w uby my dlhtái gliqkt nlm dtyxakhlm vavlm gli qtym
nyqtkm hy cbktamxl. qlhl ymql ym kn tyvém yi nlm nyqtkhlm; dltuby, hy
pknhkm, uby il ubaytl hygat hy xkickm, qlhlm qayiyi yi ubé yiqtyqyiytmy.
kmí uby, kbiuby ym xkwlt yn qtkfkol hyn mlnhkhl, ym xbgrl xyilt yn dtyxal.
dytl k ymql my dbyhy tymdlihyt uby ym xám págan dtyxakt k hlm xan nyqtkhlm
uby k qtyaiqk xan mlnhkhlm, dltuby k kubénnlm my dtyxaki gli hktnym
lpagalm, uby dlt pbytek my rki hy hkt k nlm hy mb dtlpymaói, w k émqlm il
my dbyhyi dtyxakt mail gli nk xymxk rkgayihk hyn myñlt k ubayi matvyi; w
ymqk axdlmafanahkh pltqapagk xám nk tkeói uby qyicl. dytl hyoyxlm ymql
kdktqy, uby ym nkfytaiql hy xbw hapagbnqlmk mknahk, mail vlnvkxlm k nk
dtyyxaiyigak hy nkm ktxkm gliqtk nkm nyqtkm, xkqytak uby rkmqk krltk ymqá
dlt kvytacbkt, mycúi mli nkm tkeliym uby gkhk bik hy mb dktqy knyck. w,
yiqty nkm uby ry hagrl, hagyi nkm nyqtkm uby mai ynnkm il my dlhtíki
mbmqyiqkt nkm ktxkm, dltuby nk cbyttk qkxfaéi qayiy mbm nywym w ymqá mboyqk
k ynnkm, w uby nkm nywym gkyi hyfkol hy nl uby mli nyqtkm w nyqtkhlm. k
ymql tymdlihyi nkm ktxkm uby nkm nywym il my dlhtái mbmqyiqkt mai ynnkm,
dltuby gli nkm ktxkm my hypayihyi nkm tydúfnagkm, my glimytvki nlm tyailm,
my cbkthki nkm gabhkhym, my kmycbtki nlm gkxailm, my hymdyoki nlm xktym hy
glmktalm; w, paiknxyiqy, ma dlt ynnkm il pbymy, nkm tydúfnagkm, nlm tyailm,
nkm xliktubíkm, nkm gabhkhym, nlm gkxailm hy xkt w qayttk ymqktíki mboyqlm
kn taclt w k nk glipbmaói uby qtky glimacl nk cbyttk yn qayxdl uby hbtk w
qayiy nagyigak hy bmkt hy mbm dtyvanycalm w hy mbm pbytekm. w ym tkeói
kvytacbkhk uby kubynnl uby xám gbymqk my ymqaxk w hyfy hy ymqaxkt yi xám.
kngkiekt kncbil k myt yxaiyiqy yi nyqtkm ny gbymqk qayxdl, vacanakm,
rkxfty, hymibhye, vácbahlm hy gkfyek, aihacymqaliym hy ymqóxkcl, w lqtkm
glmkm k émqkm khrytyiqym, uby, yi dktqy, wk nkm qyicl typytahkm; xkm nnyckt
bil dlt mbm qétxailm k myt fbyi mlnhkhl ny gbymqk qlhl nl uby k yn
ymqbhakiqy, yi qkiql xkwlt ctkhl uby il qayiy glxdktkgaói, dltuby k gkhk
dkml ymqá k dauby hy dythyt nk vahk. w ¿ubé qyxlt hy iygymahkh w dlftyek
dbyhy nnyckt ia pkqackt kn ymqbhakiqy, uby nnycby kn uby qayiy bi mlnhkhl,
uby, rknnáihlmy gytgkhl yi kncbik pbytek, w ymqkihl hy dlmqk, l cbkthk, yi
kncúi tyvynníi l gkfknnytl, mayiqy uby nlm yiyxaclm ymqái xaikihl rkgak nk
dktqy hlihy én ymqá, w il dbyhy kdktqktmy hy knní dlt iaicúi gkml, ia rbat
yn dynactl uby hy qki gytgk ny kxyikek? mónl nl uby dbyhy rkgyt ym hkt
ilqagak k mb gkdaqái hy nl uby dkmk, dktk uby nl tyxyhay gli kncbik
gliqtkxaik, w én ymqktmy ubyhl, qyxayihl w ymdytkihl gbáihl axdtlvamkxyiqy
rk hy mbfat k nkm ibfym mai knkm w fkokt kn dtlpbihl mai mb vlnbiqkh. w ma
émqy dktygy dyubyñl dynactl, vykxlm ma ny acbknk l rkgy vyiqkokm yn hy
yxfymqatmy hlm cknytkm dlt nkm dtlkm yi xaqkh hyn xkt ymdkgalml, nkm gbknym
yignkvaokhkm w qtkfkhkm, il ny ubyhk kn mlnhkhl xám ymdkgal hyn uby gligyhy
hlm daym hy qkfnk hyn ymdlnói; w, gli qlhl ymql, vayihl uby qayiy hynkiqy
hy mí qkiqlm xaiamqtlm hy nk xbytqy uby ny kxyikeki gbkiqlm gkñliym hy
ktqannytík my kmymqki hy nk dktqy gliqtktak, uby il hamqki hy mb gbytdl bik
nkiek, w vayihl uby kn dtaxyt hymgbahl hy nlm daym atík k vamaqkt nlm
dtlpbihlm myilm hy iydqbil; w, gli qlhl ymql, gli aiqtédahl gltkeói,
nnyvkhl hy nk rlitk uby ny aigaqk, my dliy k myt fnkigl hy qkiqk
ktgkfbgytík, w dtlgbtk dkmkt dlt qki ymqtygrl dkml kn fkoyn gliqtktal. w nl
uby xám ym hy khxatkt: uby kdyikm bil rk gkíhl hlihy il my dlhtá nyvkiqkt
rkmqk nk pai hyn xbihl, gbkihl lqtl lgbdk mb xymxl nbckt; w ma émqy qkxfaéi
gky yi yn xkt, uby glxl k yiyxacl ny kcbkthk, lqtl w lqtl ny mbgyhy, mai
hkt qayxdl kn qayxdl hy mbm xbytqym: vknyiqík w kqtyvaxayiql yn xkwlt uby
my dbyhy rknnkt yi qlhlm nlm qtkigym hy nk cbyttk. fayi rkwki kubynnlm
fyihaqlm macnlm uby gktygaytli hy nk ymdkiqkfny pbtak hy kubymqlm
yihyxliakhlm aimqtbxyiqlm hy nk ktqannytík, k gbwl aivyiqlt qyicl dktk xí
uby yi yn aipaytil my ny ymqá hkihl yn dtyxal hy mb hakfónagk aivyigaói,
gli nk gbkn hal gkbmk uby bi aipkxy w glfkthy ftkel ubaqy nk vahk k bi
vknytlml gkfknnytl, w uby, mai mkfyt góxl l dlt hóihy, yi nk xaqkh hyn
gltkoy w ftíl uby yigayihy w kiaxk k nlm vknayiqym dygrlm, nnyck bik
hymxkihkhk fknk, hamdktkhk hy ubayi ubaeá rbwó w my ymdkiqó hyn tymdnkihlt
uby rael yn pbycl kn hamdktkt hy nk xknhaqk xáubaik, w gltqk w kgkfk yi bi
aimqkiqy nlm dyimkxayiqlm w vahk hy ubayi nk xytygík clekt nbyiclm macnlm.
w kmí, glimahytkihl ymql, ymqlw dlt hygat uby yi yn knxk xy dymk hy rkfyt
qlxkhl ymqy yoytgagal hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy yi yhkh qki hyqymqkfny glxl ym
ymqk yi uby krltk vavaxlm; dltuby, kbiuby k xí iaicúi dynactl xy dliy
xayhl, qlhkvík xy dliy tygynl dyimkt ma nk dónvltk w yn ymqkñl xy rki hy
ubaqkt nk lgkmaói hy rkgytxy pkxlml w glilgahl dlt yn vknlt hy xa ftkel w
panlm hy xa ymdkhk, dlt qlhl nl hymgbfaytql hy nk qayttk. dytl rkck yn
gaynl nl uby pbyty mytvahl, uby qkiql myté xám ymqaxkhl, ma mkncl gli nl
uby dtyqyihl, gbkiql k xkwltym dynactlm xy ry dbymql uby my dbmaytli nlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym hy nlm dkmkhlm macnlm.

qlhl ymqy nktcl dtyáxfbnl haol hli ubaolqy, yi qkiql uby nlm hyxám gyikfki,
lnvaháihlmy hy nnyvkt flgkhl k nk flgk, dbymql uby kncbikm vygym ny rkfík
hagrl mkigrl dkiek uby gyikmy, uby hymdbém rkftík nbckt dktk hygat qlhl nl
uby ubamaymy. yi nlm uby ymgbgrkhl ny rkfíki mlftyvail ibyvk námqaxk hy vyt
uby rlxfty uby, kn dktygyt, qyiík fbyi yiqyihaxayiql w fbyi hamgbtml yi
qlhkm nkm glmkm uby qtkqkfk, ny rbfaymy dythahl qki tyxkqkhkxyiqy, yi
qtkqáihlny hy mb iyctk w daexayiqk gkfknnytík. yn gbtk ny haol uby qyiík
xbgrk tkeói yi qlhl gbkiql rkfík hagrl yi pkvlt hy nkm ktxkm, w uby én,
kbiuby nyqtkhl w ctkhbkhl, ymqkfk hy mb xymxl dktygyt.

kgkfktli hy gyikt, nyvkiqktli nlm xkiqynym, w, yi qkiql uby nk vyiqytk, mb
raok w xktaqltiym khytyekfki yn gkxktkigrói hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,
hlihy rkfíki hyqytxaikhl uby kubynnk ilgry nkm xboytym mlnkm yi én my
tyglcaymyi, hli pytikihl tlcó kn gkbqavl nym gliqkmy yn hamgbtml hy mb
vahk, dltuby il dlhtík myt mail uby pbymy dytyctail w cbmqlml, mycúi nkm
xbymqtkm uby rkfík glxyiekhl k hkt, vaiayihl yi glxdkñík hy eltkahk. k nl
gbkn tymdlihaó yn gkbqavl uby hy xbw fbyik ckik rktík nl uby my ny xkihkfk,
w uby mónl qyxík uby yn gbyiql il rkfík hy myt qkn, uby nym haymy yn cbmql
uby én hymykfk; dytl uby, gli qlhl yml, dlt il pknqkt yi lfyhygynny, ny
gliqktík. yn gbtk w qlhlm nlm hyxám my nl kctkhygaytli, w hy ibyvl my nl
tlcktli; w én, vaéihlmy tlckt hy qkiqlm, haol uby il ytki xyiymqyt tbyclm
khlihy yn xkihkt qyiík qkiqk pbytek.

-w kmí, ymqéi vbymqtkm xytgyhym kqyiqlm, w latái bi hamgbtml vythkhytl, k
ubayi dlhtík myt uby il nnyckmyi nlm xyiqatlmlm uby gli gbtalml w dyimkhl
ktqapagal mbynyi glxdliytmy.

gli ymql uby haol, rael uby qlhlm my kglxlhkmyi w ny dtymqkmyi bi ctkihy
manyigal; w én, vayihl uby wk gknnkfki w ymdytkfki nl uby hygat ubamaymy,
gli vle kctkhkfny w tydlmkhk, glxyieó k hygat hymqk xkiytk:





gkdíqbnl zzzaz. hlihy yn gkbqavl gbyiqk mb vahk w mbgymlm


-«yi bi nbckt hy nkm xliqkñkm hy nyói qbvl dtaigadal xa naikoy, gli ubayi
pby xám kctkhygahk w nafytkn nk ikqbtknyek uby nk pltqbik, kbiuby, yi nk
ymqtygryek hy kubynnlm dbyfnlm, qlhkvík kngkiekfk xa dkhty pkxk hy tagl, w
vythkhytkxyiqy nl pbytk ma kmí my haytk xkñk k glimytvkt mb rkgayihk glxl
my nk hkfk yi ckmqknnk. w nk glihagaói uby qyiík hy myt nafytkn w ckmqkhlt
ny dtlgyhaó hy rkfyt mahl mlnhkhl nlm kñlm hy mb olvyiqbh, uby ym ymgbynk
nk mlnhkhymgk hlihy yn xyeubail my rkgy ptkigl, w yn ptkigl, dtóhacl; w ma
kncbilm mlnhkhlm my rknnki xamytkfnym, mli glxl xlimqtblm, uby my vyi tktkm
vygym. dkmkfk xa dkhty nlm qétxailm hy nk nafytknahkh, w tkwkfk yi nlm hy
myt dtóhacl: glmk uby il ny ym hy iaicúi dtlvygrl kn rlxfty gkmkhl, w uby
qayiy raolm uby ny rki hy mbgyhyt yi yn ilxfty w yi yn myt. nlm uby xa
dkhty qyiík ytki qtym, qlhlm vktliym w qlhlm hy yhkh hy dlhyt ynycat
ymqkhl. vayihl, dbym, xa dkhty uby, mycúi én hygík, il dlhík atmy k nk xkil
gliqtk mb glihagaói, ubaml dtavktmy hyn aimqtbxyiql w gkbmk uby ny rkgík
ckmqkhlt w hkhavlml, uby pby dtavktmy hy nk rkgayihk, mai nk gbkn yn xamxl
knyokihtl dktygaytk ymqtygrl.

»w kmí, nnkxáihlilm bi hík k qlhlm qtym k mlnkm yi bi kdlmyiql, ilm haol
bikm tkeliym myxyokiqym k nkm uby krltk haté: ''raolm, dktk hygatlm uby lm
ubaytl fayi, fkmqk mkfyt w hygat uby mlam xam raolm; w, dktk yiqyihyt uby
lm ubaytl xkn, fkmqk mkfyt uby il xy vlw k nk xkil yi nl uby qlgk k
glimytvkt vbymqtk rkgayihk. dbym, dktk uby yiqyiháam hymhy kubí khynkiqy
uby lm ubaytl glxl dkhty, w uby il lm ubaytl hymqtbat glxl dkhtkmqtl,
ubaytl rkgyt bik glmk gli vlmlqtlm uby rk xbgrlm híkm uby nk qyicl dyimkhk
w gli xkhbtk glimahytkgaói hamdbymqk. vlmlqtlm ymqáam wk yi yhkh hy qlxkt
ymqkhl, l, k nl xyilm, hy ynycat yoytgagal, qkn uby, gbkihl xkwltym, lm
rlity w kdtlvygry. w nl uby ry dyimkhl ym rkgyt hy xa rkgayihk gbkqtl
dktqym: nkm qtym lm hkté k vlmlqtlm, k gkhk bil nl uby ny qlgkty, mai
yzgyhyt yi glmk kncbik, w gli nk lqtk xy ubyhkté wl dktk vavat w
mbmqyiqktxy nlm híkm uby yn gaynl pbyty mytvahl hy hktxy hy vahk. dytl
ubyttík uby, hymdbém uby gkhk bil qbvaymy yi mb dlhyt nk dktqy uby ny qlgk
hy mb rkgayihk, macbaymy bil hy nlm gkxailm uby ny haté. rkw bi typtái yi
ibymqtk ymdkñk, k xa dktygyt xbw vythkhytl, glxl qlhlm nl mli, dlt myt
myiqyigakm ftyvym mkgkhkm hy nk nbyick w hamgtyqk yzdytayigak; w yn uby wl
hacl hagy: "acnymak, l xkt, l gkmk tykn", glxl ma xám gnktkxyiqy haoytk:
"ubayi ubamayty vknyt w myt tagl, mack l nk acnymak, l ikvycby, yoytgaqkihl
yn ktqy hy nk xytgkigík, l yiqty k mytvat k nlm tywym yi mbm gkmkm"; dltuby
hagyi: "xám vkny xackok hy tyw uby xytgyh hy myñlt". hacl ymql dltuby
ubyttík, w ym xa vlnbiqkh, uby bil hy vlmlqtlm macbaymy nkm nyqtkm, yn lqtl
nk xytgkigík, w yn lqtl matvaymy kn tyw yi nk cbyttk, dbym ym hapagbnqlml
yiqtkt k mytvatny yi mb gkmk; uby, wk uby nk cbyttk il hé xbgrkm taubyekm,
mbyny hkt xbgrl vknlt w xbgrk pkxk. hyiqtl hy lgrl híkm, lm hkté qlhk
vbymqtk dktqy yi haiytlm, mai hyptkbhktlm yi bi kthaqy, glxl nl vytéam dlt
nk lftk. hygahxy krltk ma ubytéam mycbat xa dktygyt w glimyol yi nl uby lm
ry dtldbymql''. w, xkiháihlxy k xí, dlt myt yn xkwlt, uby tymdlihaymy,
hymdbém hy rkfytny hagrl uby il my hymragaymy hy nk rkgayihk, mail uby
ckmqkmy qlhl nl uby pbymy mb vlnbiqkh, uby ilmlqtlm étkxlm xlelm dktk mkfyt
ckiktnk, vaiy k glignbat yi uby gbxdnatík mb cbmql, w uby yn xíl ytk mycbat
yn yoytgagal hy nkm ktxkm, matvayihl yi én k halm w k xa tyw. yn mycbihl
rytxkil rael nlm xymxlm lptygaxayiqlm, w ymglcaó yn atmy k nkm aihakm,
nnyvkihl yxdnykhk nk rkgayihk uby ny gbdaymy. yn xyilt, w, k nl uby wl
gtyl, yn xám hamgtyql, haol uby ubytík mycbat nk acnymak, l atmy k kgkfkt
mbm glxyiekhlm ymqbhalm k mknkxkigk. kmí glxl kgkfkxlm hy gliglthktilm w
ymglcyt ibymqtlm yoytgagalm, xa dkhty ilm kftkeó k qlhlm, w, gli nk
ftyvyhkh uby haol, dbml dlt lftk gbkiql ilm rkfík dtlxyqahl; w, hkihl k
gkhk bil mb dktqy, uby, k nl uby my xy kgbythk, pbytli gkhk qtym xan
hbgkhlm, yi haiytlm (dltuby bi ibymqtl qíl glxdtó qlhk nk rkgayihk w nk
dkcó hy gliqkhl, dltuby il mknaymy hyn qtligl hy nk gkmk), yi bi xymxl hík
ilm hymdyhaxlm qlhlm qtym hy ibymqtl fbyi dkhty; w, yi kubyn xymxl,
dktygaéihlxy k xí myt airbxkiahkh uby xa dkhty ubyhkmy vayol w gli qki dlgk
rkgayihk, ragy gli én uby hy xam qtym xan qlxkmy nlm hlm xan hbgkhlm,
dltuby k xí xy fkmqkfk yn tymql dktk kglxlhktxy hy nl uby rkfík xyiymqyt bi
mlnhkhl. xam hlm rytxkilm, xlvahlm hy xa yoyxdnl, gkhk bil ny hal xan
hbgkhlm: hy xlhl uby k xa dkhty ny ubyhktli gbkqtl xan yi haiytlm, w xám
qtym xan, uby, k nl uby dktygy, vkník nk rkgayihk uby ny gbdl, uby il ubaml
vyihyt, mail ubyhktmy gli ynnk yi tkígym. hacl, yi pai, uby ilm hymdyhaxlm
hén w hy kubyn ibymqtl qíl uby ry hagrl, il mai xbgrl myiqaxayiql w
náctaxkm hy qlhlm, yigktcáihlilm uby nym ragaémyxlm mkfyt, qlhkm nkm vygym
uby rbfaymy glxlhahkh dktk ynnl, hy ibymqtlm mbgymlm, dtómdytlm l khvytmlm.
dtlxyqíxlmmynl, w, kftkeáihlilm w ygráihlilm mb fyihagaói, yn bil qlxó yn
vakoy hy mknkxkigk, yn lqtl hy myvannk w wl yn hy knagkiqy, khlihy qbvy
ibyvkm uby rkfík bik ikvy cailvymk uby gktckfk knní nkik dktk céilvk.

»Émqy rktá vyaiqy w hlm kñlm uby mkní hy gkmk hy xa dkhty, w yi qlhlm
ynnlm, dbymql uby ry ymgtaql kncbikm gktqkm, il ry mkfahl hén ia hy xam
rytxkilm ibyvk kncbik. w nl uby yi ymqy hamgbtml hy qayxdl ry dkmkhl nl
haté ftyvyxyiqy. yxfktubéxy yi knagkiqy, nnycbé gli dtómdytl vakoy k
céilvk, pba hymhy knní k xanái, hlihy xy kglxlhé hy ktxkm w hy kncbikm
cknkm hy mlnhkhl, hy hlihy ubamy at k kmyiqkt xa dnkek kn dakxliqy; w,
ymqkihl wk hy gkxail dktk knyokihtík hy nk dknnk, qbvy ibyvkm uby yn ctki
hbuby hy knfk dkmkfk k pnkihym. xbhé dtldómaql, pbaxy gli én, mytvíny yi
nkm oltikhkm uby rael, rknnéxy yi nk xbytqy hy nlm glihym hy ycbyxói w hy
rltilm, kngkigé k myt knpétye hy bi pkxlml gkdaqái hy cbkhknkoktk, nnkxkhl
haycl hy btfaik; w, k gkfl hy kncúi qayxdl uby nnycbé k pnkihym, my qbvl
ibyvkm hy nk nack uby nk mkiqahkh hyn dkdk díl ubaiql, hy pynagy
tyglthkgaói, rkfík rygrl gli vyiygak w gli ymdkñk, gliqtk yn yiyxacl glxúi,
uby ym yn qbtgl; yn gbkn, yi kubyn xymxl qayxdl, rkfík ckikhl gli mb ktxkhk
nk pkxlmk amnk hy gradty, uby ymqkfk hyfkol hyn hlxaial hyn vyiygakil: w
déthahk nkxyiqkfny w hymhagrkhk. múdlmy gaytql uby vyiík dlt cyiytkn hymqk
nack yn mytyiímaxl hli obki hy kbmqtak, rytxkil ikqbtkn hy ibymqtl fbyi tyw
hli pynady. havbncómy yn ctkihímaxl kdktkql hy cbyttk uby my rkgík. qlhl nl
gbkn xy aigaqó w glixlvaó yn áiaxl w yn hymyl hy vytxy yi nk oltikhk uby my
ymdytkfk; w, kbiuby qyiík fkttbiqlm, w gkma dtlxymkm gaytqkm, hy uby yi nk
dtaxytk lgkmaói uby my lptygaymy mytík dtlxlvahl k gkdaqái, nl ubamy hyokt
qlhl w vyiatxy, glxl xy vaiy, k aqknak. w ubaml xa fbyik mbytqy uby yn
myñlt hli obki hy kbmqtak kgkfkfk hy nnyckt k céilvk, uby dkmkfk k iádlnym
k obiqktmy gli nk ktxkhk hy vyiygak, glxl hymdbém nl rael yi xygaik.

»hacl, yi pai, uby wl xy rknné yi kubynnk pynagímaxk oltikhk, wk rygrl
gkdaqái hy aipkiqytík, k gbwl rlitlml gktcl xy mbfaó xa fbyik mbytqy, xám
uby xam xytygaxayiqlm. w kubyn hík, uby pby dktk nk gtamqakihkh qki
hagrlml, dltuby yi én my hymyickñó yn xbihl w qlhkm nkm ikgaliym hyn yttlt
yi uby ymqkfki, gtywyihl uby nlm qbtglm ytki aivyigafnym dlt nk xkt: yi
kubyn hík, hacl, hlihy ubyhó yn ltcbnnl w mlfytfak lqlxkik ubyftkiqkhk,
yiqty qkiqlm vyiqbtlmlm glxl knní rbfl (dltuby xám vyiqbtk qbvaytli nlm
gtamqakilm uby knní xbtaytli uby nlm uby vavlm w vyigyhltym ubyhktli), wl
mlnl pba yn hymhagrkhl, dbym, yi gkxfal hy uby dbhaytk ymdytkt, ma pbytk yi
nlm tlxkilm macnlm, kncbik ikvkn gltlik, xy va kubynnk ilgry uby macbaó k
qki pkxlml hík gli gkhyikm k nlm daym w ymdlmkm k nkm xkilm.

»w pby hymqk mbytqy: uby, rkfayihl yn bgrkní, tyw hy ktcyn, kqtyvahl w
vyiqbtlml glmktal, yxfymqahl w tyihahl nk gkdaqkik hy xknqk, uby mlnlm qtym
gkfknnytlm ubyhktli vavlm yi ynnk, w émqlm xknrytahlm, kgbhaó nk gkdaqkik
hy obki kihtyk k mlglttynnk, yi nk gbkn wl afk gli xa glxdkñík; w, rkgayihl
nl uby hyfík yi lgkmaói myxyokiqy, mknqé yi nk cknytk gliqtktak, nk gbkn,
hymvaáihlmy hy nk uby nk rkfík yxfymqahl, ymqltfó uby xam mlnhkhlm xy
macbaymyi, w kmí, xy rknné mlnl yiqty xam yiyxaclm, k ubayi il dbhy
tymamqat, dlt myt qkiqlm; yi pai, xy taihaytli nnyil hy rytahkm. w, glxl wk
rkftéam, myñltym, líhl hygat uby yn bgrkní my mknvó gli qlhk mb ymgbkhtk,
vaiy wl k ubyhkt gkbqavl yi mb dlhyt, w mlnl pba yn qtamqy yiqty qkiqlm
knyctym w yn gkbqavl yiqty qkiqlm naftym; dltuby pbytli ubaigy xan
gtamqakilm nlm uby kubyn hík kngkiektli nk hymykhk nafytqkh, uby qlhlm
vyiíki kn tyxl yi nk qbtubymgk ktxkhk.

»nnyvátlixy k glmqkiqaildnk, hlihy yn ctki qbtgl mynax rael cyiytkn hy nk
xkt k xa kxl, dltuby rkfík rygrl mb hyfyt yi nk fkqknnk, rkfayihl nnyvkhl
dlt xbymqtk hy mb vknlt yn ymqkihktqy hy nk tynacaói hy xknqk. rknnéxy yn
mycbihl kñl, uby pby yn hy myqyiqk w hlm, yi ikvktail, flckihl yi nk
gkdaqkik hy nlm qtym pkiknym. va w ilqé nk lgkmaói uby knní my dythaó hy il
glcyt yi yn dbytql qlhk yn ktxkhk qbtubymgk, dltuby qlhlm nlm nyvyiqym w
oyiíektlm uby yi ynnk vyiíki qbvaytli dlt gaytql uby nym rkfíki hy yxfymqat
hyiqtl hyn xymxl dbytql, w qyiíki k dbiql mb tldk w dkmkxkubym, uby mli mbm
ekdkqlm, dktk rbatmy nbycl dlt qayttk, mai ymdytkt myt glxfkqahlm: qkiql
ytk yn xayhl uby rkfíki glftkhl k ibymqtk ktxkhk. dytl yn gaynl nl lthyió
hy lqtk xkiytk, il dlt gbndk ia hymgbahl hyn cyiytkn uby k nlm ibymqtlm
tycík, mail dlt nlm dygkhlm hy nk gtamqakihkh, w dltuby ubayty w dytxaqy
halm uby qyickxlm mayxdty vythbclm uby ilm gkmqacbyi.

»yi ypyql, yn bgrkní my tyglcaó k xlhói, uby ym bik amnk uby ymqá obiql k
ikvktail, w, ygrkihl nk cyiqy yi qayttk, pltqapagó nk flgk hyn dbytql, w
ymqúvlmy ubyhl rkmqk uby yn myñlt hli obki my vlnvaó. yi ymqy vakoy my qlxó
nk cknytk uby my nnkxkfk nk dtymk, hy ubayi ytk gkdaqái bi raol hy kubyn
pkxlml glmktal fktfkttlok. qlxónk nk gkdaqkik hy iádlnym, nnkxkhk nk nlfk,
tycahk dlt kubyn tkwl hy nk cbyttk, dlt yn dkhty hy nlm mlnhkhlm, dlt kubyn
vyiqbtlml w okxám vyigahl gkdaqái hli Ánvktl hy fkeái, xktubém hy mkiqk
gtbe. w il ubaytl hyokt hy hygat nl uby mbgyhaó yi nk dtymk hy nk dtymk.
ytk qki gtbyn yn raol hy fktfkttlok, w qtkqkfk qki xkn k mbm gkbqavlm, uby,
kmí glxl nlm uby vyiíki kn tyxl vaytli uby nk cknytk nlfk nym afk yiqtkihl
w uby nlm kngkiekfk, mlnqktli qlhlm k bi qayxdl nlm tyxlm, w kmaytli hy mb
gkdaqái, uby ymqkfk mlfty yn ymqkiqytln ctaqkihl uby flckmyi kdtaymk, w
dkmáihlny hy fkigl yi fkigl, hy dldk k dtlk, ny haytli flgkhlm, uby k dlgl
xám uby dkmó hyn átfln wk rkfík dkmkhl mb áiaxk kn aipaytil: qkn ytk, glxl
ry hagrl, nk gtbynhkh gli uby nlm qtkqkfk w yn lhal uby ynnlm ny qyiíki.

»vlnvaxlm k glimqkiqaildnk, w yn kñl macbayiqy, uby pby yn hy myqyiqk w
qtym, my mbdl yi ynnk góxl yn myñlt hli obki rkfík ckikhl k qúiye, w
ubaqkhl kubyn tyail k nlm qbtglm w dbymql yi dlmymaói hén k xbnyw rkxyq,
gltqkihl nkm ymdytkiekm uby hy vlnvyt k tyaikt yi én qyiík xbnyw rkxahk, yn
xltl xám gtbyn w xám vknayiqy uby qbvl yn xbihl. maiqaó xbgrl ymqk déthahk
yn ctki qbtgl, w, bmkihl hy nk mkckgahkh uby qlhlm nlm hy mb gkmk qayiyi,
rael dke gli vyiygakilm, uby xbgrl xám uby én nk hymykfki; w yn kñl
macbayiqy hy myqyiqk w gbkqtl kglxyqaó k nk clnyqk w kn pbytqy uby obiql k
qúiye rkfík hyokhl xyhal nyvkiqkhl yn myñlt hli obki. yi qlhlm ymqlm
qtkigym kihkfk wl kn tyxl, mai ymdytkiek hy nafytqkh kncbik; k nl xyilm, il
ymdytkfk qyiytnk dlt tymgkqy, dltuby qyiík hyqytxaikhl hy il ymgtafat nkm
ibyvkm hy xa hymctkgak k xa dkhty.

»dythaómy, yi pai, nk clnyqk; dythaómy yn pbytqy, mlfty nkm gbknym dnkekm
rbfl hy mlnhkhlm qbtglm, dkckhlm, myqyiqk w gaigl xan, w hy xltlm, w
knátkfym hy qlhk nk kptagk, xám hy gbkqtlgayiqlm xan, kglxdkñkhl ymqy qki
ctki iúxytl hy cyiqy gli qkiqkm xbiagaliym w dytqtygrlm hy cbyttk, w gli
qkiqlm ckmqkhltym, uby gli nkm xkilm w k dbñkhlm hy qayttk dbhaytki gbftat
nk clnyqk w yn pbytqy. dythaómy dtaxytl nk clnyqk, qyiahk rkmqk yiqligym
dlt aiyzdbcikfny; w il my dythaó dlt gbndk hy mbm hypyimltym, nlm gbknym
ragaytli yi mb hypyimk qlhl kubynnl uby hyfíki w dlhíki, mail dltuby nk
yzdytayigak xlmqtó nk pkganahkh gli uby my dlhíki nyvkiqkt qtaigrykm yi
kubynnk hymaytqk ktyik, dltuby k hlm dknxlm my rknnkfk kcbk, w nlm qbtglm
il nk rknnktli k hlm vktkm; w kmí, gli xbgrlm mkglm hy ktyik nyvkiqktli nkm
qtaigrykm qki knqkm uby mlftydbokfki nkm xbtknnkm hy nk pbytek; w,
qatáihlnym k gkfknnytl, iaicbil dlhík dktkt, ia kmamqat k nk hypyimk. pby
glxúi ldaiaói uby il my rkfíki hy yigyttkt nlm ibymqtlm yi nk clnyqk, mail
ymdytkt yi gkxdkñk kn hymyxfktgkhytl; w nlm uby ymql hagyi rkfnki hy nyolm
w gli dlgk yzdytayigak hy gkmlm myxyokiqym, dltuby ma yi nk clnyqk w yi yn
pbytqy kdyikm rkfík mayqy xan mlnhkhlm, ¿góxl dlhík qki dlgl iúxytl, kbiuby
xám ympltekhlm pbymyi, mknat k nk gkxdkñk w ubyhkt yi nkm pbytekm, gliqtk
qkiql glxl ytk yn hy nlm yiyxaclm?; w ¿góxl ym dlmafny hyokt hy dythytmy
pbytek uby il ym mlglttahk, w xám gbkihl nk gytgki yiyxaclm xbgrlm w
dltpakhlm, w yi mb xymxk qayttk? dytl k xbgrlm nym dktygaó, w kmí xy
dktygaó k xí, uby pby dktqagbnkt ctkgak w xytgyh uby yn gaynl rael k ymdkñk
yi dytxaqat uby my kmlnkmy kubynnk lpagaik w gkdk hy xknhkhym, w kubynnk
clxak l ymdliok w dlnannk hy nk aipaiahkh hy haiytlm uby knní mai dtlvygrl
my ckmqkfki, mai mytvat hy lqtk glmk uby hy glimytvkt nk xyxltak hy rkfytnk
ckikhl nk pynagímaxk hyn aivagqímaxl gktnlm ubaiql; glxl ma pbytk xyiymqyt
dktk rkgytnk yqytik, glxl nl ym w mytá, uby kubynnkm dayhtkm nk
mbmqyiqktki.

»dythaómy qkxfaéi yn pbytqy; dytl pbétliny ckikihl nlm qbtglm dknxl k
dknxl, dltuby nlm mlnhkhlm uby nl hypyihíki dynyktli qki vknytlmk w
pbytqyxyiqy, uby dkmktli hy vyaiqy w gaigl xan yiyxaclm nlm uby xkqktli yi
vyaiqy w hlm kmknqlm cyiytknym uby nym haytli. iaicbil gkbqavktli mkil hy
qtygayiqlm uby ubyhktli vavlm, myñkn gaytqk w gnktk hy mb ympbytel w vknlt,
w hy nl fayi uby my rkfíki hypyihahl w cbkthkhl mbm dnkekm. taihaómy k
dktqahl bi dyubyñl pbytqy l qltty uby ymqkfk yi xaqkh hyn ymqkñl, k gktcl
hy hli obki ekilcbytk, gkfknnytl vknyigakil w pkxlml mlnhkhl. gkbqavktli k
hli dyhtl dbytqlgkttytl, cyiytkn hy nk clnyqk, yn gbkn rael gbkiql pby
dlmafny dlt hypyihyt mb pbytek; w maiqaó qkiql yn rkfytnk dythahl uby hy
dymkt xbtaó yi yn gkxail hy glimqkiqaildnk, hlihy ny nnyvkfki gkbqavl.
gkbqavktli kimaxymxl kn cyiytkn hyn pbytqy, uby my nnkxkfk ckftal
gytvynnói, gkfknnytl xankiém, ctkihy aicyiaytl w vknyiqímaxl mlnhkhl.
xbtaytli yi ymqkm hlm pbytekm xbgrkm dytmlikm hy gbyiqk, hy nkm gbknym pby
bik dkcái hy ltak, gkfknnytl hyn ráfaql hy mki obki, hy glihagaói cyiytlml,
glxl nl xlmqtó nk mbxxk nafytknahkh uby bmó gli mb rytxkil, yn pkxlml obki
hy kihtyk hy ltak; w nl uby xám rael nkmqaxlmk mb xbytqy pby rkfyt xbytql k
xkilm hy bilm knátkfym hy ubayi my paó, vayihl wk dythahl yn pbytqy, uby my
lptygaytli hy nnyvktny yi ráfaql hy xltl k qkfktgk, uby ym bi dltqyebynl l
gkmk uby yi kubynnkm tafytkm qayiyi nlm cailvymym uby my yoytgaqki yi nk
dymubytík hyn gltkn; nlm gbknym knátkfym ny gltqktli nk gkfyek w my nk
qtboytli kn cyiytkn hy nk ktxkhk qbtubymgk, yn gbkn gbxdnaó gli ynnlm
ibymqtl typtái gkmqynnkil: "uby kbiuby nk qtkagaói kdnkgy, yn qtkahlt my
kflttygy"; w kmí, my hagy uby xkihó yn cyiytkn krltgkt k nlm uby ny
qtboytli yn dtymyiqy, dltuby il my ny rkfíki qtkíhl vavl.

»yiqty nlm gtamqakilm uby yi yn pbytqy my dythaytli, pby bil nnkxkhl hli
dyhtl hy kcbankt, ikqbtkn il mé hy ubé nbckt hyn kihknbgík, yn gbkn rkfík
mahl knpétye yi yn pbytqy, mlnhkhl hy xbgrk gbyiqk w hy tktl yiqyihaxayiql:
ymdygaknxyiqy qyiík dktqagbnkt ctkgak yi nl uby nnkxki dlymík. híclnl
dltuby mb mbytqy ny qtbol k xa cknytk w k xa fkigl, w k myt ymgnkvl hy xa
xymxl dkqtói; w, kiqym uby ilm dktqaémyxlm hy kubyn dbytql, rael ymqy
gkfknnytl hlm mliyqlm, k xkiytk hy ydaqkpalm, yn bil k nk clnyqk w yn lqtl
kn pbytqy. w yi vythkh uby nlm qyicl hy hygat, dltuby nlm mé hy xyxltak w
gtyl uby kiqym gkbmktái cbmql uby dymkhbxfty.»

yi yn dbiql uby yn gkbqavl ilxftó k hli dyhtl hy kcbankt, hli pytikihl xató
k mbm gkxktkhkm, w qlhlm qtym my mlitaytli; w, gbkihl nnycó k hygat hy nlm
mliyqlm, haol yn bil:

-kiqym uby vbymqtk xytgyh dkmy khynkiqy, ny mbdnagl xy hack ubé my rael ymy
hli dyhtl hy kcbankt uby rk hagrl.

-nl uby mé ym -tymdlihaó yn gkbqavl- uby, kn gkfl hy hlm kñlm uby ymqbvl yi
glimqkiqaildnk, my rbwó yi qtkoy hy ktikúqy gli bi ctaycl ymdík, w il mé ma
vail yi nafytqkh, dbymql uby gtyl uby mí, dltuby hy knní k bi kñl va wl kn
ctaycl yi glimqkiqaildnk, w il ny dbhy dtycbiqkt yn mbgyml hy kubyn vakoy.

-dbym nl pby -tymdlihaó yn gkfknnytl-, dltuby ymy hli dyhtl ym xa rytxkil,
w ymqá krltk yi ibymqtl nbckt, fbyil w tagl, gkmkhl w gli qtym raolm.

-ctkgakm myki hkhkm k halm -haol yn gkbqavl- dlt qkiqkm xytgyhym glxl ny
rael; dltuby il rkw yi nk qayttk, glipltxy xa dktygyt, gliqyiql uby my
acbkny k kngkiekt nk nafytqkh dythahk.

-w xám -tydnagó yn gkfknnytl-, uby wl mé nlm mliyqlm uby xa rytxkil rael.

-hícknlm, dbym, vbymqtk xytgyh -haol yn gkbqavl-, uby nlm mkftá hygat xyolt
uby wl.

-uby xy dnkgy -tymdlihaó yn gkfknnytl-; w yn hy nk clnyqk hygík kmí:





gkdíqbnl zn. hlihy my dtlmacby nk ramqltak hyn gkbqavl


mliyql

   knxkm hagrlmkm uby hyn xltqkn vynl
   naftym w ymyiqkm, dlt yn fayi uby lftkmqym,
   hymhy nk fkok qayttk lm nyvkiqkmqym
   k nl xám knql w nl xyolt hyn gaynl,
   w, kthayihl yi atk w yi rlitlml gynl,
   hy nlm gbytdlm nk pbytek yoytgaqkmqym,
   uby yi dtldak w mkicty koyik glnltkmqym
   yn xkt vygail w ktyilml mbynl;
   dtaxytl uby yn vknlt pknqó nk vahk
   yi nlm gkimkhlm ftkelm, uby, xbtayihl,
   gli myt vyigahlm, nnyvki nk vaqltak.
   w ymqk vbymqtk xltqkn, qtamqy gkíhk
   yiqty yn xbtl w yn rayttl, lm vk khubatayihl
   pkxk uby yn xbihl lm hk, w yn gaynl cnltak.

-hymk xymxk xkiytk ny mé wl -haol yn gkbqavl.

-dbym yn hyn pbytqy, ma xkn il xy kgbythl -haol yn gkfknnytl-, hagy kmí:

mliyql

   hy yiqty ymqk qayttk ymqétan, hyttafkhk,
   hymqlm qyttliym dlt yn mbynl ygrkhlm,
   nkm knxkm mkiqkm hy qtym xan mlnhkhlm
   mbfaytli vavkm k xyolt xltkhk,
   mayihl dtaxytl, yi vkil, yoytgaqkhk
   nk pbytek hy mbm ftkelm ympltekhlm,
   rkmqk uby, kn pai, hy dlglm w gkimkhlm,
   haytli nk vahk kn panl hy nk ymdkhk.
   w émqy ym yn mbynl uby gliqaibl rk mahl
   hy xan xyxltakm nkxyiqkfnym nnyil
   yi nlm dkmkhlm macnlm w dtymyiqym.
   xkm il xám obmqkm hy mb hbtl myil
   rkftái kn gnktl gaynl knxkm mbfahl,
   ia kbi én mlmqbvl gbytdlm qki vknayiqym.

il dktygaytli xkn nlm mliyqlm, w yn gkbqavl my knyctó gli nkm ibyvkm uby hy
mb gkxktkhk ny haytli; w, dtlmacbayihl mb gbyiql, haol:

-«tyihahlm, dbym, nk clnyqk w yn pbytqy, nlm qbtglm haytli lthyi yi
hymxkiqynkt nk clnyqk, dltuby yn pbytqy ubyhó qkn, uby il rbfl ubé dliyt
dlt qayttk, w dktk rkgytnl gli xám ftyvyhkh w xyilm qtkfkol, nk xaiktli dlt
qtym dktqym; dytl gli iaicbik my dbhl vlnkt nl uby dktygík xyilm pbytqy,
uby ytki nkm xbtknnkm vayokm; w qlhl kubynnl uby rkfík ubyhkhl yi day hy nk
pltqapagkgaói ibyvk uby rkfík rygrl yn ptkqíi, gli xbgrk pkganahkh vail k
qayttk. yi tymlnbgaói, nk ktxkhk vlnvaó k glimqkiqaildnk, qtabipkiqy w
vyigyhltk: w hy knní k dlglm xymym xbtaó xa kxl yn bgrkní, kn gbkn nnkxkfki
bgrkní pktqkz, uby ubayty hygat, yi nyicbk qbtubymgk, yn tyiyckhl qañlml,
dltuby nl ytk; w ym glmqbxfty yiqty nlm qbtglm dliytmy ilxftym hy kncbik
pknqk uby qyicki, l hy kncbik vatqbh uby yi ynnlm rkwk. w ymql ym dltuby il
rkw yiqty ynnlm mail gbkqtl kdynnahlm hy naikoym, uby hygayihyi hy nk gkmk
lqlxkik, w nlm hyxám, glxl qyicl hagrl, qlxki ilxfty w kdynnahl wk hy nkm
qkgrkm hyn gbytdl w wk hy nkm vatqbhym hyn áiaxl. w ymqy qañlml flcó yn
tyxl, mayihl ymgnkvl hyn ctki myñlt, gkqltgy kñlm, w k xám hy nlm qtyaiqk w
gbkqtl hy mbm yhkh tyiycó, hy hymdygrl hy uby bi qbtgl, ymqkihl kn tyxl,
ny hal bi flpyqói, w dlt dlhytmy vyickt hyoó mb py; w pby qkiql mb vknlt
uby, mai mbfat dlt nlm qltdym xyhalm w gkxailm uby nlm xám dtavkhlm hyn
ctki qbtgl mbfyi, vail k myt tyw hy ktcyn, w hymdbém, k myt cyiytkn hy nk
xkt, uby ym yn qytgytl gktcl uby rkw yi kubyn myñltíl. ytk gknkftém hy
ikgaói, w xltknxyiqy pby bi rlxfty hy fayi, w qtkqkfk gli xbgrk rbxkiahkh k
mbm gkbqavlm, uby nnycó k qyiyt qtym xan, nlm gbknym, hymdbém hy mb xbytqy,
my tydktqaytli, glxl én nl hyoó yi mb qymqkxyiql, yiqty yn ctki myñlt (uby
qkxfaéi ym raol rytyhytl hy gbkiqlm xbytyi, w yiqtk k nk dktqy gli nlm xám
raolm uby hyok yn hapbiql) w yiqty mbm tyiyckhlm; w wl gbdy k bi tyiyckhl
vyiygakil uby, mayihl ctbxyqy hy bik ikvy, ny gkbqavó yn bgrkní, w ny ubaml
qkiql, uby pby bil hy nlm xám tycknkhlm ckteliym mbwlm, w én vail k myt yn
xám gtbyn tyiyckhl uby okxám my rk vamql. nnkxáfkmy keái kcá, w nnycó k myt
xbw tagl, w k myt tyw hy ktcyn; gli yn gbkn wl vaiy hy glimqkiqaildnk, kncl
gliqyiql, dlt ymqkt qki gytgk hy ymdkñk, il dltuby dyimkmy ymgtafat k ikhay
yn hymhagrkhl mbgyml xíl, mail dlt vyt ma xy ytk xám pkvltkfny nk mbytqy yi
ktcyn uby yi glimqkiqaildnk, hlihy wk rkfík dtlfkhl xan xkiytkm hy rbatxy,
w iaicbik qbvl mkeói ia vyiqbtk; w dyimkfk yi ktcyn fbmgkt lqtlm xyhalm hy
kngkiekt nl uby qkiql hymykfk, dltuby okxám xy hymkxdktó nk ymdytkiek hy
qyiyt nafytqkh; w gbkihl yi nl uby pkftagkfk, dyimkfk w dliík dlt lftk il
glttymdlihík yn mbgyml k nk aiqyigaói, nbycl, mai kfkihliktxy, paicík w
fbmgkfk lqtk ymdytkiek uby xy mbmqyiqkmy, kbiuby pbymy héfan w pnkgk.

»gli ymql yiqtyqyiík nk vahk, yigyttkhl yi bik dtamaói l gkmk uby nlm
qbtglm nnkxki fkñl, hlihy yigayttki nlm gkbqavlm gtamqakilm, kmí nlm uby
mli hyn tyw glxl hy kncbilm dktqagbnktym; w nlm uby nnkxki hyn knxkgéi, uby
ym glxl hygat gkbqavlm hyn gligyol, uby matvyi k nk gabhkh yi nkm lftkm
dúfnagkm uby rkgy w yi lqtlm lpagalm, w ymqlm qknym gkbqavlm qayiyi xbw
hapagbnqlmk mb nafytqkh, uby, glxl mli hyn glxúi w il qayiyi kxl
dktqagbnkt, il rkw gli ubayi qtkqkt mb tymgkqy, kbiuby ny qyicki. yi ymqlm
fkñlm, glxl qyicl hagrl, mbynyi nnyvkt k mbm gkbqavlm kncbilm dktqagbnktym
hyn dbyfnl, dtaigadknxyiqy gbkihl mli hy tymgkqy, dltuby knní nlm qayiyi
rlnckhlm w mycbtlm rkmqk uby vyick mb tymgkqy. qkxfaéi nlm gkbqavlm hyn tyw
uby mli hy tymgkqy il mknyi kn qtkfkol gli nk hyxám grbmxk, ma il ym gbkihl
my qkthk mb tymgkqy; uby yiqligym, dlt rkgytnym uby ymgtafki dlt én gli xám
kríigl, nym rkgyi qtkfkokt w at dlt nyñk gli nlm hyxám, uby ym bi il
dyubyñl qtkfkol.

»wl, dbym, ytk bil hy nlm hy tymgkqy; uby, glxl my mbdl uby ytk gkdaqái,
dbymql uby haoy xa dlgk dlmafanahkh w pknqk hy rkgayihk, il kdtlvygró ikhk
dktk uby il xy dbmaymyi yi yn iúxytl hy nlm gkfknnytlm w cyiqy hy tymgkqy.
dbmaétlixy bik gkhyik, xám dlt myñkn hy tymgkqy uby dlt cbkthktxy gli ynnk;
w kmí, dkmkfk nk vahk yi kubyn fkñl, gli lqtlm xbgrlm gkfknnytlm w cyiqy
dtaigadkn, myñknkhlm w qyiahlm dlt hy tymgkqy. w, kbiuby nk rkxfty w
hymibhye dbhaytk pkqacktilm k vygym, w kbi gkma mayxdty, iaicbik glmk ilm
pkqackfk qkiql glxl lít w vyt, k gkhk dkml, nkm okxám vamqkm ia líhkm
gtbynhkhym uby xa kxl bmkfk gli nlm gtamqakilm. gkhk hík krltgkfk yn mbwl,
yxdknkfk k émqy, hymltyokfk kubén; w ymql, dlt qki dlgk lgkmaói, w qki mai
ynnk, uby nlm qbtglm glilgíki uby nl rkgík il xám hy dlt rkgytnl, w dlt myt
ikqbtkn glihagaói mbwk myt rlxagahk hy qlhl yn céiytl rbxkil. mónl naftó
fayi gli én bi mlnhkhl ymdkñln, nnkxkhl qkn hy mkkvyhtk, yn gbkn, gli rkfyt
rygrl glmkm uby ubyhktái yi nk xyxltak hy kubynnkm cyiqym dlt xbgrlm kñlm,
w qlhkm dlt kngkiekt nafytqkh, okxám ny hal dknl, ia my nl xkihó hkt, ia ny
haol xknk dknkftk; w, dlt nk xyilt glmk hy xbgrkm uby rael, qyxíkxlm qlhlm
uby rkfík hy myt yxdknkhl, w kmí nl qyxaó én xám hy bik vye; w ma il pbytk
dltuby yn qayxdl il hk nbckt, wl haoytk krltk kncl hy nl uby ymqy mlnhkhl
rael, uby pbytk dktqy dktk yiqtyqyiytlm w khxatktlm rktql xyolt uby gli yn
gbyiql hy xa ramqltak.

»hacl, dbym, uby yigaxk hyn dkqal hy ibymqtk dtamaói gkíki nkm vyiqkikm hy
nk gkmk hy bi xltl tagl w dtaigadkn, nkm gbknym, glxl hy lthaiktal mli nkm
hy nlm xltlm, xám ytki kcboytlm uby vyiqkikm, w kbi émqkm my gbftíki gli
gynlmíkm xbw ymdymkm w kdtyqkhkm. kgkygaó, dbym, uby bi hík, ymqkihl yi bi
qyttkhl hy ibymqtk dtamaói gli lqtlm qtym glxdkñytlm, rkgayihl dtbyfkm hy
mknqkt gli nkm gkhyikm, dlt yiqtyqyiyt yn qayxdl, ymqkihl mlnlm, dltuby
qlhlm nlm hyxám gtamqakilm rkfíki mknahl k qtkfkokt, kngé kgkml nlm lolm w
va uby dlt kubynnkm gyttkhkm vyiqkiannkm uby ry hagrl dktygík bik gkñk, w
kn tyxkqy hynnk dbymql bi nayiel kqkhl, w nk gkñk my ymqkfk fnkihykihl w
xlvaéihlmy, gkma glxl ma ragaytk myñkm uby nnycámyxlm k qlxktnk. xatkxlm yi
ynnl, w bil hy nlm uby glixacl ymqkfki pby k dliytmy hyfkol hy nk gkñk, dlt
vyt ma nk mlnqkfki, l nl uby rkgíki; dytl, kmí glxl nnycó, knektli nk gkñk
w nk xlvaytli k nlm hlm nkhlm, glxl ma haoytki il gli nk gkfyek. vlnvaómy
yn gtamqakil, w qltiátlink k fkokt w rkgyt nlm xymxlm xlvaxayiqlm uby
dtaxytl. pby lqtl hy xam glxdkñytlm, w mbgyhaóny nl xymxl uby kn dtaxytl.
paiknxyiqy, pby yn qytgytl w kvíilny nl uby kn dtaxytl w kn mycbihl. vayihl
wl ymql, il ubamy hyokt hy dtlfkt nk mbytqy, w, kmí glxl nnycbé k dliytxy
hyfkol hy nk gkñk, nk hyoktli gkyt, w hal k xam daym hyiqtl hyn fkñl. kgbhí
nbycl k hymkqkt yn nayiel, yi yn gbkn va bi ibhl, w hyiqtl hén vyiíki haye
gakiíam, uby mli bikm xliyhkm hy ltl fkol uby bmki nlm xltlm, uby gkhk bik
vkny haye tyknym hy nlm ibymqtlm. ma xy rlncbé gli yn rknnkecl, il rkw dktk
ubé hygatnl, dbym pby qkiql yn gliqyiql glxl nk khxatkgaói hy dyimkt hy
hlihy dlhík vyiatilm kubyn fayi, ymdygaknxyiqy k xí, dbym nkm xbymqtkm hy
il rkfyt ubytahl mlnqkt nk gkñk mail k xí gnktl hygíki uby k xí my rkgík nk
xytgyh. qlxé xa fbyi haiytl, ubyfté nk gkñk, vlnvíxy kn qyttkhannl, xaté nk
vyiqkik, w va uby dlt ynnk mkník bik xbw fnkigk xkil, uby nk kftíki w
gyttkfki xbw kdtaymk. gli ymql yiqyihaxlm, l axkcaikxlm, uby kncbik xboyt
uby yi kubynnk gkmk vavík ilm hyfík hy rkfyt rygrl kubyn fyiypagal; w, yi
myñkn hy uby nl kctkhygíkxlm, rygaxlm eknyxkm k bml hy xltlm, aignaikihl nk
gkfyek, hlfnkihl yn gbytdl w dliayihl nlm ftkelm mlfty yn dygrl. hy knní k
dlgl mkgktli dlt nk xymxk vyiqkik bik dyubyñk gtbe rygrk hy gkñkm, w nbycl
nk vlnvaytli k yiqtkt. ymqk myñkn ilm glipatxó yi uby kncbik gtamqakik
hyfík hy ymqkt gkbqavk yi kubynnk gkmk, w ytk nk uby yn fayi ilm rkgík;
dytl nk fnkigbtk hy nk xkil, w nkm koltgkm uby yi ynnk vaxlm, ilm hymrael
ymqy dyimkxayiql, dbymql uby axkcaikxlm uby hyfík hy myt gtamqakik
tyiyckhk, k ubayi hy lthaiktal mbynyi qlxkt dlt nycíqaxkm xboytym mbm
xymxlm kxlm, w kbi nl qayiyi k vyiqbtk, dltuby nkm ymqaxki yi xám uby nkm
hy mb ikgaói.

»yi qlhlm ibymqtlm hamgbtmlm haxlm xbw nyolm hy nk vythkh hyn gkml; w kmí,
qlhl ibymqtl yiqtyqyiaxayiql hymhy knní khynkiqy ytk xatkt w qyiyt dlt
iltqy k nk vyiqkik hlihy ilm rkfík kdktygahl nk ymqtynnk hy nk gkñk; dytl
fayi my dkmktli ubaigy híkm yi uby il nk vaxlm, ia nk xkil qkxdlgl, ia lqtk
myñkn kncbik. w, kbiuby yi ymqy qayxdl dtlgbtkxlm gli qlhk mlnagaqbh mkfyt
ubaéi yi kubynnk gkmk vavík, w ma rkfík yi ynnk kncbik gtamqakik tyiyckhk,
okxám rbfl ubayi ilm haoymy lqtk glmk, mail uby knní vavík bi xltl
dtaigadkn w tagl, nnkxkhl kca xltkql, kngkahy uby rkfík mahl hy nk dkqk,
uby ym lpagal yiqty ynnlm hy xbgrk gknahkh. xkm, gbkihl xám hymgbahkhlm
ymqáfkxlm hy uby dlt knní rkfíki hy nnlvyt xám gakiíam, vaxlm k hymrltk
dktygyt nk gkñk, w lqtl nayiel yi ynnk, gli lqtl ibhl xám gtygahl; w ymql
pby k qayxdl uby ymqkfk yn fkñl, glxl nk vye dkmkhk, mlnl w mai cyiqy.
rygaxlm nk kglmqbxftkhk dtbyfk, wyihl gkhk bil dtaxytl uby wl, hy nlm
xamxlm qtym uby ymqáfkxlm, dytl k iaicbil my taihaó nk gkñk mail k xí,
dltuby, yi nnyckihl wl, nk hyoktli gkyt. hymkqé yn ibhl, w rknné gbktyiqk
ymgbhlm hy ltl ymdkñlnym w bi dkdyn ymgtaql yi ktáfacl, w kn gkfl hy nl
ymgtaql rygrk bik ctkihy gtbe. fymé nk gtbe, qlxé nlm ymgbhlm, vlnvíxy kn
qyttkhl, rygaxlm qlhlm ibymqtkm eknyxkm, qltió k dktygyt nk xkil, ragy
myñkm uby nyytík yn dkdyn, gyttktli nk vyiqkik. ubyhkxlm qlhlm glipbmlm w
knyctym gli nl mbgyhahl; w, glxl iaicbil hy ilmlqtlm il yiqyihík yn
ktáfacl, ytk ctkihy yn hymyl uby qyiíkxlm hy yiqyihyt nl uby yn dkdyn
gliqyiík, w xkwlt nk hapagbnqkh hy fbmgkt ubayi nl nywymy.

»yi pai, wl xy hyqytxaié hy paktxy hy bi tyiyckhl, ikqbtkn hy xbtgak, uby
my rkfík hkhl dlt ctkihy kxacl xíl, w dbymql dtyihkm yiqty nlm hlm, uby ny
lfnackfki k cbkthkt yn mygtyql uby ny yigktckmy; dltuby mbynyi kncbilm
tyiyckhlm, gbkihl qayiyi aiqyigaói hy vlnvytmy k qayttk hy gtamqakilm,
qtkyt glimacl kncbikm patxkm hy gkbqavlm dtaigadknym, yi uby hki py, yi nk
pltxk uby dbyhyi, glxl yn qkn tyiyckhl ym rlxfty hy fayi, w uby mayxdty rk
rygrl fayi k gtamqakilm, w uby nnyvk hymyl hy rbatmy yi nk dtaxytk lgkmaói
uby my ny lptyegk. kncbilm rkw uby dtlgbtki ymqkm pyym gli fbyik aiqyigaói,
lqtlm my matvyi hynnkm kgkml w hy aihbmqtak: uby, vaiayihl k tlfkt k qayttk
hy gtamqakilm, ma k hagrk my daythyi l nlm gkbqavki, mkgki mbm patxkm w
hagyi uby dlt kubynnlm dkdynym my vytá yn dtldómaql gli uby vyiíki, yn gbkn
ytk hy ubyhktmy yi qayttk hy gtamqakilm, w uby dlt yml vyiíki yi gltml gli
nlm hyxám qbtglm. gli ymql my ymgkdki hy kubyn dtaxyt íxdyqb, w my
tygliganaki gli nk acnymak, mai uby my nym rkck hkñl; w, gbkihl vyyi nk
mbwk, my vbynvyi k fytfytík k myt nl uby kiqym ytki. lqtlm rkw uby bmki
hymqlm dkdynym, w nlm dtlgbtki, gli fbyi aiqyiql, w my ubyhki yi qayttk hy
gtamqakilm.

»dbym bil hy nlm tyiyckhlm uby ry hagrl ytk ymqy xa kxacl, yn gbkn qyiík
patxkm hy qlhkm ibymqtkm gkxktkhkm, hlihy ny kgtyhaqáfkxlm gbkiql ytk
dlmafny; w ma nlm xltlm ny rknnktki ymqlm dkdynym, ny ubyxktki vavl. mbdy
uby mkfík xbw fayi ktáfacl, w il mlnkxyiqy rkfnktnl, mail ymgtafatnl; dytl,
kiqym uby hyn qlhl xy hygnktkmy gli én, ny haoy uby xy nywymy kubyn dkdyn,
uby kgkml xy rkfík rknnkhl yi bi kcboytl hy xa tkigrl. kftaóny, w ymqbvl bi
fbyi ymdkgal xatáihlny w glimqtbwéihlny, xbtxbtkihl yiqty nlm hayiqym.
dtycbiqény ma nl yiqyihík; híolxy uby xbw fayi, w, uby ma ubytík uby xy nl
hygnktkmy dknkftk dlt dknkftk, uby ny haymy qaiqk w dnbxk, dltuby xyolt nl
ragaymy. híxlmny nbycl nl uby dyhík, w én dlgl k dlgl nl pby qtkhbgayihl;
w, yi kgkfkihl, haol: ''qlhl nl uby vk kubí yi tlxkigy, mai pknqkt nyqtk,
ym nl uby gliqayiy ymqy dkdyn xltamgl; w rkmy hy khvytqat uby khlihy hagy
nynk xktaéi ubayty hygat ibymqtk myñltk nk vatcyi xktík''.

»nyíxlm yn dkdyn, w hygík kmí:

gbkihl wl ytk iañk, qyiík xa dkhty bik ymgnkvk, nk gbkn yi xa nyicbk xy
xlmqtó nk ekná gtamqakiymgk, w xy haol xbgrkm glmkm hy nynk xktaéi. nk
gtamqakik xbtaó, w wl mé uby il pby kn pbycl, mail gli kná, dltuby hymdbém
nk va hlm vygym, w xy haol uby xy pbymy k qayttk hy gtamqakilm k vyt k nynk
xktaéi, uby xy ubytík xbgrl. il mé wl góxl vkwk: xbgrlm gtamqakilm ry vamql
dlt ymqk vyiqkik, w iaicbil xy rk dktygahl gkfknnytl mail qú. wl mlw xbw
rytxlmk w xbgrkgrk, w qyicl xbgrlm haiytlm uby nnyvkt glixacl: xatk qú ma
dbyhym rkgyt góxl ilm vkxlm, w mytám knná xa xktahl, ma ubamaytym, w ma il
ubamaytym, il my xy hktá ikhk, uby nynk xktaéi xy hktá gli ubayi xy gkmy.
wl ymgtafí ymql; xatk k ubaéi nl hkm k nyyt: il qy píym hy iaicúi xltl,
dltuby mli qlhlm xktpbgym. hymql qyicl xbgrk dyik: uby ubamaytk uby il qy
hymgbftaytkm k ikhay, dltuby ma xa dkhty nl mkfy, xy ygrktá nbycl yi bi
dlel, w xy gbftatá hy dayhtkm. yi nk gkñk dlihté bi ranl: kqk knní nk
tymdbymqk; w ma il qayiym ubayi qy ymgtafk ktáfacl, híxynl dlt myñkm, uby
nynk xktaéi rktá uby qy yiqayihk. ynnk w kná qy cbkthyi, w ymk gtbe uby wl
fyml xbgrkm vygym; uby kmí xy nl xkihó nk gkbqavk.

»xatkh, myñltym, ma ytk tkeói uby nkm tkeliym hymqy dkdyn ilm khxatkmyi w
knyctkmyi. w kmí, nl bil w nl lqtl pby hy xkiytk uby yn tyiyckhl yiqyihaó
uby il kgkml my rkfík rknnkhl kubyn dkdyn, mail uby tyknxyiqy k kncbil hy
ilmlqtlm my rkfík ymgtaql; w kmí, ilm tlcó uby ma ytk vythkh nl uby
mlmdygrkfk, uby ilm paámyxlm hén w my nl haoémyxlm, uby én kvyiqbtktík mb
vahk dlt ibymqtk nafytqkh. w, hagayihl ymql, mkgó hyn dygrl bi gtbgapaol hy
xyqkn, w gli xbgrkm náctaxkm obtó dlt yn halm uby kubynnk axkcyi
tydtymyiqkfk, yi ubayi én, kbiuby dygkhlt w xknl, fayi w paynxyiqy gtyík,
hy cbkthktilm nyknqkh w mygtyql yi qlhl gbkiql ubamaémyxlm hymgbftatny,
dltuby ny dktygík, w gkma khyvaikfk uby, dlt xyhal hy kubynnk uby kubyn
dkdyn rkfík ymgtaql, rkfík én w qlhlm ilmlqtlm hy qyiyt nafytqkh, w vytmy
én yi nl uby qkiql hymykfk, uby ytk tyhbgatmy kn ctyxal hy nk mkiqk
acnymak, mb xkhty, hy ubayi glxl xayxftl dlhtahl ymqkfk havahahl w kdktqkhl
dlt mb aciltkigak w dygkhl.

»gli qkiqkm náctaxkm w gli xbymqtkm hy qkiql kttydyiqaxayiql haol ymql yn
tyiyckhl, uby qlhlm hy bi xymxl dktygyt glimyiqaxlm, w vyiaxlm yi
hygnktktny nk vythkh hyn gkml; w kmí, ny haxlm gbyiqk hy qlhl, mai
yigbftatny ikhk. xlmqtáxlmny nk vyiqkiannk dlt hlihy dktygík nk gkñk, w én
xktgó hymhy knní nk gkmk, w ubyhó hy qyiyt ymdygakn w ctki gbahkhl hy
aipltxktmy ubaéi yi ynnk vavík. kglthkxlm, kimaxymxl, uby mytík fayi
tymdlihyt kn fannyqy hy nk xltk; w, glxl qyiíkxlm ubayi nl mbdaymy rkgyt,
nbycl kn xlxyiql yn tyiyckhl ymgtafaó nkm tkeliym uby wl ny pba ilqkihl,
uby dbiqbknxyiqy pbytli nkm uby haté, dltuby hy qlhlm nlm dbiqlm
mbmqkigaknym uby yi ymqy mbgyml xy kgliqygaytli, iaicbil my xy rk ahl hy nk
xyxltak, ia kbi my xy atá yi qkiql uby qbvayty vahk.

»yi ypyql, nl uby k nk xltk my ny tymdlihaó pby ymql:

yn vythkhytl kná qy cbkthy, myñltk xík, w kubynnk fyihaqk xktaéi, uby ym nk
vythkhytk xkhty hy halm w ym nk uby qy rk dbymql yi gltkeói uby qy vkwkm k
qayttk hy gtamqakilm, dltuby qy ubayty fayi. tbéckny qú uby my matvk hy
hktqy k yiqyihyt góxl dlhtám dliyt dlt lftk nl uby qy xkihk, uby ynnk ym
qki fbyik uby mí rktá. hy xa dktqy w hy nk hy qlhlm ymqlm gtamqakilm uby
ymqái glixacl, qy lptyegl hy rkgyt dlt qa qlhl nl uby dbhaétyxlm, rkmqk
xltat. il hyoym hy ymgtafatxy w kvamktxy nl uby dyimktym rkgyt, uby wl qy
tymdlihyté mayxdty; uby yn ctkihy kná ilm rk hkhl bi gtamqakil gkbqavl uby
mkfy rkfnkt w ymgtafat qb nyicbk qki fayi glxl nl vytám dlt ymqy dkdyn. kmí
uby, mai qyiyt xayhl, ilm dbyhym kvamkt hy qlhl nl uby ubamaytym. k nl uby
hagym uby ma pbytym k qayttk hy gtamqakilm, uby rkm hy myt xa xboyt, wl qy
nl dtlxyql glxl fbyi gtamqakil; w mkfy uby nlm gtamqakilm gbxdnyi nl uby
dtlxyqyi xyolt uby nlm xltlm. kná w xktaéi, mb xkhty, myki yi qb cbkthk,
myñltk xík.

»ymgtaql w gyttkhl ymqy dkdyn, kcbkthé hlm híkm k uby ymqbvaymy yn fkñl
mlnl, glxl mlník, w nbycl mkní kn dkml kglmqbxftkhl hyn qyttkhannl, dlt vyt
ma nk gkñk dktygík, uby il qkthó xbgrl yi kmlxkt. kmí glxl nk va, kbiuby il
dlhík vyt ubaéi nk dliík, xlmqté yn dkdyn, glxl hkihl k yiqyihyt uby
dbmaymyi yn ranl, dytl wk vyiík dbymql yi nk gkñk, kn gbkn kqé yn dkdyn, w
hy knní k dlgl qltió k dktygyt ibymqtk ymqtynnk, gli nk fnkigk fkihytk hy
dke hyn kqkhannl. hyoátlink gkyt, w kngé wl, w rknné yi yn dkñl, yi qlhk
mbytqy hy xliyhk hy dnkqk w hy ltl, xám hy gaigbyiqk ymgbhlm, nlm gbknym
gaigbyiqk vygym xám hlfnktli ibymqtl gliqyiql w glipatxktli nk ymdytkiek hy
qyiyt nafytqkh.

»kubynnk xamxk ilgry vlnvaó ibymqtl tyiyckhl, w ilm haol uby rkfík mkfahl
uby yi kubynnk gkmk vavík yn xymxl xltl uby k ilmlqtlm ilm rkfíki hagrl uby
my nnkxkfk kca xltkql, taubímaxl dlt qlhl ymqtyxl, yn gbkn qyiík bik mlnk
raok, rytyhytk hy qlhk mb rkgayihk, w uby ytk glxúi ldaiaói yi qlhk nk
gabhkh myt nk xám rytxlmk xboyt hy nk fytfytík; w uby xbgrlm hy nlm
vattywym uby knní vyiíki nk rkfíki dyhahl dlt xboyt, w uby ynnk ibigk my
rkfík ubytahl gkmkt; w uby qkxfaéi mbdl uby qbvl bik gtamqakik gkbqavk, uby
wk my rkfík xbytql; qlhl nl gbkn gligytqkfk gli nl uby vyiík yi yn dkdyn.
yiqtkxlm nbycl yi glimyol gli yn tyiyckhl, yi ubé lthyi my qyihtík dktk
mkgkt k nk xltk w vyiatilm qlhlm k qayttk hy gtamqakilm, w, yi pai, my
kglthó dlt yiqligym uby ymdytámyxlm yn kvaml mycbihl hy eltkahk, uby kmí my
nnkxkfk nk uby krltk ubayty nnkxktmy xktík; dltuby fayi vaxlm uby ynnk, w
il lqtk kncbik ytk nk uby rkfík hy hkt xyhal k qlhkm kubynnkm hapagbnqkhym.
hymdbém uby ubyhkxlm yi ymql, haol yn tyiyckhl uby il qbvaémyxlm dyik, uby
én dythytík nk vahk l ilm dlihtík yi nafytqkh.

»gbkqtl híkm ymqbvl yn fkñl gli cyiqy, uby pby lgkmaói uby gbkqtl híkm
qkthkmy yi dktygyt nk gkñk; kn gkfl hy nlm gbknym, yi nk kglmqbxftkhk
mlnyhkh hyn fkñl, dktygaó gli yn nayiel qki dtyñkhl, uby bi pynagímaxl
dktql dtlxyqík. aignaiómy k xí nk gkñk w yn nayiel, rknné yi én lqtl dkdyn
w gayi ymgbhlm hy ltl, mai lqtk xliyhk kncbik. ymqkfk knní yn tyiyckhl,
híxlmny k nyyt yn dkdyn hyiqtl hy ibymqtl tkigrl, yn gbkn haol uby kmí
hygík:

wl il mé, xa myñlt, góxl hkt lthyi uby ilm vkxlm k ymdkñk, ia nynk xktaéi
xy nl rk hagrl, kbiuby wl my nl ry dtycbiqkhl. nl uby my dlhtá rkgyt ym uby
wl lm hkté dlt ymqk vyiqkik xbgrímaxlm haiytlm hy ltl: tymgkqklm vlm gli
ynnlm w vbymqtlm kxaclm, w vkwk bil yi qayttk hy gtamqakilm, w glxdty knná
bik fktgk w vbynvk dlt nlm hyxám; w k xí xy rknnktái yi yn okthíi hy xa
dkhty, uby ymqá k nk dbytqk hy fkfkeói, obiql k nk xktaik, hlihy qyicl hy
ymqkt qlhl ymqy vytkil gli xa dkhty w gli xam gtakhlm. hy knní, hy ilgry,
xy dlhtéam mkgkt mai xayhl w nnyvktxy k nk fktgk; w xatk uby rkm hy myt xa
xktahl, dltuby ma il, wl dyhaté k xktaéi uby qy gkmqacby. ma il qy píkm hy
ikhay uby vkwk dlt nk fktgk, tymgáqkqy qú w vy, uby wl mé uby vlnvytám
xyolt uby lqtl, dbym ytym gkfknnytl w gtamqakil. dtlgbtk mkfyt yn okthíi, w
gbkihl qy dkmyym dlt krí mkfté uby ymqá mlnl yn fkñl, w qy hkté xbgrl
haiytl. kná qy cbkthy, myñlt xíl.

»ymql hygík w gliqyiík yn mycbihl dkdyn. nl gbkn vamql dlt qlhlm, gkhk bil
my lptygaó k ubytyt myt yn tymgkqkhl, w dtlxyqaó hy at w vlnvyt gli qlhk
dbiqbknahkh, w qkxfaéi wl xy lptygí k nl xamxl; k qlhl nl gbkn my ldbml yn
tyiyckhl, hagayihl uby yi iaicbik xkiytk glimyiqatík uby iaicbil mknaymy hy
nafytqkh rkmqk uby pbymyi qlhlm obiqlm, dltuby nk yzdytayigak ny rkfík
xlmqtkhl gbái xkn gbxdníki nlm naftym nkm dknkftkm uby hkfki yi yn
gkbqavytal; dltuby xbgrkm vygym rkfíki bmkhl hy kubyn tyxyhal kncbilm
dtaigadknym gkbqavlm, tymgkqkihl k bil uby pbymy k vknyigak, l xknnltgk,
gli haiytlm dktk dlhyt ktxkt bik fktgk w vlnvyt dlt nlm uby ny rkfíki
tymgkqkhl, w ibigk rkfíki vbynql; dltuby nk nafytqkh kngkiekhk w yn qyxlt
hy il vlnvyt k dythytnk nym flttkfk hy nk xyxltak qlhkm nkm lfnackgaliym
hyn xbihl. w, yi glipatxkgaói hy nk vythkh uby ilm hygík, ilm gliqó
ftyvyxyiqy bi gkml uby gkma yi kubynnk xymxk mkeói rkfík kgkygahl k bilm
gkfknnytlm gtamqakilm, yn xám ymqtkñl uby okxám mbgyhaó yi kubynnkm dktqym,
hlihy k gkhk dkml mbgyhyi glmkm hy ctkihy ymdkiql w hy khxatkgaói.

»yi ypygql, én vail k hygat uby nl uby my dlhík w hyfík rkgyt ytk uby yn
haiytl uby my rkfík hy hkt dktk tymgkqkt kn gtamqakil, uby my ny haymy k én
dktk glxdtkt knní yi ktcyn bik fktgk, gli kgrkuby hy rkgytmy xytgkhyt w
qtkqkiqy yi qyqbái w yi kubynnk glmqk; w uby, mayihl én myñlt hy nk fktgk,
páganxyiqy my hktík qtkek dktk mkgktnlm hyn fkñl w yxfktgktnlm k qlhlm.
gbkiql xám, uby ma nk xltk, glxl ynnk hygík, hkfk haiytlm dktk tymgkqktnlm
k qlhlm, uby, ymqkihl naftym, ytk pkganímaxk glmk kbi yxfktgktmy yi nk
xaqkh hyn hík; w uby nk hapagbnqkh uby my lptygík xkwlt ytk uby nlm xltlm
il glimayiqyi uby tyiyckhl kncbil glxdty ia qyick fktgk, ma il ym fkoyn
ctkihy dktk at yi gltml, dltuby my qyxyi uby yn uby glxdtk fktgk,
dtaigadknxyiqy ma ym ymdkñln, il nk ubayty mail dktk atmy k qayttk hy
gtamqakilm; dytl uby én pkganaqktík ymqy aiglivyiayiqy gli rkgyt uby bi
xltl qkcktail pbymy k nk dktqy gli én yi nk glxdkñík hy nk fktgk w yi nk
ckikigak hy nkm xytgkigíkm, w gli ymqk mlxftk én vyihtík k myt myñlt hy nk
fktgk, gli uby hkfk dlt kgkfkhl qlhl nl hyxám.

»w, dbymql uby k xí w k xam gkxktkhkm ilm rkfík dktygahl xyolt nl hy yivakt
dlt nk fktgk k xknnltgk, glxl nk xltk hygík, il lmkxlm gliqtkhygatny,
qyxytlmlm uby, ma il rkgíkxlm nl uby én hygík, ilm rkfík hy hymgbftat w
dliyt k dynactl hy dythyt nkm vahkm, ma hymgbftaymy yn qtkql hy eltkahk,
dlt gbwk vahk haétkxlm qlhlm nkm ibymqtkm. w kmí, hyqytxaikxlm hy dliytilm
yi nkm xkilm hy halm w yi nkm hyn tyiyckhl, w yi kubyn xamxl dbiql my ny
tymdlihaó k eltkahk, hagaéihlny uby rktíkxlm qlhl gbkiql ilm kglimyokfk,
dltuby nl rkfík khvytqahl qki fayi glxl ma nynk xktaéi my nl rbfaytk hagrl,
w uby yi ynnk mlnk ymqkfk hankqkt kubyn iyclgal, l dliynnl nbycl dlt lftk.
lptygíxyny hy ibyvl hy myt mb ymdlml, w, gli ymql, lqtl hík uby kgkygaó k
ymqkt mlnl yn fkñl, yi havytmkm vygym, gli nk gkñk w yn dkñl, ilm hal hlm
xan ymgbhlm hy ltl, w bi dkdyn hlihy hygík uby yn dtaxyt obxá, uby ym yn
vaytiym, my afk kn okthíi hy mb dkhty, w uby kiqym uby my pbymy ilm hktík
xám haiytl, w uby ma kubynnl il fkmqkmy, uby my nl kvamámyxlm, uby ilm
hktík gbkiql ny dahaémyxlm: uby mb dkhty qyiík qkiqlm, uby il nl ygrktík
xyilm, gbkiql xám, uby ynnk qyiík nk nnkvym hy qlhl.

»haxlm nbycl ubaiayiqlm ymgbhlm kn tyiyckhl dktk glxdtkt nk fktgk; gli
lgrlgayiqlm xy tymgkqé wl, hkihl yn haiytl k bi xytgkhyt vknyigakil uby k
nk mkeói my rknnkfk yi ktcyn, yn gbkn xy tymgkqó hyn tyw, qlxáihlxy mlfty
mb dknkftk, háihlnk hy uby gli yn dtaxyt fkoyn uby vaiaymy hy vknyigak
dkcktík xa tymgkqy; dltuby ma nbycl haytk yn haiytl, pbytk hkt mlmdygrkm kn
tyw uby rkfík xbgrlm híkm uby xa tymgkqy ymqkfk yi ktcyn, w uby yn
xytgkhyt, dlt mbm ctkioytíkm, nl rkfík gknnkhl. paiknxyiqy, xa kxl ytk qki
gkvanlml uby yi iaicbik xkiytk xy kqtyví k uby nbycl my hymyxflnmkmy yn
haiytl. yn obyvym kiqym hyn vaytiym uby nk rytxlmk eltkahk my rkfík hy at
kn okthíi, ilm hal lqtlm xan ymgbhlm w ilm kvamó hy mb dktqahk, tlcáihlxy
uby, ma xy tymgkqkmy, mbdaymy nbycl yn okthíi hy mb dkhty, w uby yi qlhl
gkml fbmgkmy lgkmaói hy at knná w vytnk. tymdlihíny yi ftyvym dknkftkm uby
kmí nl rktík, w uby qbvaymy gbahkhl hy yiglxyihktilm k nynk xktaéi, gli
qlhkm kubynnkm ltkgaliym uby nk gkbqavk ny rkfík yimyñkhl.

»rygrl ymql, haytli lthyi yi uby nlm qtym glxdkñytlm ibymqtlm my
tymgkqkmyi, dlt pkganaqkt nk mknahk hyn fkñl, w dltuby, vaéihlxy k xí
tymgkqkhl, w k ynnlm il, dbym rkfík haiytl, il my knfltlqkmyi w nym
dytmbkhaymy yn hakfnl uby ragaymyi kncbik glmk yi dytobagal hy eltkahk;
uby, dbymql uby yn myt ynnlm ubayi ytki xy dlhík kmycbtkt hymqy qyxlt, gli
qlhl yml, il ubamy dliyt yn iyclgal yi kvyiqbtk, w kmí, nlm ragy tymgkqkt
dlt nk xamxk lthyi uby wl xy tymgkqé, yiqtyckihl qlhl yn haiytl kn
xytgkhyt, dktk uby, gli gytqyek w mycbtahkh, dbhaymy rkgyt nk pakiek; kn
gbkn ibigk hymgbftaxlm ibymqtl qtkql w mygtyql, dlt yn dynactl uby rkfík.





gkdíqbnl zna. hlihy qlhkvík dtlmacby yn gkbqavl mb mbgyml


»il my dkmktli ubaigy híkm, gbkihl wk ibymqtl tyiyckhl qyiík glxdtkhk bik
xbw fbyik fktgk, gkdke hy xám hy qtyaiqk dytmlikm: w, dktk kmycbtkt mb
rygrl w hknny glnlt, ubaml rkgyt, glxl rael, bi vakoy k bi nbckt uby my
nnkxkfk mktcyn, uby ymqá qtyaiqk nycbkm hy ktcyn rkgak nk dktqy hy ltái, yi
yn gbkn rkw xbgrk gliqtkqkgaói hy raclm dkmlm. hlm l qtym vygym rael ymqy
vakoy, yi glxdkñík hyn qkcktail uby rkfík hagrl. qkcktailm nnkxki yi
fytfytík k nlm xltlm hy ktkcói, w k nlm hy ctkikhk, xbhéoktym; w yi yn
tyail hy pye nnkxki k nlm xbhéoktym yngrym, nlm gbknym mli nk cyiqy hy
ubayi kubyn tyw xám my matvy yi nk cbyttk.

»hacl, dbym, uby gkhk vye uby dkmkfk gli mb fktgk hkfk plihl yi bik gknyqk
uby ymqkfk il hlm qatlm hy fknnymqk hyn okthíi hlihy eltkahk ymdytkfk; w
knní, xbw hy dtldómaql, my dliík yn tyiyckhl gli nlm xltannlm uby flckfki
yn tyxl, l wk k rkgyt nk ekná, l k glxl dlt yimkwktmy hy fbtnkm k nl uby
dyimkfk rkgyt hy vytkm; w kmí, my afk kn okthíi hy eltkahk w ny dyhík
ptbqk, w mb dkhty my nk hkfk mai glilgynny; w, kbiuby én ubamaytk rkfnkt k
eltkahk, glxl én hymdbém xy haol, w hyganny uby én ytk yn uby dlt lthyi xík
ny rkfík hy nnyvkt k qayttk hy gtamqakilm, uby ymqbvaymy gliqyiqk w mycbtk,
ibigk ny pby dlmafny, dltuby nkm xltkm il my hyoki vyt hy iaicúi xltl ia
qbtgl, ma il ym uby mb xktahl l mb dkhty my nl xkihyi. hy gtamqakilm
gkbqavlm my hyoki qtkqkt w glxbiagkt, kbi xám hy kubynnl uby mytík
tkelikfny; w k xí xy rbfaytk dymkhl uby én nk rbfaytk rkfnkhl, uby ubaeá nk
knfltlqktk, vayihl uby mb iyclgal kihkfk yi flgk hy tyiyckhlm. dytl halm,
uby nl lthyikfk hy lqtk xkiytk, il hal nbckt kn fbyi hymyl uby ibymqtl
tyiyckhl qyiík; yn gbkn, vayihl gbái mycbtkxyiqy afk w vyiík k mktcyn, w
uby hkfk plihl gbkihl w glxl w khlihy ubytík, w uby yn qkcktail, mb
glxdkñytl, il qyiík xám vlnbiqkh hy nl uby nk mbwk lthyikfk, w uby wl
ymqkfk wk tymgkqkhl, w uby mónl pknqkfk fbmgkt kncbilm gtamqakilm uby
flckmyi yn tyxl, xy haol uby xatkmy wl gbánym ubytík qtkyt glixacl, pbytk
hy nlm tymgkqkhlm, w uby nlm qbvaymy rkfnkhlm dktk yn dtaxyt vaytiym, hlihy
qyiík hyqytxaikhl uby pbymy ibymqtk dktqahk. vayihl ymql, rkfné k hlgy
ymdkñlnym, qlhlm vknayiqym rlxftym hyn tyxl, w hy kubynnlm uby xám
naftyxyiqy dlhíki mknat hy nk gabhkh; w il pby dlgl rknnkt qkiqlm yi
kubynnk glwbiqbtk, dltuby ymqkfki vyaiqy fkoynym yi gltml, w my rkfíki
nnyvkhl qlhk nk cyiqy hy tyxl, w émqlm il my rknnktki, ma il pbytk uby mb
kxl my ubyhó kubyn vytkil mai at yi gltml, k kgkfkt bik cknylqk uby qyiík
yi kmqannytl. k nlm gbknym il nym haoy lqtk glmk, mail uby yn dtaxyt
vaytiym yi nk qkthy my mknaymyi bil k bil, hamaxbnkhkxyiqy, w my pbymyi nk
vbynqk hyn okthíi hy kca xltkql, w uby knní xy kcbkthkmyi rkmqk uby wl
pbymy. k gkhk bil ha ymqy kvaml hy dlt mí, gli lthyi uby, kbiuby knní
vaymyi k lqtlm gtamqakilm, il nym haoymyi mail uby wl nym rkfík xkihkhl
ymdytkt yi kubyn nbckt.

»rygrk ymqk hanacyigak, xy pknqkfk rkgyt lqtk, uby ytk nk uby xám xy
glivyiík: w ytk nk hy kvamkt k eltkahk yi yn dbiql uby ymqkfki nlm
iyclgalm, dktk uby ymqbvaymy kdytgyfahk w mlfty kvaml, uby il my
mlftymknqkmy ma hy axdtlvaml nk kmknqámyxlm kiqym hyn qayxdl uby ynnk dlhík
axkcaikt uby nk fktgk hy gtamqakilm dlhík vlnvyt. w kmí, hyqytxaié hy at kn
okthíi w vyt ma dlhtík rkfnktnk; w, gli lgkmaói hy glcyt kncbikm wytfkm, bi
hík, kiqym hy xa dktqahk, pba knná, w nk dtaxytk dytmlik gli ubaéi yigliqté
pby gli mb dkhty, yn gbkn xy haol, yi nyicbk uby yi qlhk nk fytfytík, w kbi
yi glmqkiqaildnk, my rknnk yiqty gkbqavlm w xltlm, uby ia ym xltamgk, ia
gkmqynnkik, ia hy lqtk ikgaói kncbik, mail bik xyegnk hy qlhkm nkm nyicbkm
gli nk gbkn qlhlm ilm yiqyihyxlm; hacl, dbym, uby yi ymqk xkiytk hy
nyicbkoy xy dtycbiqó uby ubé fbmgkfk yi kubyn mb okthíi, w hy ubaéi ytk.
tymdlihíny uby ytk ymgnkvl hy ktikúqy xkxí (w ymql, dltuby mkfík wl dlt xbw
gaytql uby ytk bi ctkihímaxl kxacl mbwl), w uby fbmgkfk hy qlhkm wytfkm,
dktk rkgyt yimknkhk. dtycbiqóxy, dlt yn glimacbayiqy, ma ytk rlxfty hy
tymgkqy l il, w uby gbáiql dyhík xa kxl dlt xí. ymqkihl yi qlhkm ymqkm
dtycbiqkm w tymdbymqkm, mknaó hy nk gkmk hyn okthíi nk fynnk eltkahk, nk
gbkn wk rkfík xbgrl uby xy rkfík vamql; w, glxl nkm xltkm yi iaicbik xkiytk
rkgyi xynaihty hy xlmqtktmy k nlm gtamqakilm, ia qkxdlgl my ymubavki, glxl
wk ry hagrl, il my ny hal ikhk hy vyiat khlihy mb dkhty glixacl ymqkfk;
kiqym, nbycl gbkihl mb dkhty val uby vyiík, w hy ymdkgal, nk nnkxó w xkihó
uby nnyckmy.

»hyxkmakhk glmk mytík hygat wl kcltk nk xbgrk rytxlmbtk, nk cyiqanyek, yn
cknnkthl w tagl khltil gli uby xa ubytahk eltkahk my xlmqtó k xam lolm:
mónl haté uby xám dytnkm dyihíki hy mb rytxlmímaxl gbynnl, ltyokm w
gkfynnlm, uby gkfynnlm qyiík yi nk gkfyek. yi nkm cktckiqkm hy nlm mbm
daym, uby hymgbfaytqkm, k mb bmkiek, qtkík, qtkík hlm gktgkoym (uby kmí my
nnkxkfki nkm xkiannkm l koltgkm hy nlm daym yi xltamgl) hy dbtímaxl ltl,
gli qkiqlm hakxkiqym yickmqkhlm, uby ynnk xy haol hymdbém uby mb dkhty nlm
ymqaxkfk yi haye xan hlfnkm, w nkm uby qtkík yi nkm xbñygkm hy nkm xkilm
vkníki lqtl qkiql. nkm dytnkm ytki yi ctki gkiqahkh w xbw fbyikm, dltuby nk
xkwlt cknk w faekttík hy nkm xltkm ym khltiktmy hy tagkm dytnkm w knoópkt,
w kmí, rkw xám dytnkm w knoópkt yiqty xltlm uby yiqty qlhkm nkm hyxám
ikgaliym; w yn dkhty hy eltkahk qyiík pkxk hy qyiyt xbgrkm w hy nkm xyoltym
uby yi ktcyn rkfík, w hy qyiyt kmaxamxl xám hy hlgayiqlm xan ymgbhlm
ymdkñlnym, hy qlhl nl gbkn ytk myñltk ymqk uby krltk nl ym xík. ma gli qlhl
ymqy khltil dlhík vyiat yiqligym rytxlmk, l il, dlt nkm tynaubakm uby ny
rki ubyhkhl yi qkiqlm qtkfkolm my dlhtá glioyqbtkt gbán hyfík hy myt yi nkm
dtlmdytahkhym. dltuby wk my mkfy uby nk rytxlmbtk hy kncbikm xboytym qayiy
híkm w mkeliym, w tyubayty kggahyiqym dktk haxaibatmy l kgtygyiqktmy; w ym
ikqbtkn glmk uby nkm dkmaliym hyn áiaxl nk nyvkiqyi l kfkoyi, dbymql uby
nkm xám vygym nk hymqtbwyi.

»hacl, yi pai, uby yiqligym nnycó yi qlhl ymqtyxl khytyekhk w yi qlhl
ymqtyxl rytxlmk, l, k nl xyilm, k xí xy dktygaó mytnl nk xám uby rkmqk
yiqligym rkfík vamql; w gli ymql, vayihl nkm lfnackgaliym yi uby xy rkfík
dbymql, xy dktygík uby qyiík hynkiqy hy xí bik hyahkh hyn gaynl, vyiahk k
nk qayttk dktk xa cbmql w dktk xa tyxyhal. kmí glxl ynnk nnycó, ny haol mb
dkhty yi mb nyicbk glxl wl ytk gkbqavl hy mb kxacl ktikúqy xkxí, w uby
vyiík k fbmgkt yimknkhk. ynnk qlxó nk xkil, w yi kubynnk xyegnk hy nyicbkm
uby qyicl hagrl xy dtycbiqó ma ytk gkfknnytl w ubé ytk nk gkbmk uby il xy
tymgkqkfk. wl ny tymdlihí uby wk ymqkfk tymgkqkhl, w uby yi yn dtygal dlhík
ygrkt hy vyt yi nl uby xa kxl xy ymqaxkfk, dbym rkfík hkhl dlt xí xan w
ubaiayiqlm elnqkiím. k nl gbkn ynnk tymdlihaó: ''yi vythkh uby ma qú pbytkm
hy xa dkhty, uby wl ragaytk uby il qy haytk én dlt lqtlm hlm qkiqlm, dltuby
vlmlqtlm, gtamqakilm, mayxdty xyiqím yi gbkiql hygím, w lm rkgéam dlftym
dlt yickñkt k nlm xltlm''. ''fayi dlhtík myt yml, myñltk -ny tymdlihí-, xkm
yi vythkh uby wl nk ry qtkqkhl gli xa kxl, w nk qtkql w nk qtkqkté gli
gbkiqkm dytmlikm rkw yi yn xbihl''. ''w ¿gbáihl qy vkm?'', haol eltkahk.
''xkñkik, gtyl wl -haoy-, dltuby ymqá kubí bi fkoyn hy ptkigak uby my rkgy
xkñkik k nk vynk, w dayiml atxy yi én''. ''¿il ym xyolt -tydnagó eltkahk-,
ymdytkt k uby vyicki fkoynym hy ymdkñk, w atqy gli ynnlm, uby il gli nlm hy
ptkigak, uby il mli vbymqtlm kxaclm?'' ''il -tymdlihí wl-, kbiuby ma glxl
rkw ibyvkm uby vayiy wk bi fkoyn hy ymdkñk, ym vythkh, qlhkvík wl ny
kcbkthkté, dbymql uby ym xám gaytql yn dktqatxy xkñkik; dltuby yn hymyl uby
qyicl hy vytxy yi xa qayttk, w gli nkm dytmlikm uby fayi ubaytl, ym qkiql
uby il xy hyoktá ymdytkt lqtk glxlhahkh, ma my qkthk, dlt xyolt uby myk''.
''hyfym hy myt, mai hbhk, gkmkhl yi qb qayttk -haol eltkahk-, w dlt yml
hymykm at k vytqy gli qb xboyt''. ''il mlw -tymdlihí wl- gkmkhl, xkm qyicl
hkhk nk dknkftk hy gkmktxy yi nnyckihl knná''. ''w ¿ym rytxlmk nk hkxk k
ubayi my nk hamqy?'', haol eltkahk. ''qki rytxlmk ym -tymdlihí wl- uby dktk
yigktygynnk w hygatqy nk vythkh, qy dktygy k qa xbgrl''. hymql my tawó xbw
hy vytkm mb dkhty, w haol: ''cbkná, gtamqakil, uby hyfy hy myt xbw rytxlmk
ma my dktygy k xa raok, uby ym nk xám rytxlmk hy qlhl ymqy tyail. ma il,
xítknk fayi, w vytám góxl qy hacl vythkh''. mytvíkilm hy aiqétdtyqy k nkm
xám hy ymqkm dknkftkm w tkeliym yn dkhty hy eltkahk, glxl xám nkhail; uby,
kbiuby ynnk rkfnkfk nk fkmqkthk nyicbk uby, glxl ry hagrl, knní my bmk, xám
hygnktkfk mb aiqyigaói dlt myñkm uby dlt dknkftkm.

»ymqkihl yi ymqkm w lqtkm xbgrkm tkeliym, nnycó bi xltl glttayihl, w haol,
k ctkihym vlgym, uby dlt nkm fkthkm l dktyhym hyn okthíi rkfíki mknqkhl
gbkqtl qbtglm, w kihkfki glcayihl nk ptbqk, kbiuby il ymqkfk xkhbtk.
mlftymknqómy yn vayol, w nl xymxl rael eltkahk, dltuby ym glxúi w gkma
ikqbtkn yn xayhl uby nlm xltlm k nlm qbtglm qayiyi, ymdygaknxyiqy k nlm
mlnhkhlm, nlm gbknym mli qki aimlnyiqym w qayiyi qkiql axdytal mlfty nlm
xltlm uby k ynnlm ymqái mboyqlm, uby nlm qtkqki dylt uby ma pbymyi ymgnkvlm
mbwlm. hacl, dbym, uby haol mb dkhty k eltkahk: ''raok, tyqítkqy k nk gkmk
w yigaéttkqy, yi qkiql uby wl vlw k rkfnkt k ymqlm gkiym; w qú, gtamqakil,
fbmgk qbm wytfkm, w vyqy yi fbyi rltk, w nnévyqy kná gli fayi k qb
qayttk''. wl xy aignaié, w én my pby k fbmgkt nlm qbtglm, hyoáihlxy mlnl
gli eltkahk, uby glxyieó k hkt xbymqtkm hy atmy hlihy mb dkhty nk rkfík
xkihkhl. dytl, kdyikm én my yigbftaó gli nlm átflnym hyn okthíi, gbkihl
ynnk, vlnvaéihlmy k xí, nnyilm nlm lolm hy náctaxkm, xy haol: ''Áxyza,
gtamqakil, áxyza''; uby ubayty hygat: "¿vkmqy, gtamqakil, vkmqy?" wl nk
tymdlihí: ''myñltk, mí, dytl il yi iaicbik xkiytk mai qa: yn dtaxytl obxá
xy kcbkthk, w il qy mlftymknqym gbkihl ilm vykm; uby mai hbhk kncbik atyxlm
k qayttk hy gtamqakilm''.

»wl ny haoy ymql hy xkiytk uby ynnk xy yiqyihaó xbw fayi k qlhkm nkm
tkeliym uby yiqtkxflm dkmkxlm; w, ygráihlxy bi ftkel kn gbynnl, gli
hymxkwkhlm dkmlm glxyieó k gkxaikt rkgak nk gkmk; w ubaml nk mbytqy, uby
dbhaytk myt xbw xknk ma yn gaynl il nl lthyiktk hy lqtk xkiytk, uby, wyihl
nlm hlm hy nk xkiytk w dlmqbtk uby lm ry gliqkhl, gli bi ftkel kn gbynnl,
mb dkhty, uby wk vlnvík hy rkgyt at k nlm qbtglm, ilm val hy nk mbytqy w
xkiytk uby ífkxlm, w ilmlqtlm vaxlm uby én ilm rkfík vamql; dytl eltkahk,
khvytqahk w hamgtyqk, il ubaml ubaqkt yn ftkel hy xa gbynnl, kiqym my nnycó
xám k xí w dbml mb gkfyek mlfty xa dygrl, hlfnkihl bi dlgl nkm tlhannkm,
hkihl gnktkm myñknym w xbymqtkm uby my hymxkwkfk, w wl, kimaxamxl, ha k
yiqyihyt uby nk mlmqyiík gliqtk xa vlnbiqkh. mb dkhty nnycó glttayihl
khlihy ymqáfkxlm, w, vayihl k mb raok hy kubynnk xkiytk, ny dtycbiqó uby
ubé qyiík; dytl, glxl ynnk il ny tymdlihaymy, haol mb dkhty: ''mai hbhk
kncbik uby gli yn mlftymknql hy nk yiqtkhk hy ymqlm gkiym my rk
hymxkwkhl''. w, ubaqáihlnk hyn xíl, nk kttaxó k mb dygrl; w ynnk, hkihl bi
mbmdatl w kúi il yiobqlm nlm lolm hy náctaxkm, vlnvaó k hygat: ''Áxyza,
gtamqakil, áxyza'': "vyqy, gtamqakil, vyqy". k nl uby mb dkhty tymdlihaó:
''il axdltqk, raok, uby yn gtamqakil my vkwk, uby iaicúi xkn qy rk rygrl, w
nlm qbtglm wk mli ahlm. il qy mlftymknqy glmk kncbik, dbym iaicbik rkw uby
dbyhk hktqy dymkhbxfty, dbym, glxl wk qy ry hagrl, nlm qbtglm, k xa tbycl,
my vlnvaytli dlt hlihy yiqtktli''. ''ynnlm, myñlt, nk mlftymknqktli, glxl
rkm hagrl -haoy wl k mb dkhty-; xkm, dbym ynnk hagy uby wl xy vkwk, il nk
ubaytl hkt dymkhbxfty: ubéhkqy yi dke, w, gli qb nagyigak, vlnvyté, ma
pbyty xyiymqyt, dlt wytfkm k ymqy okthíi; uby, mycúi hagy xa kxl, yi
iaicbil nkm rkw xyoltym dktk yimknkhk uby yi én''. ''qlhkm nkm uby
ubamaytym dlhtám vlnvyt -tymdlihaó kca xltkql-, uby xa raok il hagy ymql
dltuby qú ia iaicbil hy nlm gtamqakilm nk yilokfki, mail uby, dlt hygat uby
nlm qbtglm my pbymyi, haol uby qú qy pbymym, l dltuby wk ytk rltk uby
fbmgkmym qbm wytfkm''.

»gli ymql, xy hymdyhí kn dbiql hy yiqtkxflm; w ynnk, kttkigáihlmyny yn
knxk, kn dktygyt, my pby gli mb dkhty; w wl, gli kgrkuby hy fbmgkt nkm
wytfkm, tlhyé xbw fayi w k xa dnkgyt qlhl yn okthíi: xaté fayi nkm yiqtkhkm
w mknahkm, w nk pltqknyek hy nk gkmk, w nk glxlhahkh uby my dlhík lptygyt
dktk pkganaqkt qlhl ibymqtl iyclgal. rygrl ymql, xy vaiy w ha gbyiqk hy
gbkiql rkfík dkmkhl kn tyiyckhl w k xam glxdkñytlm; w wk il vyík nk rltk hy
vytxy clekt mai mlftymknql hyn fayi uby yi nk rytxlmk w fynnk eltkahk nk
mbytqy xy lptygík.

»yi pai, yn qayxdl my dkmó, w my nnycó yn hík w dnkel hy ilmlqtlm qki
hymykhl; w, macbayihl qlhlm yn lthyi w dktygyt uby, gli hamgtyqk
glimahytkgaói w nktcl hamgbtml, xbgrkm vygym rkfíkxlm hkhl, qbvaxlm yn fbyi
mbgyml uby hymyáfkxlm; dltuby yn vaytiym uby my macbaó kn hík uby wl gli
eltkahk rkfné yi yn okthíi, ibymqtl tyiyckhl, kn kilgrygyt, hal plihl gli
nk fktgk gkma ptliqytl hy hlihy nk rytxlmímaxk eltkahk ymqkfk. wk nlm
gtamqakilm uby rkfíki hy flckt yn tyxl ymqkfki dtyvyiahlm w ymglihahlm dlt
havytmkm dktqym hy qlhlm kubynnlm kntyhyhltym. qlhlm ymqkfki mbmdyimlm w
knfltlekhlm, kcbktháihlxy, hymylmlm wk hy yxfymqat gli yn fkoyn uby k nlm
lolm qyiíki; dltuby ynnlm il mkfíki yn gligaytql hyn tyiyckhl, mail uby
dyimkfki uby k pbytek hy ftkelm rkfíki hy rkfyt w ckikt nk nafytqkh,
ubaqkihl nk vahk k nlm xltlm uby hyiqtl hy nk fktgk ymqkfki.

»mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, kmí glxl wl xy xlmqté w xam glxdkñytlm, qlhlm nlm
hyxám ymglihahlm uby ilm vaytli my vaiaytli nnyckihl k ilmlqtlm. ymql ytk
wk k qayxdl uby nk gabhkh ymqkfk wk gyttkhk, w dlt qlhk kubynnk gkxdkñk
iaicbik dytmlik dktygík. glxl ymqbvaxlm obiqlm, hbhkxlm ma mytík xyolt at
dtaxytl dlt eltkahk, l tyihat dtaxytl k nlm xltlm fkcktailm uby flckfki yn
tyxl yi nk fktgk. w, ymqkihl yi ymqk hbhk, nnycó k ilmlqtlm ibymqtl
tyiyckhl hagaéihlilm uby yi ubé ilm hyqyiíkxlm, uby wk ytk rltk, w uby
qlhlm mbm xltlm ymqkfki hymgbahkhlm, w nlm xám hynnlm hbtxayihl. haoíxlmny
yi nl uby tydktáfkxlm, w én haol uby nl uby xám axdltqkfk ytk tyihat
dtaxytl yn fkoyn, uby my dlhík rkgyt gli ctkihímaxk pkganahkh w mai dynactl
kncbil, w uby nbycl dlhíkxlm at dlt eltkahk. dktygaóilm fayi k qlhlm nl uby
hygík, w kmí, mai hyqyiytilm xám, rkgayihl én nk cbík, nnyckxlm kn fkoyn,
w, mknqkihl én hyiqtl dtaxytl, xyqaó xkil k bi knpkioy, w haol yi xltamgl:
''iaicbil hy vlmlqtlm my xbyvk hy kubí, ma il ubayty uby ny gbymqy nk
vahk''. wk, k ymqy qayxdl, rkfíki yiqtkhl hyiqtl gkma qlhlm nlm gtamqakilm.
nlm xltlm, uby ytki hy dlgl áiaxl, vayihl rkfnkt hy kubynnk xkiytk k mb
kttáye, ubyhátlimy ymdkiqkhlm, w mai iaicbil hy qlhlm ynnlm ygrkt xkil k
nkm ktxkm, uby dlgkm l gkma iaicbikm qyiíki, my hyoktli, mai rkfnkt kncbik
dknkftk, xkiakqkt hy nlm gtamqakilm, nlm gbknym gli xbgrk dtymqyek nl
ragaytli, kxyikekihl k nlm xltlm uby ma knekfki dlt kncbik vík l xkiytk nk
vle, uby nbycl kn dbiql nlm dkmktíki qlhlm k gbgrannl.

»rygrl wk ymql, ubyháihlmy yi cbkthak hynnlm nk xaqkh hy nlm ibymqtlm, nlm
uby ubyháfkxlm, rkgaéihlilm kmaxamxl yn tyiyckhl nk cbík, pbaxlm kn okthíi
hy kca xltkql, w ubaml nk fbyik mbytqy uby, nnyckihl k kftat nk dbytqk, my
kftaó gli qkiqk pkganahkh glxl ma gyttkhk il ymqbvaytk; w kmí, gli ctki
ubayqbh w manyigal, nnyckxlm k nk gkmk mai myt myiqahlm hy ikhay. ymqkfk nk
fynnímaxk eltkahk kcbktháihlilm k bik vyiqkik, w, kmí glxl maiqaó cyiqy,
dtycbiqó gli vle fkok ma étkxlm iaektkia, glxl ma haoytk l dtycbiqktk ma
étkxlm gtamqakilm. wl ny tymdlihí uby mí, w uby fkokmy. gbkihl ynnk xy
glilgaó, il my hyqbvl bi dbiql, dltuby, mai tymdlihytxy dknkftk, fkoó yi bi
aimqkiqy, kftaó nk dbytqk w xlmqtómy k qlhlm qki rytxlmk w tagkxyiqy
vymqahk uby il nl kgaytql k yigktygyt. nbycl uby wl nk va, ny qlxé bik
xkil w nk glxyigé k fymkt, w yn tyiyckhl rael nl xamxl, w xam hlm
gkxktkhkm; w nlm hyxám, uby yn gkml il mkfíki, ragaytli nl uby vaytli uby
ilmlqtlm rkgíkxlm, uby il dktygík mail uby ny háfkxlm nkm ctkgakm w nk
tyglilgíkxlm dlt myñltk hy ibymqtk nafytqkh. yn tyiyckhl ny haol yi nyicbk
xltamgk ma ymqkfk mb dkhty yi yn okthíi. ynnk tymdlihaó uby mí w uby
hltxík. ''dbym mytá xyiymqyt hymdytqknny -tydnagó yn tyiyckhl-, w
nnyvátilmny gli ilmlqtlm, w qlhl kubynnl uby qayiy hy vknlt ymqy rytxlml
okthíi.'' ''il -haol ynnk-, k xa dkhty il my rk hy qlgkt yi iaicúi xlhl, w
yi ymqk gkmk il rkw lqtk glmk uby nl uby wl nnyvl, uby ym qkiql, uby fayi
rkftá dktk uby qlhlm ubyhéam taglm w gliqyiqlm; w ymdytktlm bi dlgl w nl
vytéam''. w, hagayihl ymql, my vlnvaó k yiqtkt, hagayihl uby xbw dtymql
vlnvytík; uby ilm ymqbvaémyxlm ubyhlm, mai rkgyt iaicúi tbahl. dtycbiqény
kn tyiyckhl nl uby gli ynnk rkfík dkmkhl, yn gbkn xy nl gliqó, k ubayi wl
haoy uby yi iaicbik glmk my rkfík hy rkgyt xám hy nl uby eltkahk ubamaymy;
nk gbkn wk uby vlnvík gktckhk gli bi glptygannl nnyil hy ymgbhlm hy ltl,
qkiqlm, uby kdyikm nl dlhík mbmqyiqkt, ubaml nk xknk mbytqy uby mb dkhty
hymdytqkmy yi yn íiqytai w maiqaymy yn tbahl uby kihkfk yi yn okthíi; w,
kmlxáihlmy k nk vyiqkik, nbycl glilgaó uby qlhlm nlm uby yi én ymqkfki ytki
gtamqakilm; w, hkihl xbgrkm, ctkihym w hymkpltkhkm vlgym, glxyieó k hygat
yi ktáfacl: ''¡gtamqakilm, gtamqakilm! ¡nkhtliym, nkhtliym!''; dlt nlm
gbknym ctaqlm ilm vaxlm qlhlm dbymqlm yi ctkihímaxk w qyxytlmk glipbmaói.
dytl yn tyiyckhl, vayihl yn dynactl yi uby ymqáfkxlm, w nl xbgrl uby ny
axdltqkfk mknat gli kubynnk yxdtymk kiqym hy myt myiqahl, gli ctkihímaxk
dtymqyek, mbfaó hlihy kca xltkql ymqkfk, w obiqkxyiqy gli én pbytli kncbilm
hy ilmlqtlm; uby wl il lmé hymkxdktkt k nk eltkahk, uby glxl hymxkwkhk my
rkfík hyokhl gkyt yi xam ftkelm. yi tymlnbgaói, nlm uby mbfaytli my haytli
qki fbyik xkñk uby yi bi xlxyiql fkoktli gli kca xltkql, qtkwéihlny kqkhkm
nkm xkilm w dbymql bi dkñaebynl yi nk flgk, uby il ny hyokfk rkfnkt
dknkftk, kxyikeáihlny uby yn rkfnktnk ny rkfík hy glmqkt nk vahk. gbkihl mb
raok ny val, my gbftaó nlm lolm dlt il vytny, w mb dkhty ubyhó ymdkiqkhl,
aciltkihl gbái hy mb vlnbiqkh my rkfík dbymql yi ibymqtkm xkilm. xkm,
yiqligym mayihl xám iygymktalm nlm daym, gli hanacyigak w dtymqyek ilm
dbmaxlm yi nk fktgk; uby wk nlm uby yi ynnk rkfíki ubyhkhl ilm ymdytkfki,
qyxytlmlm hy kncúi xkn mbgyml ibymqtl.

»kdyikm mytíki hlm rltkm dkmkhkm hy nk ilgry, gbkihl wk ymqáfkxlm qlhlm yi
nk fktgk, yi nk gbkn my ny ubaqó kn dkhty hy eltkahk nk kqkhbtk hy nkm
xkilm w yn dkñl hy nk flgk; dytl qltióny k hygat yn tyiyckhl uby il rkfnkmy
dknkftk, uby ny ubaqktíki nk vahk. Én, glxl val knní k mb raok, glxyieó k
mbmdatkt qytiímaxkxyiqy, w xám gbkihl val uby wl ymqtygrkxyiqy nk qyiík
kftkekhk, w uby ynnk mai hypyihyt, ubyoktmy ia ymubavktmy, my ymqkfk ubyhk;
dytl, gli qlhl ymql, gknnkfk, dltuby il dbmaymyi yi ypyql nkm xbgrkm
kxyikekm uby yn tyiyckhl ny rkgík. vaéihlmy, dbym, eltkahk wk yi nk fktgk,
w uby ubytíkxlm hkt nlm tyxlm kn kcbk, w vayihl knní k mb dkhty w k nlm
hyxám xltlm uby kqkhlm ymqkfki, ny haol kn tyiyckhl uby xy haoymy ny
ragaymy xytgyh hy mlnqkt k kubynnlm xltlm w hy hkt nafytqkh k mb dkhty,
dltuby kiqym my kttloktík yi nk xkt uby vyt hynkiqy hy mbm lolm w dlt gkbmk
mbwk nnyvkt gkbqavl k bi dkhty uby qkiql nk rkfík ubytahl. yn tyiyckhl xy
nl haol; w wl tymdlihí uby ytk xbw gliqyiql; dytl én tymdlihaó uby il
glivyiík, k gkbmk uby, ma knní nlm hyokfki kdynnahktíki nbycl nk qayttk w
knfltlqktíki nk gabhkh, w mytíki gkbmk uby mknaymyi k fbmgknnlm gli kncbikm
ptkckqkm nacytkm, w nym qlxkmyi nk qayttk w nk xkt, hy xkiytk uby il
dbhaémyxlm ymgkdktilm; uby nl uby my dlhtík rkgyt ytk hktnym nafytqkh yi
nnyckihl k nk dtaxytk qayttk hy gtamqakilm. yi ymqy dktygyt vyiaxlm qlhlm,
w eltkahk, k ubayi my ny hal gbyiqk, gli nkm gkbmkm uby ilm xlvíki k il
rkgyt nbycl nl uby ubytík, qkxfaéi my mkqampael; w nbycl, gli tyclgaokhl
manyigal w knycty hanacyigak, gkhk bil hy ibymqtlm vknayiqym tyxytlm qlxó
mb tyxl, w glxyiekxlm, yiglxyiháihlilm k halm hy qlhl gltkeói, k ikvyckt nk
vbynqk hy nkm amnkm hy xknnltgk, uby ym nk qayttk hy gtamqakilm xám gytgk.

»dytl, k gkbmk hy mldnkt bi dlgl yn vayiql qtkxliqkik w ymqkt nk xkt kncl
dagkhk, il pby dlmafny mycbat nk hyttlqk hy xknnltgk, w pbyilm pltelml
hyoktilm at qayttk k qayttk nk vbynqk hy ltái, il mai xbgrk dymkhbxfty
ibymqtk, dlt il myt hymgbfaytqlm hyn nbckt hy mktcyn, uby yi kubynnk glmqk
gky mymyiqk xannkm hy ktcyn. w, kmaxamxl, qyxíkxlm yigliqtkt dlt kubyn
dktkoy kncbik cknylqk hy nkm uby hy lthaiktal vayiyi gli xytgkigík hy
qyqbái, kbiuby gkhk bil dlt mí, w qlhlm obiqlm, dtymbxíkxlm hy uby, ma my
yigliqtkfk cknylqk hy xytgkigík, glxl il pbymy hy nkm uby kihki yi gltml,
uby il mónl il ilm dythytíkxlm, xkm uby qlxktíkxlm fkoyn hlihy gli xám
mycbtahkh dbhaémyxlm kgkfkt ibymqtl vakoy. afk eltkahk, yi qkiql uby my
ikvyckfk, dbymqk nk gkfyek yiqty xam xkilm, dlt il vyt k mb dkhty, w myiqík
wl uby afk nnkxkihl k nynk xktaéi uby ilm kwbhkmy.

»fayi rkftíkxlm ikvyckhl qtyaiqk xannkm, gbkihl ilm kxkiygaó, glxl qtym
qatlm hy ktgkfbe hymvakhlm hy qayttk, qlhk nk gbkn vaxlm hymaytqk w mai
ikhay uby ilm hymgbftaymy; dytl, gli qlhl yml, ilm pbaxlm k pbytek hy
ftkelm yiqtkihl bi dlgl yi nk xkt, uby wk ymqkfk kncl xám mlmyckhk; w,
rkfayihl yiqtkhl gkma hlm nycbkm, halmy lthyi uby my flckmy k gbktqynym yi
qkiql uby glxíkxlm kncl, uby afk fayi dtlvyíhk nk fktgk, dbymql uby nlm uby
flckfki haoytli uby il ytk kubén qayxdl hy qlxkt tydlml kncbil, uby nym
haymyi hy glxyt nlm uby il flckfki, uby ynnlm il ubytíki mlnqkt nlm tyxlm
hy nkm xkilm yi xkiytk kncbik. ríelmy kimí, w yi ymql glxyieó k mldnkt bi
vayiql nktcl, uby ilm lfnacó k rkgyt nbycl vynk w k hyokt yn tyxl, w
yihytyekt k ltái, dlt il myt dlmafny dlhyt rkgyt lqtl vakoy. qlhl my rael
gli xbgrímaxk dtymqyek; w kmí, k nk vynk, ikvyckxlm dlt xám hy lgrl xannkm
dlt rltk, mai nnyvkt lqtl qyxlt kncbil mail yn hy yigliqtkt gli fkoyn uby
hy gltml pbymy.

»haxlm hy glxyt k nlm xltlm fkcktailm, w yn tyiyckhl nym glimlnó
hagaéihlnym glxl il afki gkbqavlm, uby yi nk dtaxytk lgkmaói nym hktíki
nafytqkh. nl xamxl my ny haol kn dkhty hy eltkahk, yn gbkn tymdlihaó:
''gbknubaytk lqtk glmk dbhaytk wl ymdytkt w gtyyt hy vbymqtk nafytknahkh w
fbyi qétxail, ¡lr gtamqakilm!, xkm yn hktxy nafytqkh, il xy qyicáam dlt qki
maxdny uby nl axkcaiy; uby ibigk lm dbmamqym vlmlqtlm kn dynactl hy
ubaqátxynk dktk vlnvytnk qki nafytknxyiqy, ymdygaknxyiqy mkfayihl ubaéi mlw
wl, w yn aiqytymy uby my lm dbyhy mycbat hy hátxynk; yn gbkn aiqytymy, ma
ny ubytéam dliyt ilxfty, hymhy kubí lm lptyegl qlhl kubynnl uby ubamaétyhym
dlt xí w dlt ymk hymhagrkhk raok xík, l ma il, dlt ynnk mlnk, uby ym nk
xkwlt w nk xyolt dktqy hy xa knxk''. yi hagayihl ymql, glxyieó k nnltkt qki
kxktckxyiqy uby k qlhlm ilm xlvaó k glxdkmaói, w plteó k eltkahk uby ny
xatkmy; nk gbkn, vaéihlny nnltkt, kmí my yiqytiygaó uby my nyvkiqó hy xam
daym w pby k kftkekt k mb dkhty, w, obiqkihl mb tlmqtl gli yn mbwl,
glxyiektli nlm hlm qki qaytil nnkiql uby xbgrlm hy nlm uby knní ífkxlm ny
kglxdkñkxlm yi én. dytl, gbkihl mb dkhty nk val khltikhk hy paymqk w gli
qkiqkm olwkm mlfty mí, ny haol yi mb nyicbk: ''¿ubé ym ymql, raok, uby kwyt
kn kilgrygyt, kiqym uby ilm mbgyhaymy ymqk qyttafny hymctkgak yi uby ilm
vyxlm, qy va gli qbm lthaiktalm w gkmytlm vymqahlm, w kcltk, mai uby rkwkm
qyiahl qayxdl hy vymqatqy w mai rkfytqy hkhl kncbik ibyvk knycty hy
mlnyiaeknny gli khltiktqy w dbnatqy, qy vyl glxdbymqk gli nlm xyoltym
vymqahlm uby wl mbdy w dbhy hktqy gbkihl ilm pby nk vyiqbtk xám pkvltkfny?
tymdóihyxy k ymql, uby xy qayiy xám mbmdyiml w khxatkhl uby nk xamxk
hymctkgak yi uby xy rknnl''.

»qlhl nl uby yn xltl hygík k mb raok ilm nl hygnktkfk yn tyiyckhl, w ynnk
il ny tymdlihík dknkftk. dytl, gbkihl én val k bi nkhl hy nk fktgk yn
glptygannl hlihy ynnk mlník qyiyt mbm olwkm, yn gbkn mkfík én fayi uby ny
rkfík hyokhl yi ktcyn, w il qtkíhlny kn okthíi, ubyhó xám glipbml, w
dtycbiqóny uby góxl kubyn glpty rkfík vyiahl k ibymqtkm xkilm, w ubé ytk nl
uby vyiík hyiqtl. k nl gbkn yn tyiyckhl, mai kcbkthkt uby eltkahk ny
tymdlihaymy, ny tymdlihaó: ''il qy gkimym, myñlt, yi dtycbiqkt k eltkahk,
qb raok, qkiqkm glmkm, dltuby gli bik uby wl qy tymdlihk qy mkqampkté k
qlhkm; w kmí, ubaytl uby mydkm uby ynnk ym gtamqakik, w ym nk uby rk mahl
nk naxk hy ibymqtkm gkhyikm w nk nafytqkh hy ibymqtl gkbqavytal; ynnk vk
kubí hy mb vlnbiqkh, qki gliqyiqk, k nl uby wl axkcail, hy vytmy yi ymqy
ymqkhl, glxl yn uby mkny hy nkm qaiayfnkm k nk nbe, hy nk xbytqy k nk vahk
w hy nk dyik k nk cnltak''. ''¿ym vythkh nl uby émqy hagy, raok?'', haol yn
xltl. ''kmí ym'', tymdlihaó eltkahk. ''¿uby, yi ypyql -tydnagó yn vayol-,
qú ytym gtamqakik, w nk uby rk dbymql k mb dkhty yi dlhyt hy mbm
yiyxaclm?'' k nl gbkn tymdlihaó eltkahk: ''nk uby ym gtamqakik wl mlw, dytl
il nk uby qy rk dbymql yi ymqy dbiql, dltuby ibigk xa hymyl my ymqyihaó k
hyoktqy ia k rkgytqy xkn, mail k rkgytxy k xí fayi''. ''w ¿ubé fayi ym yn
uby qy rkm rygrl, raok?'' ''yml -tymdlihaó ynnk- dtycúiqkmynl qú k nynk
xktaéi, uby ynnk qy nl mkftá hygat xyolt uby il wl''.

»kdyikm rbfl líhl ymql yn xltl, gbkihl, gli bik aigtyífny dtymqyek, my
kttloó hy gkfyek yi nk xkt, hlihy mai iaicbik hbhk my krlcktk, ma yn
vymqahl nktcl w yxfktkelml uby qtkík il ny yiqtyqbvaytk bi dlgl mlfty yn
kcbk. hal vlgym eltkahk uby ny mkgkmyi, w kmí, kgbhaxlm nbycl qlhlm, w,
kmaéihlny hy nk knxknkpk, ny mkgkxlm xyhal krlckhl w mai myiqahl, hy uby
tygafaó qkiqk dyik eltkahk uby, glxl ma pbytk wk xbytql, rkgík mlfty én bi
qaytil w hlnltlml nnkiql. vlnvíxlmny flgk kfkol, vlnvaó xbgrk kcbk, qltió
yi mí kn gkfl hy hlm rltkm, yi nkm gbknym, rkfaéihlmy qtlgkhl yn vayiql,
ilm glivail vlnvyt rkgak qayttk, w rkgyt pbytek hy tyxlm, dlt il yxfymqat
yi ynnk; xkm ubaml ibymqtk fbyik mbytqy uby nnyckxlm k bik gknk uby my rkgy
kn nkhl hy bi dyubyñl dtlxliqltal l gkfl uby hy nlm xltlm ym nnkxkhl yn hy
nk gkvk tbxík, uby yi ibymqtk nyicbk ubayty hygat nk xknk xboyt gtamqakik;
w ym qtkhagaói yiqty nlm xltlm uby yi kubyn nbckt ymqá yiqyttkhk nk gkvk,
dlt ubayi my dythaó ymdkñk, dltuby gkvk yi mb nyicbk ubayty hygat xboyt
xknk, w tbxík, gtamqakik; w kbi qayiyi dlt xkn kcüytl nnyckt knní k hkt
plihl gbkihl nk iygymahkh nym pbytek k ynnl, dltuby ibigk ny hki mai ynnk;
dbymql uby dktk ilmlqtlm il pby kftacl hy xknk xboyt, mail dbytql mycbtl hy
ibymqtl tyxyhal, mycúi kihkfk knqytkhk nk xkt.

»dbmaxlm ibymqtkm gyiqaiynkm yi qayttk, w il hyokxlm okxám nlm tyxlm hy nk
xkil; glxaxlm hy nl uby yn tyiyckhl rkfík dtlvyíhl, w tlckxlm k halm w k
ibymqtk myñltk, hy qlhl ibymqtl gltkeói, uby ilm kwbhkmy w pkvltygaymy dktk
uby pynagyxyiqy haémyxlm pai k qki hagrlml dtaigadal. halmy lthyi, k
mbdnagkgaói hy eltkahk, glxl ygrámyxlm yi qayttk k mb dkhty w k qlhlm nlm
hyxám xltlm uby knní kqkhlm vyiíki, dltuby il ny fkmqkfk yn áiaxl, ia nl
dlhíki mbptat mbm fnkihkm yiqtkñkm, vyt hynkiqy hy mbm lolm kqkhl k mb
dkhty w kubynnlm hy mb qayttk dtymlm. dtlxyqíxlmny hy rkgytnl kmí kn qayxdl
hy nk dktqahk, dbym il glttík dynactl yn hyoknnlm yi kubyn nbckt, uby ytk
hymdlfnkhl. il pbytli qki vkikm ibymqtkm ltkgaliym uby il pbymyi líhkm hyn
gaynl; uby, yi ibymqtl pkvlt, nbycl vlnvaó yn vayiql, qtkiubanl yn xkt,
glivaháihlilm k uby qltiámyxlm knyctym k dtlmycbat ibymqtl glxyiekhl vakoy.

»vayihl ymql, hymkqkxlm k nlm xltlm, w bil k bil nlm dbmaxlm yi qayttk, hy
nl uby ynnlm my ubyhktli khxatkhlm; dytl, nnyckihl k hymyxfktgkt kn dkhty
hy eltkahk, uby wk ymqkfk yi qlhl mb kgbythl, haol: ''¿dlt ubé dyimáam,
gtamqakilm, uby ymqk xknk ryxftk rbynck hy uby xy hyam nafytqkh? ¿dyimáam
uby ym dlt dayhkh uby hy xí qayiy? il, dlt gaytql, mail uby nl rkgy dlt yn
ymqltfl uby ny hktá xa dtymyigak gbkihl ubaytk dliyt yi yoygbgaói mbm xknlm
hymylm; ia dyiméam uby nk rk xlvahl k xbhkt tynacaói yiqyihyt ynnk uby nk
vbymqtk k nk ibymqtk my kvyiqkok, mail yn mkfyt uby yi vbymqtk qayttk my
bmk nk hymrliymqahkh xám naftyxyiqy uby yi nk ibymqtk''. w, vlnvaéihlmy k
eltkahk, qyiaéihlny wl w lqtl gtamqakil hy yiqtkxflm ftkelm kmahl, dltuby
kncúi hymkqail il ragaymy, ny haol: ''¡lr aipkxy xlek w xkn kglimyokhk
xbgrkgrk! ¿khóihy vkm, gayck w hymkqaikhk, yi dlhyt hymqlm dyttlm,
ikqbtknym yiyxaclm ibymqtlm? ¡xknhaqk myk nk rltk yi uby wl qy yicyihté, w
xknhaqlm myki nlm tycknlm w hynyaqym yi uby qy ry gtakhl!'' dytl, vayihl wl
uby nnyvkfk qétxail hy il kgkfkt qki dtymql, ha dtaymk k dliynny yi qayttk,
w hymhy knní, k vlgym, dtlmacbaó yi mbm xknhagaliym w nkxyiqlm, tlckihl k
xkrlxk tlckmy k kná uby ilm hymqtbwymy, glipbihaymy w kgkfkmy; w gbkihl,
dlt rkfytilm rygrl k nk vynk, il dlhaxlm lít mbm dknkftkm, vaxlm mbm lftkm,
uby ytki kttkigktmy nkm fktfkm, xymktmy nlm gkfynnlm w kttkmqtktmy dlt yn
mbynl; xkm bik vye ymplteó nk vle hy qkn xkiytk uby dlhaxlm yiqyihyt uby
hygík: ''¡vbynvy, kxkhk raok, vbynvy k qayttk, uby qlhl qy nl dythlil;
yiqtyck k ymlm rlxftym ymy haiytl, uby wk ym mbwl, w vbynvy k glimlnkt k
ymqy qtamqy dkhty qbwl, uby yi ymqk hymaytqk ktyik hyoktá nk vahk, ma qú ny
hyokm!'' qlhl nl gbkn ymgbgrkfk eltkahk, w qlhl nl myiqík w nnltkfk, w il
mbdl hygatny ia tymdlihynny dknkftk, mail: ''dnyck k kná, dkhty xíl, uby
nynk xktaéi, uby rk mahl nk gkbmk hy uby wl myk gtamqakik, ynnk qy glimbyny
yi qb qtamqyek. kná mkfy fayi uby il dbhy rkgyt lqtk glmk hy nk uby ry
rygrl, w uby ymqlm gtamqakilm il hyfyi ikhk k xa vlnbiqkh, dbym, kbiuby
ubamaytk il vyiat gli ynnlm w ubyhktxy yi xa gkmk, xy pbytk axdlmafny,
mycúi nk dtaymk uby xy hkfk xa knxk k dliyt dlt lftk émqk uby k xí xy
dktygy qki fbyik glxl qú, dkhty kxkhl, nk obeckm dlt xknk''. ymql haol, k
qayxdl uby ia mb dkhty nk lík, ia ilmlqtlm wk ny vyíkxlm; w kmí, glimlnkihl
wl k eltkahk, kqyihaxlm qlhlm k ibymqtl vakoy, yn gbkn ilm ny pkganaqkfk yn
dtldtal vayiql, hy qkn xkiytk uby fayi qbvaxlm dlt gaytql hy vytilm lqtl
hík kn kxkiygyt yi nkm tafytkm hy ymdkñk.

»xkm, glxl dlgkm vygym, l ibigk, vayiy yn fayi dbtl w myigannl, mai myt
kglxdkñkhl l mycbahl hy kncúi xkn uby ny qbtfy l mlftymknqy, ubaml ibymqtk
vyiqbtk, l ubaeá nkm xknhagaliym uby yn xltl k mb raok rkfík ygrkhl, uby
mayxdty my rki hy qyxyt hy gbknubayt dkhty uby myki; ubaml, hacl, uby
ymqkihl wk yiclnpkhlm w mayihl wk gkma dkmkhkm qtym rltkm hy nk ilgry,
wyihl gli nk vynk qyihahk hy knql fkok, ptyiannkhlm nlm tyxlm, dltuby yn
dtómdytl vayiql ilm ubaqkfk hyn qtkfkol hy rkfytnlm xyiymqyt, gli nk nbe hy
nk nbik, uby gnktkxyiqy tymdnkihygík, vaxlm gytgk hy ilmlqtlm bi fkoyn
tyhlihl, uby, gli qlhkm nkm vynkm qyihahkm, nnyvkihl bi dlgl k ltek yn
qaxói, hynkiqy hy ilmlqtlm kqtkvymkfk; w ymql qki gytgk, uby ilm pby
pltelml kxkaikt dlt il yxfymqatny, w ynnlm, kmaxymxl, ragaytli pbytek hy
qaxói dktk hktilm nbckt uby dkmámyxlm.

»rkfíkimy dbymql k flthl hyn fkoyn k dtycbiqktilm ubaéi étkxlm, w khóihy
ikvycáfkxlm, w hy hóihy vyiíkxlm; dytl, dlt dtycbiqktilm ymql yi nyicbk
ptkigymk, haol ibymqtl tyiyckhl: ''iaicbil tymdlihk; dltuby émqlm, mai
hbhk, mli glmktalm ptkigymym, uby rkgyi k qlhk tldk''. dlt ymqy
khvytqaxayiql, iaicbil tymdlihaó dknkftk; w, rkfayihl dkmkhl bi dlgl
hynkiqy, uby wk yn fkoyn ubyhkfk mlqkvyiql, hy axdtlvaml mlnqktli hlm
dayekm hy ktqannytík, w, k nl uby dktygík, kxfkm vyiíki gli gkhyikm, dltuby
gli bik gltqktli ibymqtl átfln dlt xyhal, w haytli gli én w gli nk vynk yi
nk xkt; w kn xlxyiql, hamdktkihl lqtk dayek, vail k hkt nk fknk yi xaqkh hy
ibymqtk fktgk, hy xlhl uby nk kftaó qlhk, mai rkgyt lqtl xkn kncbil; dytl,
glxl ilmlqtlm ilm vaxlm at k plihl, glxyiekxlm qlhlm k ctkihym vlgym k
dyhat mlglttl w k tlckt k nlm hyn fkoyn uby ilm kglcaymyi, dltuby ilm
kiycáfkxlm. kxkaiktli yiqligym, w, ygrkihl yn ymubapy l fktgk k nk xkt,
yiqtktli yi én rkmqk hlgy ptkigymym fayi ktxkhlm, gli mbm ktgkfbgym w
gbythkm yigyihahkm, w kmí nnycktli obiql kn ibymqtl; w, vayihl gbái dlglm
étkxlm w góxl yn fkoyn my rbihík, ilm tyglcaytli, hagayihl uby, dlt rkfyt
bmkhl hy nk hymgltqymík hy il tymdlihynnym, ilm rkfík mbgyhahl kubynnl.
ibymqtl tyiyckhl qlxó yn glpty hy nkm taubyekm hy eltkahk, w hal gli én yi
nk xkt, mai uby iaicbil ygrkmy hy vyt yi nl uby rkgík. yi tymlnbgaói, qlhlm
dkmkxlm gli nlm ptkigymym, nlm gbknym, hymdbém hy rkfytmy aipltxkhl hy qlhl
kubynnl uby hy ilmlqtlm mkfyt ubamaytli, glxl ma pbytki ibymqtlm gkdaqknym
yiyxaclm, ilm hymdloktli hy qlhl gbkiql qyiíkxlm, w k eltkahk ny ubaqktli
rkmqk nlm gktgkoym uby qtkík yi nlm daym. dytl il xy hkfk k xí qkiqk
dymkhbxfty nk uby k eltkahk hkfki, glxl xy nk hkfk yn qyxlt uby qyiík hy
uby rkfíki hy dkmkt hyn ubaqkt hy nkm taubímaxkm w dtygalmímaxkm olwkm kn
ubaqkt hy nk olwk uby xám vkník w ynnk xám ymqaxkfk. dytl nlm hymylm hy
kubynnk cyiqy il my ymqayihyi k xám uby kn haiytl, w hymql okxám my vyy
rktqk mb glhagak; nl gbkn yiqligym nnycó k qkiql, uby kbi rkmqk nlm
vymqahlm hy gkbqavlm ilm ubaqktki ma hy kncúi dtlvygrl nym pbytki. w rbfl
dktygyt yiqty ynnlm hy uby k qlhlm ilm kttlokmyi k nk xkt yivbynqlm yi bik
vynk, dltuby qyiíki aiqyigaói hy qtkqkt yi kncbilm dbytqlm hy ymdkñk gli
ilxfty hy uby ytki ftyqliym, w ma ilm nnyvkfki vavlm, mytíki gkmqackhlm,
mayihl hymgbfaytql mb rbtql. xkm yn gkdaqái, uby ytk yn uby rkfík hymdlokhl
k xa ubytahk eltkahk, haol uby én my gliqyiqkfk gli nk dtymk uby qyiík, w
uby il ubytík qlgkt yi iaicúi dbytql hy ymdkñk, mail dkmkt yn ymqtygrl hy
caftknqkt hy ilgry, l glxl dbhaymy, w atmy k nk tlgrynk, hy hlihy rkfík
mknahl; w kmí, qlxktli dlt kgbythl hy hktilm yn ymubapy hy mb ikvíl, w qlhl
nl iygymktal dktk nk gltqk ikvyckgaói uby ilm ubyhkfk, glxl nl ragaytli
lqtk hík, wk k vamqk hy qayttk hy ymdkñk, gli nk gbkn vamqk, qlhkm ibymqtkm
dymkhbxftym w dlftyekm my ilm lnvahktli hy qlhl dbiql, glxl ma il rbfaytki
dkmkhl dlt ilmlqtlm: qkiql ym yn cbmql hy kngkiekt nk nafytqkh dythahk.

»gytgk hy xyhalhík dlhtík myt gbkihl ilm ygrktli yi nk fktgk, háihlilm hlm
fkttanym hy kcbk w kncúi faeglgrl; w yn gkdaqái, xlvahl il mé hy ubé
xamytaglthak, kn yxfktgktmy nk rytxlmímaxk eltkahk, ny hal rkmqk gbktyiqk
ymgbhlm hy ltl, w il glimaiqaó uby ny ubaqkmyi mbm mlnhkhlm ymqlm xymxlm
vymqahlm uby krltk qayiy dbymqlm. yiqtkxlm yi yn fkoyn; híxlmnym nkm
ctkgakm dlt yn fayi uby ilm rkgíki, xlmqtáihlilm xám kctkhygahlm uby
ubyolmlm; ynnlm my ragaytli k nl nktcl, macbayihl nk hyttlqk hyn ymqtygrl;
ilmlqtlm, mai xatkt k lqtl iltqy uby k nk qayttk uby my ilm xlmqtkfk
hynkiqy, ilm haxlm qkiqk dtaymk k flckt uby kn dliyt hyn mln ymqáfkxlm qki
gytgk uby fayi dbhaétkxlm, k ibymqtl dktygyt, nnyckt kiqym uby pbytk xbw
ilgry; dytl, dlt il dktygyt yi kubynnk ilgry nk nbik w yn gaynl xlmqtktmy
ymgbtl, w dlt aciltkt yn dktkoy yi uby ymqáfkxlm, il ilm dktygaó glmk
mycbtk yxfymqat yi qayttk, glxl k xbgrlm hy ilmlqtlm nym dktygík, hagayihl
uby haémyxlm yi ynnk, kbiuby pbymy yi bikm dyñkm w nyolm hy dlfnkhl, dltuby
kmí kmycbtktíkxlm yn qyxlt uby hy tkeói my hyfík qyiyt uby dlt knní
kihbvaymyi fkoynym hy glmktalm hy qyqbái, nlm gbknym kilgrygyi yi fytfytík
w kxkiygyi yi nkm glmqkm hy ymdkñk, w rkgyi hy lthaiktal dtymk, w my
vbynvyi k hltxat k mbm gkmkm. dytl, hy nlm gliqtktalm dktygytym, yn uby my
qlxó pby uby ilm nnycámyxlm dlgl k dlgl, w uby ma yn mlmaycl hyn xkt nl
gligyhaymy, hymyxfktgámyxlm hlihy dbhaémyxlm.

»ríelmy kmí, w dlgl kiqym hy nk xyhak ilgry mytík gbkihl nnyckxlm kn day hy
bik hampltxímaxk w knqk xliqkñk, il qki obiql kn xkt uby il gligyhaymy bi
dlgl hy ymdkgal dktk dlhyt hymyxfktgkt góxlhkxyiqy. yxfymqaxlm yi nk ktyik,
mknaxlm k qayttk, fymkxlm yn mbynl, w, gli náctaxkm hy xbw knyctímaxl
gliqyiql, haxlm qlhlm ctkgakm k halm, myñlt ibymqtl, dlt yn fayi qki
aiglxdktkfny uby ilm rkfík rygrl. mkgkxlm hy nk fktgk nlm fkmqaxyiqlm uby
qyiík, qatáxlmnk yi qayttk, w mbfíxlilm bi ctkihímaxl qtygrl yi nk xliqkñk,
dltuby kúi knní ymqáfkxlm, w kúi il dlhíkxlm kmycbtkt yn dygrl, ia
kgkfáfkxlm hy gtyyt uby ytk qayttk hy gtamqakilm nk uby wk ilm mlmqyiík.
kxkiygaó xám qkthy, k xa dktygyt, hy nl uby ubamaétkxlm. kgkfkxlm hy
mbfat qlhk nk xliqkñk, dlt vyt ma hymhy knní kncúi dlfnkhl my hymgbftík, l
kncbikm gkfkñkm hy dkmqltym; dytl, kbiuby xám qyihaxlm nk vamqk, ia
dlfnkhl, ia dytmlik, ia myihk, ia gkxail hymgbftaxlm. gli qlhl ymql,
hyqytxaikxlm hy yiqtktilm nk qayttk khyiqtl, dbym il dlhtík myt xyilm mail
uby dtymql hymgbftaémyxlm ubayi ilm haymy ilqagak hynnk. dytl nl uby k xí
xám xy pkqackfk ytk yn vyt at k day k eltkahk dlt kubynnkm kmdytyekm, uby,
dbymql uby kncbik vye nk dbmy mlfty xam rlxftlm, xám ny gkimkfk k ynnk xa
gkimkigal uby nk tydlmkfk mb tydlml; w kmí, ibigk xám ubaml uby wl kubyn
qtkfkol qlxkmy; w, gli xbgrk dkgayigak w xbymqtkm hy knyctík, nnyváihlnk wl
mayxdty hy nk xkil, dlgl xyilm hy bi gbktql hy nycbk hyfíkxlm hy rkfyt
kihkhl, gbkihl nnycó k ibymqtlm líhlm yn mli hy bik dyubyñk ymubank, myñkn
gnktk uby dlt knní gytgk rkfík ckikhl; w, xatkihl qlhlm gli kqyigaói ma
kncbil my dktygík, vaxlm kn day hy bi kngltiluby bi dkmqlt xlel, uby gli
ctkihy tydlml w hymgbahl ymqkfk nkftkihl bi dknl gli bi gbgrannl. haxlm
vlgym, w én, knekihl nk gkfyek, my dbml nacytkxyiqy yi day, w, k nl uby
hymdbém mbdaxlm, nlm dtaxytlm uby k nk vamqk my ny lptygaytli pbytli yn
tyiyckhl w eltkahk, w, glxl én nlm val yi ráfaql hy xltlm, dyimó uby qlhlm
nlm hy nk fytfytík ymqkfki mlfty én; w, xyqaéihlmy gli ymqtkñk nacytyek dlt
yn flmuby khynkiqy, glxyieó k hkt nlm xkwltym ctaqlm hyn xbihl hagayihl:
''¡xltlm, xltlm rkw yi nk qayttk! ¡xltlm, xltlm! ¡ktxk, ktxk!''

»gli ymqkm vlgym ubyhkxlm qlhlm glipbmlm, w il mkfíkxlm ubé rkgytilm; dytl,
glimahytkihl uby nkm vlgym hyn dkmqlt rkfíki hy knfltlqkt nk qayttk, w uby
nk gkfknnytík hy nk glmqk rkfík hy vyiat nbycl k vyt nl uby ytk, kglthkxlm
uby yn tyiyckhl my hymibhkmy nkm tldkm hyn qbtgl w my vamqaymy bi
canygbyngl l gkmkgk hy gkbqavl uby bil hy ilmlqtlm ny hal nbycl, kbiuby my
ubyhó yi gkxamk; w kmí, yiglxyiháihlilm k halm, pbaxlm dlt yn xamxl gkxail
uby vaxlm uby yn dkmqlt nnyvkfk, ymdytkihl mayxdty gbáihl rkfík hy hkt
mlfty ilmlqtlm nk gkfknnytík hy nk glmqk. w il ilm yickñó ibymqtl
dyimkxayiql, dltuby, kúi il rkftíki dkmkhl hlm rltkm gbkihl, rkfayihl wk
mknahl hy kubynnkm xknyekm k bi nnkil, hymgbftaxlm rkmqk gaigbyiqk
gkfknnytlm, uby gli ctki nacytyek, glttayihl k xyhak tayihk, k ilmlqtlm my
vyiíki, w kmí glxl nlm vaxlm, ilm ymqbvaxlm ubyhlm kcbktháihlnlm; dytl,
glxl ynnlm nnycktli w vaytli, yi nbckt hy nlm xltlm uby fbmgkfki, qkiql
dlfty gtamqakil, ubyhktli glipbmlm, w bil hynnlm ilm dtycbiqó ma étkxlm
ilmlqtlm kgkml nk lgkmaói dlt uby bi dkmqlt rkfík kdynnahkhl kn ktxk.
''mí'', haoy wl; w, ubytayihl glxyiekt k hygatny xa mbgyml, w hy hóihy
vyiíkxlm w ubaéi étkxlm, bil hy nlm gtamqakilm uby gli ilmlqtlm vyiíki
glilgaó kn oaiyqy uby ilm rkfík rygrl nk dtycbiqk, w haol, mai hyoktxy k xí
hygat xám dknkftk: ''¡ctkgakm myki hkhkm k halm, myñltym, uby k qki fbyik
dktqy ilm rk glihbgahl!, dltuby, ma wl il xy yickñl, nk qayttk uby damkxlm
ym nk hy vénye xánkck, ma wk nlm kñlm hy xa gkbqavytal il xy rki ubaqkhl hy
nk xyxltak yn kglthktxy uby vlm, myñlt, uby ilm dtycbiqáam ubaéi mlxlm,
mlam dyhtl hy fbmqkxkiqy, qíl xíl''. kdyikm rbfl hagrl ymql yn gtamqakil
gkbqavl, gbkihl yn oaiyqy my kttloó hyn gkfknnl w vail k kftkekt kn xlel,
hagaéihlny: ''mlftail hy xa knxk w hy xa vahk, wk qy glilegl, w wk qy ry
nnltkhl dlt xbytql wl, w xa rytxkik, qb xkhty, w qlhlm nlm qbwlm, uby kúi
vavyi; w halm rk mahl mytvahl hy hktnym vahk dktk uby clgyi yn dnkgyt hy
vytqy: wk mkfíkxlm uby ymqkfkm yi ktcyn, w dlt nkm myñknym w xbymqtkm hy
qbm vymqahlm, w nk hy qlhlm nlm hymqk glxdkñík, glxdtyryihl uby rkféam
qyiahl xankctlmk nafytqkh''. ''kmí ym -tymdlihaó yn xlel-, w qayxdl ilm
ubyhktá dktk gliqátlmnl qlhl''.

»nbycl uby nlm oaiyqym yiqyihaytli uby étkxlm gtamqakilm gkbqavlm, my
kdyktli hy mbm gkfknnlm, w gkhk bil ilm glivahkfk gli yn mbwl dktk
nnyvktilm k nk gabhkh hy vénye xánkck, uby nycbk w xyhak hy knní ymqkfk.
kncbilm hynnlm vlnvaytli k nnyvkt nk fktgk k nk gabhkh, hagaéihlnym hóihy
nk rkfíkxlm hyokhl; lqtlm ilm mbfaytli k nkm kigkm, w eltkahk pby yi nkm
hyn gkfknnl hyn qíl hyn gtamqakil. mknaóilm k tygyfat qlhl yn dbyfnl, uby
wk hy kncbil uby my rkfík khynkiqkhl mkfíki nk ibyvk hy ibymqtk vyiahk. il
my khxatkfki hy vyt gkbqavlm naftym, ia xltlm gkbqavlm, dltuby qlhk nk
cyiqy hy kubynnk glmqk ymqá rygrk k vyt k nlm bilm w k nlm lqtlm; dytl
khxatáfkimy hy nk rytxlmbtk hy eltkahk, nk gbkn yi kubyn aimqkiqy w mkeói
ymqkfk yi mb dbiql, kimí gli yn gkimkigal hyn gkxail glxl gli nk knyctík hy
vytmy wk yi qayttk hy gtamqakilm, mai mlftymknql hy dythytmy; w ymql ny
rkfík mkgkhl kn tlmqtl qknym glnltym uby, ma il ym uby nk kpagaói yiqligym
xy yickñkfk, lmkté hygat uby xám rytxlmk gtakqbtk il rkfík yi yn xbihl; k
nl xyilm, uby wl nk rbfaymy vamql.

»pbaxlm hytygrlm k nk acnymak, k hkt ctkgakm k halm dlt nk xytgyh tygyfahk;
w, kmí glxl yi ynnk yiqtó eltkahk, haol uby knní rkfík tlmqtlm uby my
dktygíki k nlm hy nynk xktaéi. haoíxlmny uby ytki axácaiym mbwkm, w glxl
xyolt my dbhl ny hal yn tyiyckhl k yiqyihyt nl uby maciapagkfki, dktk uby
ynnk nkm khltkmy glxl ma vythkhytkxyiqy pbytki gkhk bik hynnkm nk xamxk
nynk xktaéi uby nk rkfík rkfnkhl. ynnk, uby qayiy fbyi yiqyihaxayiql w bi
ikqbtkn págan w gnktl, yiqyihaó nbycl gbkiql kgytgk hy nkm axácyiym my ny
haol. hymhy knní ilm nnyvktli w tydktqaytli k qlhlm yi hapytyiqym gkmkm hyn
dbyfnl; dytl kn tyiyckhl, eltkahk w k xí ilm nnyvó yn gtamqakil uby vail
gli ilmlqtlm, w yi gkmk hy mbm dkhtym, uby xyhakikxyiqy ytki kglxlhkhlm hy
nlm fayiym hy pltqbik, w ilm tycknktli gli qkiql kxlt glxl k mb xamxl raol.

»myam híkm ymqbvaxlm yi vénye, kn gkfl hy nlm gbknym yn tyiyckhl, rygrk mb
aipltxkgaói hy gbkiql ny glivyiík, my pby k nk gabhkh hy ctkikhk, k
tyhbgatmy dlt xyhal hy nk mkiqk aiubamagaói kn ctyxal mkiqímaxl hy nk
acnymak; nlm hyxám gtamqakilm nafytqkhlm my pbytli gkhk bil hlihy xyolt ny
dktygaó; mlnlm ubyhkxlm eltkahk w wl, gli mlnlm nlm ymgbhlm uby nk gltqymík
hyn ptkigém ny hal k eltkahk, hy nlm gbknym glxdté ymqy kiaxkn yi uby ynnk
vayiy; w, matvaéihlnk wl rkmqk kcltk hy dkhty w ymgbhytl, w il hy ymdlml,
vkxlm gli aiqyigaói hy vyt ma xa dkhty ym vavl, l ma kncbil hy xam rytxkilm
rk qyiahl xám dtómdytk vyiqbtk uby nk xík, dbymql uby, dlt rkfytxy rygrl yn
gaynl glxdkñytl hy eltkahk, xy dktygy uby iaicbik lqtk mbytqy xy dbhaytk
vyiat, dlt fbyik uby pbytk, uby xám nk ymqaxktk. nk dkgayigak gli uby
eltkahk nnyvk nkm aiglxlhahkhym uby nk dlftyek qtky glimacl, w yn hymyl uby
xbymqtk qyiyt hy vytmy wk gtamqakik ym qkiql w qkn, uby xy khxatk w xy
xbyvy k mytvatnk qlhl yn qayxdl hy xa vahk, dbymql uby yn cbmql uby qyicl
hy vytxy mbwl w hy uby ynnk myk xík xy nl qbtfk w hymrkgy il mkfyt ma
rknnkté yi xa qayttk kncúi taigói hlihy tyglcynnk, w ma rkftái rygrl yn
qayxdl w nk xbytqy qkn xbhkiek yi nk rkgayihk w vahk hy xa dkhty w rytxkilm
uby kdyikm rknny ubayi xy glilegk, ma ynnlm pknqki.» il qyicl xám, myñltym,
uby hygatlm hy xa ramqltak; nk gbkn, ma ym kctkhkfny w dytyctaik, oúecbyinl
vbymqtlm fbyilm yiqyihaxayiqlm; uby hy xí mé hygat uby ubamaytk rkfétlmnk
gliqkhl xám ftyvyxyiqy, dbymql uby yn qyxlt hy yipkhktlm xám hy gbkqtl
gatgbmqkigakm xy rk ubaqkhl hy nk nyicbk.





gkdíqbnl znaa. uby qtkqk hy nl uby xám mbgyhaó yi nk vyiqk w hy lqtkm
xbgrkm glmkm hacikm hy mkfytmy


gknnó, yi hagayihl ymql, yn gkbqavl, k ubayi hli pytikihl haol:

-dlt gaytql, myñlt gkdaqái, yn xlhl gli uby rkféam gliqkhl ymqy ymqtkñl
mbgyml rk mahl qkn, uby acbknk k nk ilvyhkh w ymqtkñyek hyn xymxl gkml.
qlhl ym dytyctail w tktl, w nnyil hy kggahyiqym uby xktkvannki w mbmdyihyi
k ubayi nlm lwy; w ym hy qkn xkiytk yn cbmql uby ryxlm tygyfahl yi
ymgbgrknny, uby, kbiuby ilm rknnktk yn hík hy xkñkik yiqtyqyiahlm yi yn
xymxl gbyiql, rlncátkxlm uby hy ibyvl my glxyiektk.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, hli pytikihl w qlhlm nlm hyxám my ny lptygaytli, gli
qlhl nl k ynnlm dlmafny dktk mytvatny, gli dknkftkm w tkeliym qki kxltlmkm
w qki vythkhytkm uby yn gkdaqái my qbvl dlt fayi mkqampygrl hy mbm
vlnbiqkhym. ymdygaknxyiqy, ny lptygaó hli pytikihl uby ma ubytík vlnvytmy
gli én, uby én rktík uby yn xktubém, mb rytxkil, pbymy dkhtail hyn fkbqamxl
hy eltkahk, w uby én, dlt mb dktqy, ny kglxlhktík hy xkiytk uby dbhaymy
yiqtkt yi mb qayttk gli yn kbqltahkh w góxlhl uby k mb dytmlik my hyfík.
qlhl nl kctkhygaó gltqymímaxkxyiqy yn gkbqavl, dytl il ubaml kgyqkt iaicbil
hy mbm nafytknym lptygaxayiqlm.

yi ymql, nnyckfk wk nk ilgry, w, kn gyttkt hynnk, nnycó k nk vyiqk bi
glgry, gli kncbilm rlxftym hy k gkfknnl. dahaytli dlmkhk; k ubayi nk
vyiqytk tymdlihaó uby il rkfík yi qlhk nk vyiqk bi dknxl hymlgbdkhl.

-dbym, kbiuby yml myk -haol bil hy nlm hy k gkfknnl uby rkfíki yiqtkhl-, il
rk hy pknqkt dktk yn myñlt lahlt uby kubí vayiy.

k ymqy ilxfty my qbtfó nk cüémdyhk, w haol:

-myñlt, nl uby yi ynnl rkw ym uby il qyicl gkxkm: ma ym uby mb xytgyh hyn
myñlt lahlt nk qtky, uby mí hyfy hy qtkyt, yiqty yi fbyi rltk, uby wl w xa
xktahl ilm mknhtyxlm hy ibymqtl kdlmyiql dlt kglxlhkt k mb xytgyh.

-myk yi fbyi rltk -haol yn ymgbhytl.

dytl, k ymqy qayxdl, wk rkfík mknahl hyn glgry bi rlxfty, uby yi yn qtkoy
xlmqtó nbycl yn lpagal w gktcl uby qyiík, dltuby nk tldk nbyick, gli nkm
xkickm kttlgkhkm, uby vymqík, xlmqtktli myt lahlt, glxl mb gtakhl rkfík
hagrl. qtkík hy nk xkil k bik hligynnk, kn dktygyt hy rkmqk haye w myam
kñlm, vymqahk hy gkxail, qki faekttk, qki rytxlmk w qki cknnkthk uby k
qlhlm dbml yi khxatkgaói mb vamqk; hy mbytqy uby, k il rkfyt vamql k
hltlqyk w k nbmgaihk w eltkahk, uby yi nk vyiqk ymqkfki, gtywytki uby lqtk
qkn rytxlmbtk glxl nk hymqk hligynnk hapíganxyiqy dbhaytk rknnktmy. rknnómy
hli ubaolqy kn yiqtkt hyn lahlt w hy nk hligynnk, w, kmí glxl ny val, haol:

-mycbtkxyiqy dbyhy vbymqtk xytgyh yiqtkt w ymdkgaktmy yi ymqy gkmqannl,
uby, kbiuby ym ymqtygrl w xkn kglxlhkhl, il rkw ymqtygryek ia aiglxlhahkh
yi yn xbihl uby il hé nbckt k nkm ktxkm w k nkm nyqtkm, w xám ma nkm ktxkm
w nyqtkm qtkyi dlt cbík w khknah k nk pytxlmbtk, glxl nk qtkyi nkm nyqtkm
hy vbymqtk xytgyh yi ymqk pytxlmk hligynnk, k ubayi hyfyi il mónl kftatmy w
xkiapymqktmy nlm gkmqannlm, mail kdktqktmy nlm tamglm, w hyvahatmy w
kfkoktmy nkm xliqkñkm, dktk hknny kglcahk. yiqty vbymqtk xytgyh, hacl, yi
ymqy dktkíml, uby kubí rknnktá ymqtynnkm w mlnym uby kglxdkñyi yn gaynl uby
vbymqtk xytgyh qtky glimacl; kubí rknnktá nkm ktxkm yi mb dbiql w nk
rytxlmbtk yi mb ymqtyxl.

khxatkhl ubyhó yn lahlt hyn tkelikxayiql hy hli ubaolqy, k ubayi my dbml k
xatkt xbw hy dtldómaql, w il xyilm ny khxatkfk mb qknny uby mbm dknkftkm;
w, mai rknnkt iaicbikm gli uby tymdlihynny, my qltió k khxatkt hy ibyvl
gbkihl val hynkiqy hy mí k nbmgaihk, hltlqyk w k eltkahk, uby, k nkm ibyvkm
hy nlm ibyvlm cüémdyhym w k nkm uby nk vyiqytk nym rkfík hkhl hy nk
rytxlmbtk hy nk hligynnk, rkfíki vyiahl k vytnk w k tygyfatnk. dytl hli
pytikihl, gkthyial w yn gbtk ny ragaytli xám nnkilm w xám gltqymkilm
lptygaxayiqlm. yi ypygql, yn myñlt lahlt yiqtó glipbml, kmí hy nl uby vyík
glxl hy nl uby ymgbgrkfk, w nkm rytxlmkm hy nk vyiqk haytli nk fayinnyckhk
k nk rytxlmk hligynnk.

yi tymlnbgaói, fayi ygró hy vyt yn lahlt uby ytk cyiqy dtaigadkn qlhk nk
uby knní ymqkfk; dytl yn qknny, vamkoy w nk kdlmqbtk hy hli ubaolqy ny
hymkqaikfk; w, rkfayihl dkmkhl yiqty qlhlm gltqymym lptygaxayiqlm w
qkiqykhl nk glxlhahkh hy nk vyiqk, my lthyió nl uby kiqym ymqkfk lthyikhl:
uby qlhkm nkm xboytym my yiqtkmyi yi yn gkxktkigrói wk typytahl, w uby nlm
rlxftym my ubyhkmyi pbytk, glxl yi mb cbkthk. w kmí, pby gliqyiql yn lahlt
uby mb raok, uby ytk nk hligynnk, my pbymy gli kubynnkm myñltkm, nl uby
ynnk rael hy xbw fbyik ckik. w gli dktqy hy nk ymqtygrk gkxk hyn vyiqytl, w
gli nk xaqkh hy nk uby yn lahlt qtkík, my kglxlhktli kubynnk ilgry xyolt hy
nl uby dyimkfki.

yn gkbqavl, uby, hymhy yn dbiql uby val kn lahlt, ny hal mknqlm yn gltkeói
w fkttbiqlm hy uby kubén ytk mb rytxkil, dtycbiqó k bil hy nlm gtakhlm uby
gli én vyiíki uby góxl my nnkxkfk w ma mkfík hy ubé qayttk ytk. yn gtakhl
ny tymdlihaó uby my nnkxkfk yn nagyigakhl obki détye hy vayhxk, w uby rkfík
líhl hygat uby ytk hy bi nbckt hy nkm xliqkñkm hy nyói. gli ymqk tynkgaói w
gli nl uby én rkfík vamql my kgkfó hy glipatxkt hy uby kubén ytk mb
rytxkil, uby rkfík mycbahl nkm nyqtkm dlt glimyol hy mb dkhty; w,
knfltlqkhl w gliqyiql, nnkxkihl kdktqy k hli pytikihl, k gkthyial w kn
gbtk, nym gliqó nl uby dkmkfk, gytqapagáihlnym uby kubyn lahlt ytk mb
rytxkil. rkfíkny hagrl qkxfaéi yn gtakhl glxl afk dtlvyíhl dlt lahlt k nkm
aihakm, yi nk kbhayigak hy xéoagl. mbdl qkxfaéi glxl kubynnk hligynnk ytk
mb raok, hy gbwl dktql rkfík xbytql mb xkhty, w uby én rkfík ubyhkhl xbw
tagl gli yn hlqy uby gli nk raok my ny ubyhó yi gkmk. dahaónym glimyol ubé
xlhl qyihtík dktk hymgbftatmy, l dktk glilgyt dtaxytl ma, hymdbém hy
hymgbfaytql, mb rytxkil, dlt vytny dlfty, my kptyiqkfk l ny tygyfík gli
fbyikm yiqtkñkm.

-héoymyxy k xí yn rkgyt ymk yzdytayigak -haol yn gbtk-; gbkiql xám, uby il
rkw dyimkt mail uby vlm, myñlt gkdaqái, mytéam xbw fayi tygyfahl; dltuby yn
vknlt w dtbhyigak uby yi mb fbyi dktygyt hymgbfty vbymqtl rytxkil il hk
aihagalm hy myt kttlckiqy ia hymglilgahl, ia uby il rk hy mkfyt dliyt nlm
gkmlm hy nk pltqbik yi mb dbiql.

-gli qlhl yml -haol yn gkdaqái- wl ubyttík, il hy axdtlvaml, mail dlt
tlhylm, hátxyny k glilgyt.

-wk lm hacl -tymdlihaó yn gbtk- uby wl nl qtkekté hy xlhl uby qlhlm
ubyhyxlm mkqampygrlm.

wk, yi ymql, ymqkfk khytyekhk nk gyik, w qlhlm my myiqktli k nk xymk, ygyql
yn gkbqavl w nkm myñltkm, uby gyiktli hy dlt mí yi mb kdlmyiql. yi nk xaqkh
hy nk gyik haol yn gbtk:

-hyn xymxl ilxfty hy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt lahlt, qbvy wl bik gkxktkhk yi
glmqkiqaildnk, hlihy ymqbvy gkbqavl kncbilm kñlm; nk gbkn gkxktkhk ytk bil
hy nlm vknayiqym mlnhkhlm w gkdaqkiym uby rkfík yi qlhk nk aipkiqytík
ymdkñlnk, dytl qkiql gbkiql qyiík hy ympltekhl w vknytlml nl qyiík hy
hymhagrkhl.

-w ¿góxl my nnkxkfk ymy gkdaqái, myñlt xíl? -dtycbiqó yn lahlt.

-nnkxáfkmy -tymdlihaó yn gbtk- tbw détye hy vayhxk, w ytk ikqbtkn hy bi
nbckt hy nkm xliqkñkm hy nyói, yn gbkn xy gliqó bi gkml uby k mb dkhty
gli mbm rytxkilm ny rkfík mbgyhahl, uby, k il gliqátxynl bi rlxfty qki
vythkhytl glxl én, nl qbvaytk dlt glimyok hy kubynnkm uby nkm vayokm
gbyiqki yn aivaytil kn pbycl. dltuby xy haol uby mb dkhty rkfík havahahl mb
rkgayihk yiqty qtym raolm uby qyiík, w nym rkfík hkhl gaytqlm glimyolm,
xyoltym uby nlm hy gkqói. w mé wl hygat uby yn uby én ymglcaó hy vyiat k nk
cbyttk ny rkfík mbgyhahl qki fayi uby yi dlglm kñlm, dlt mb vknlt w
ympbytel, mai lqtl ftkel uby yn hy mb xbgrk vatqbh, mbfaó k myt gkdaqái hy
aipkiqytík, w k vytmy yi gkxail w dtyhagkxyiql hy myt dtymql xkymqty hy
gkxdl. dytl pbyny nk pltqbik gliqtktak, dbym hlihy nk dbhaytk ymdytkt w
qyiyt fbyik, knní nk dythaó, gli dythyt nk nafytqkh yi nk pynagímaxk
oltikhk hlihy qkiqlm nk glftktli, uby pby yi nk fkqknnk hy nydkiql. wl nk
dythí yi nk clnyqk, w hymdbém, dlt hapytyiqym mbgymlm, ilm rknnkxlm
gkxktkhkm yi glmqkiqaildnk. hymhy knní vail k ktcyn, hlihy mé uby ny
mbgyhaó bil hy nlm xám ymqtkñlm gkmlm uby yi yn xbihl rki mbgyhahl.

hy kubí pby dtlmacbayihl yn gbtk, w, gli ftyvyhkh mbgaiqk, gliqó nl uby gli
eltkahk k mb rytxkil rkfík mbgyhahl; k qlhl nl gbkn ymqkfk qki kqyiql yn
lahlt, uby iaicbik vye rkfík mahl qki lahlt glxl yiqligym. mónl nnycó yn
gbtk kn dbiql hy gbkihl nlm ptkigymym hymdloktli k nlm gtamqakilm uby yi nk
fktgk vyiíki, w nk dlftyek w iygymahkh yi uby mb gkxktkhk w nk rytxlmk xltk
rkfíki ubyhkhl; hy nlm gbknym il rkfík mkfahl yi ubé rkfíki dktkhl, ia ma
rkfíki nnyckhl k ymdkñk, l nnyváhlnlm nlm ptkigymym k ptkigak.

qlhl nl uby yn gbtk hygík ymqkfk ymgbgrkihl, kncl hy knní hymvakhl, yn
gkdaqái, w ilqkfk qlhlm nlm xlvaxayiqlm uby mb rytxkil rkgík; yn gbkn,
vayihl uby wk yn gbtk rkfík nnyckhl kn pai hy mb gbyiql, hkihl bi ctkihy
mbmdatl w nnyiáihlmyny nlm lolm hy kcbk, haol:

-¡lr, myñlt, ma mbdaémyhym nkm ibyvkm uby xy rkféam gliqkhl, w góxl xy
qlgki qki yi dktqy uby xy ym pltelml hkt xbymqtkm hynnl gli ymqkm náctaxkm
uby, gliqtk qlhk xa hamgtygaói w tygkql, xy mknyi dlt nlm lolm! ymy gkdaqái
qki vknytlml uby hygím ym xa xkwlt rytxkil, yn gbkn, glxl xám pbytqy w hy
xám knqlm dyimkxayiqlm uby wl ia lqtl rytxkil xyilt xíl, ymglcaó yn rlitlml
w hacil yoytgagal hy nk cbyttk, uby pby bil hy nlm qtym gkxailm uby ibymqtl
dkhty ilm dtldbml, mycúi lm haol vbymqtk gkxktkhk yi nk glimyok uby, k
vbymqtl dktygyt, ny límqym. wl mycbí yn hy nkm nyqtkm, yi nkm gbknym halm w
xa hanacyigak xy rki dbymql yi yn ctkhl uby xy vyam. xa xyilt rytxkil ymqá
yi yn datú, qki tagl uby gli nl uby rk yivakhl k xa dkhty w k xí rk
mkqampygrl fayi nk dktqy uby én my nnyvó, w kbi hkhl k nkm xkilm hy xa
dkhty gli uby dlhyt rktqkt mb nafytknahkh ikqbtkn; w wl, kimaxymxl, ry
dlhahl gli xám hygyigak w kbqltahkh qtkqktxy yi xam ymqbhalm w nnyckt kn
dbymql yi uby xy vyl. vavy kúi xa dkhty, xbtayihl gli yn hymyl hy mkfyt hy
mb raol xkwlt, w dahy k halm gli gliqaibkm ltkgaliym il gaytty nk xbytqy
mbm lolm rkmqk uby én vyk gli vahk k nlm hy mb raol; hyn gbkn xy xktkvannl,
mayihl qki hamgtyql, góxl yi qkiqlm qtkfkolm w kpnagaliym, l dtómdytlm
mbgymlm, my rkwk hymgbahkhl hy hkt ilqagak hy mí k mb dkhty; uby ma én nl
mbdaytk, l kncbil hy ilmlqtlm, il qbvaytk iygymahkh hy kcbkthkt kn xankctl
hy nk gkñk dktk kngkiekt mb tymgkqy. dytl hy nl uby wl kcltk xy qyxl ym hy
dyimkt ma kubynnlm ptkigymym ny rkftái hkhl nafytqkh, l ny rkftái xbytql
dlt yigbftat mb rbtql. ymql qlhl mytá uby wl dtlmack xa vakoy, il gli kubyn
gliqyiql gli uby ny glxyigé, mail gli qlhk xynkiglník w qtamqyek. ¡lr fbyi
rytxkil xíl, w ubaéi mbdaytk kcltk hóihy ymqkfkm; uby wl qy pbytk k fbmgkt
w k naftkt hy qbm qtkfkolm, kbiuby pbytk k glmqk hy nlm xílm! ¡lr, ubaéi
nnyvktk ibyvkm k ibymqtl vayol dkhty hy uby qyiíkm vahk, kbiuby ymqbvaytkm
yi nkm xkexlttkm xám ymglihahkm hy fytfytík; uby hy knní qy mkgktki mbm
taubyekm, nkm hy xa rytxkil w nkm xíkm! ¡lr eltkahk rytxlmk w nafytkn,
ubaéi dbhaytk dkckt yn fayi uby k bi rytxkil ragamqy!; ¡ubaéi dbhaytk
rknnktmy kn tyikgyt hy qb knxk, w k nkm flhkm, uby qkiql cbmql k qlhlm ilm
haytki!

ymqkm w lqtkm myxyokiqym dknkftkm hygík yn lahlt, nnyil hy qkiqk glxdkmaói
gli nkm ibyvkm uby hy mb rytxkil ny rkfíki hkhl, uby qlhlm nlm uby ny líki
ny kglxdkñkfki yi hkt xbymqtkm hyn myiqaxayiql uby qyiíki hy mb námqaxk.

vayihl, dbym, yn gbtk uby qki fayi rkfík mknahl gli mb aiqyigaói w gli nl
uby hymykfk yn gkdaqái, il ubaml qyiytnlm k qlhlm xám qayxdl qtamqym, w
kmí, my nyvkiqó hy nk xymk, w, yiqtkihl hlihy ymqkfk eltkahk, nk qlxó dlt
nk xkil, w qtkm ynnk my vaiaytli nbmgaihk, hltlqyk w nk raok hyn lahlt.
ymqkfk ymdytkihl yn gkdaqái k vyt nl uby yn gbtk ubytík rkgyt, uby pby uby,
qlxáihlny k én kmaxymxl hy nk lqtk xkil, gli yiqtkxflm k hlm my pby hlihy
yn lahlt w nlm hyxám gkfknnytlm ymqkfki, w haol:

-gymyi, myñlt lahlt, vbymqtkm náctaxkm, w gónxymy vbymqtl hymyl hy qlhl yn
fayi uby kgytqkty k hymyktmy, dbym qyiéam hynkiqy k vbymqtl fbyi rytxkil w
k vbymqtk fbyik gbñkhk. Émqy uby kubí vyam ym yn gkdaqái vayhxk, w émqk, nk
rytxlmk xltk uby qkiql fayi ny rael. nlm ptkigymym uby lm haoy nlm dbmaytli
yi nk ymqtygryek uby vyam, dktk uby vlm xlmqtéam nk nafytknahkh hy vbymqtl
fbyi dygrl.

kgbhaó yn gkdaqái k kftkekt k mb rytxkil, w én ny dbml kxfkm xkilm yi nlm
dygrlm dlt xatktny kncl xám kdktqkhl; xkm, gbkihl ny kgkfó hy glilgyt, ny
kftkeó qki ymqtygrkxyiqy, hyttkxkihl qki qaytikm náctaxkm hy gliqyiql,uby
nlm xám hy nlm uby dtymyiqym ymqkfki ny rbfaytli hy kglxdkñkt yi ynnkm. nkm
dknkftkm uby yiqtkxflm rytxkilm my haoytli, nlm myiqaxayiqlm uby xlmqtktli,
kdyikm gtyl uby dbyhyi dyimktmy, gbkiql xám ymgtafatmy. knní, yi ftyvym
tkeliym, my haytli gbyiqk hy mbm mbgymlm; knní xlmqtktli dbymqk yi mb dbiql
nk fbyik kxamqkh hy hlm rytxkilm; knní kftkeó yn lahlt k eltkahk; knní nk
lptygaó mb rkgayihk; knní rael uby nk kftkekmy mb raok; knní nk gtamqakik
rytxlmk w nk xltk rytxlmímaxk tyilvktli nkm náctaxkm hy qlhlm.

knní hli ubaolqy ymqkfk kqyiql, mai rkfnkt dknkftk, glimahytkihl ymqlm qki
ymqtkñlm mbgymlm, kqtafbwéihlnlm qlhlm k ubaxytkm hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík.
knní gligytqktli uby yn gkdaqái w eltkahk my vlnvaymyi gli mb rytxkil k
myvannk w kvamkmyi k mb dkhty hy mb rknnkecl w nafytqkh, dktk uby, glxl
dbhaymy, vaiaymy k rknnktmy yi nkm flhkm w fkbqamxl hy eltkahk, dlt il ny
myt kn lahlt dlmafny hyokt yn gkxail uby nnyvkfk, k gkbmk hy qyiyt ibyvkm
uby hy knní k bi xym dktqík nk pnlqk hy myvannk k nk ibyvk ymdkñk, w
pbétkny hy ctkihy aiglxlhahkh dythyt yn vakoy.

yi tymlnbgaói, qlhlm ubyhktli gliqyiqlm w knyctym hyn fbyi mbgyml hyn
gkbqavl; w, glxl wk nk ilgry afk gkma yi nkm hlm dktqym hy mb oltikhk,
kglthktli hy tyglcytmy w tydlmkt nl uby hy ynnk nym ubyhkfk. hli ubaolqy my
lptygaó k rkgyt nk cbkthak hyn gkmqannl, dltuby hy kncúi cackiqy l lqtl xkn
kihkiqy plnnói il pbymyi kglxyqahlm, glhagalmlm hyn ctki qymltl hy
rytxlmbtk uby yi kubyn gkmqannl my yigyttkfk. kctkhygaétlimynl nlm uby ny
glilgíki, w haytli kn lahlt gbyiqk hyn rbxlt ymqtkñl hy hli ubaolqy, hy uby
il dlgl cbmql tygafaó.

mónl mkigrl dkiek my hymymdytkfk gli nk qkthkiek hyn tyglcaxayiql, w mónl
én my kglxlhó xyolt uby qlhlm, ygráihlmy mlfty nlm kdktyolm hy mb obxyiql,
uby ny glmqktli qki gktlm glxl khynkiqy my hatá.

tyglcahkm, dbym, nkm hkxkm yi mb ymqkigak, w nlm hyxám kglxlháhlmy glxl
xyilm xkn dbhaytli, hli ubaolqy my mknaó pbytk hy nk vyiqk k rkgyt nk
gyiqaiynk hyn gkmqannl, glxl nl rkfík dtlxyqahl.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby pknqkihl dlgl dlt vyiat yn knfk, nnycó k nlm líhlm hy
nkm hkxkm bik vle qki yiqlikhk w qki fbyik, uby nym lfnacó k uby qlhkm ny
dtymqkmyi kqyiql líhl, ymdygaknxyiqy hltlqyk, uby hymdaytqk ymqkfk, k gbwl
nkhl hltxík hlñk gnktk hy vayhxk, uby kimí my nnkxkfk nk raok hyn lahlt.
ikhay dlhík axkcaikt ubaéi ytk nk dytmlik uby qki fayi gkiqkfk, w ytk bik
vle mlnk, mai uby nk kglxdkñkmy aimqtbxyiql kncbil. bikm vygym nym dktygík
uby gkiqkfki yi yn dkqal; lqtkm, uby yi nk gkfknnytaek; w, ymqkihl yi ymqk
glipbmaói xbw kqyiqkm, nnycó k nk dbytqk hyn kdlmyiql gkthyial w haol:

-ubayi il hbytxy, ymgbgry; uby latái bik vle hy bi xlel hy xbnkm, uby hy
qkn xkiytk gkiqk uby yigkiqk.

-wk nl líxlm, myñlt -tymdlihaó hltlqyk.

w, gli ymql, my pby gkthyial; w hltlqyk, dliayihl qlhk nk kqyigaói dlmafny,
yiqyihaó uby nl uby my gkiqkfk ytk ymql:





gkdíqbnl znaaa. hlihy my gbyiqk nk kctkhkfny ramqltak hyn xlel hy xbnkm,
gli lqtlm ymqtkñlm kgkygaxayiqlm yi nk vyiqk mbgyhahlm]


   -xktaiytl mlw hy kxlt,
   w yi mb daénkcl dtlpbihl
   ikvycl mai ymdytkiek
   hy nnyckt k dbytql kncbil.
   macbayihl vlw k bik ymqtynnk
   uby hymhy nyolm hymgbftl,
   xám fynnk w tymdnkihygayiqy
   uby gbkiqkm val dknaibtl.
   wl il mé khóihy xy cbík,
   w kmí, ikvycl glipbml,
   yn knxk k xatktnk kqyiqk,
   gbahkhlmk w gli hymgbahl.
   tygkqlm axdytqaiyiqym,
   rliymqahkh gliqtk yn bml,
   mli ibfym uby xy nk yigbftyi
   gbkihl xám vytnk dtlgbtl.
   ¡lr gnktk w nbgayiqy ymqtynnk,
   yi gbwk nbxfty xy kdbtl!;
   kn dbiql uby qy xy yigbftkm,
   mytá hy xa xbytqy yn dbiql.

nnyckihl yn uby gkiqkfk k ymqy dbiql, ny dktygaó k hltlqyk uby il mytík
fayi uby hyokmy gnktk hy lít bik qki fbyik vle; w kmí, xlvaéihlnk k bik w k
lqtk dktqy, nk hymdytqó hagaéihlny:

-dythóikxy, iañk, uby qy hymdaytql, dbym nl rkcl dltuby cbmqym hy lít nk
xyolt vle uby ubaeá rkftám líhl yi qlhk qb vahk.

gnktk hymdytqó qlhk mlñlnayiqk, w hy nk dtaxytk vye il yiqyihaó nl uby
hltlqyk ny hygík; w, vlnvaéihlmynl k dtycbiqkt, ynnk my nl vlnvaó k hygat,
dlt nl gbkn ymqbvl kqyiqk gnktk. dytl, kdyikm rbfl líhl hlm vytmlm uby yn
uby gkiqkfk afk dtlmacbayihl, gbkihl ny qlxó bi qyxfnlt qki ymqtkñl glxl ma
hy kncúi ctkvy kggahyiqy hy gbktqkik ymqbvaytk yipytxk, w, kftkeáihlmy
ymqtygrkxyiqy gli qylhltk, ny haol:

-¡kw myñltk hy xa knxk w hy xa vahk!, ¿dktk ubé xy hymdytqkmqym?; uby yn
xkwlt fayi uby nk pltqbik xy dlhík rkgyt dlt krltk ytk qyiytxy gyttkhlm nlm
lolm w nlm líhlm, dktk il vyt ia lít k ymy hymhagrkhl xúmagl.

-¿ubé ym nl uby hagym, iañk?; xatk uby hagyi uby yn uby gkiqk ym bi xlel hy
xbnkm.

-il ym mail myñlt hy nbcktym -tymdlihaó gnktk-, w yn uby ny qayiy yi xa
knxk gli qkiqk mycbtahkh uby ma én il ubayty hyoknny, il ny mytá ubaqkhl
yqytikxyiqy.

khxatkhk ubyhó hltlqyk hy nkm myiqahkm tkeliym hy nk xbgrkgrk, dktygaéihlny
uby my kvyiqkokfki yi xbgrl k nk hamgtygaói uby mbm dlglm kñlm dtlxyqíki; w
kmí, ny haol:

-rkfnáam hy xlhl, myñltk gnktk, uby il dbyhl yiqyihytlm: hygnktklm xám w
hygahxy ubé ym nl uby hygím hy knxk w hy nbcktym, w hymqy xúmagl, gbwk vle
qki aiubayqk lm qayiy. dytl il xy hacáam ikhk dlt krltk, uby il ubaytl
dythyt, dlt kgbhat k vbymqtl mlftymknql, yn cbmql uby tygafl hy lít kn uby
gkiqk; uby xy dktygy uby gli ibyvlm vytmlm w ibyvl qlil qltik k mb gkiql.

-myk yi fbyi rltk -tymdlihaó gnktk.

w, dlt il línny, my qkdó gli nkm xkilm yiqtkxflm líhlm, hy nl uby qkxfaéi
my khxató hltlqyk; nk gbkn, ymqkihl kqyiqk k nl uby my gkiqkfk, val uby
dtlmycbíki yi ymqk xkiytk:

   -hbngy ymdytkiek xík,
   uby, tlxdayihl axdlmafnym w xknyekm,
   macbym patxy nk vík
   uby qú xymxk qy paicym w khytyekm:
   il qy hymxkwy yn vytqy
   k gkhk dkml obiql kn hy qb xbytqy.
   il kngkieki dytyelmlm
   rlitkhlm qtabiplm ia vaqltak kncbik,
   ia dbyhyi myt hagrlmlm
   nlm uby, il gliqtkmqkihl k nk pltqbik,
   yiqtycki, hymvknahlm,
   kn lgal fnkihl qlhlm nlm myiqahlm.
   uby kxlt mbm cnltakm vyihk
   gktkm, ym ctki tkeói, w ym qtkql obmql,
   dbym il rkw xám tagk dtyihk
   uby nk uby my ubankqk dlt mb cbmql;
   w ym glmk xkiapaymqk
   uby il ym hy ymqaxk nl uby dlgl gbymqk.
   kxltlmkm dltpíkm
   qkn vye kngkieki axdlmafnym glmkm;
   w kimí, kbiuby gli nkm xíkm
   macl hy kxlt nkm xám hapagbnqlmkm,
   il dlt yml tygynl
   hy il kngkiekt hymhy nk qayttk yn gaynl.

kubí hal pai nk vle, w dtaigadal k ibyvlm mlnnlelm gnktk. qlhl nl gbkn
yigyihík yn hymyl hy hltlqyk, uby hymykfk mkfyt nk gkbmk hy qki mbkvy gkiql
w hy qki qtamqy nnltl. w kmí, ny vlnvaó k dtycbiqkt ubé ytk nl uby ny
ubytík hygat hyikiqym. yiqligym gnktk, qyxytlmk hy uby nbmgaihk il nk
lwymy, kftkekihl ymqtygrkxyiqy k hltlqyk, dbml mb flgk qki obiql hyn líhl
hy hltlqyk, uby mycbtkxyiqy dlhík rkfnkt mai myt hy lqtl myiqahk, w kmí ny
haol:

-ymqy uby gkiqk, myñltk xík, ym bi raol hy bi gkfknnytl ikqbtkn hyn tyail
hy ktkcói, myñlt hy hlm nbcktym, yn gbkn vavík ptliqytl hy nk gkmk hy xa
dkhty yi nk gltqy; w, kbiuby xa dkhty qyiík nkm vyiqkikm hy mb gkmk gli
nayielm yi yn aivaytil w gynlmíkm yi yn vytkil, wl il mé nl uby pby, ia nl
uby il, uby ymqy gkfknnytl, uby kihkfk kn ymqbhal, xy val, ia mé ma yi nk
acnymak l yi lqtk dktqy. paiknxyiqy, én my yikxltó hy xí, w xy nl hal k
yiqyihyt hymhy nkm vyiqkikm hy mb gkmk gli qkiqkm myñkm w gli qkiqkm
náctaxkm, uby wl ny rbfy hy gtyyt, w kbi ubytyt, mai mkfyt nl uby xy
ubytík. yiqty nkm myñkm uby xy rkgík, ytk bik hy obiqktmy nk bik xkil gli
nk lqtk, háihlxy k yiqyihyt uby my gkmktík glixacl; w, kbiuby wl xy
rlncktík xbgrl hy uby kimí pbytk, glxl mlnk w mai xkhty, il mkfík gli ubaéi
glxbiagknnl, w kmí, nl hyoé ymqkt mai hknny lqtl pkvlt ma il ytk, gbkihl
ymqkfk xa dkhty pbytk hy gkmk w yn mbwl qkxfaéi, knekt bi dlgl yn nayiel l
nk gynlmík w hyoktxy vyt qlhk, hy nl uby én rkgík qkiqk paymqk, uby hkfk
myñknym hy vlnvytmy nlgl. nnycómy yi ymql yn qayxdl hy nk dktqahk hy xa
dkhty, nk gbkn én mbdl, w il hy xí, dbym ibigk dbhy hygítmynl. gkwó xknl, k
nl uby wl yiqayihl, hy dymkhbxfty; w kmí, yn hík uby ilm dktqaxlm ibigk
dbhy vytny dktk hymdyhatxy hén, maubaytk gli nlm lolm. dytl, k gkfl hy hlm
híkm uby gkxaiáfkxlm, kn yiqtkt hy bik dlmkhk, yi bi nbckt bik oltikhk hy
kubí, ny va k nk dbytqk hyn xymói, dbymql yi ráfaql hy xlel hy xbnkm, qki
kn ikqbtkn uby ma wl il ny qtboytk qki tyqtkqkhl yi xa knxk pbytk axdlmafny
glilgynny. glilgíny, khxatéxy w knyctéxy; én xy xató k rbtql hy xa dkhty,
hy ubayi én mayxdty my ymglihy gbkihl kqtkvaymk dlt hynkiqy hy xí yi nlm
gkxailm w yi nkm dlmkhkm hl nnyckxlm; w, glxl wl mé ubaéi ym, w glimahytl
uby dlt kxlt hy xí vayiy k day w gli qkiql qtkfkol, xbétlxy hy dymkhbxfty,
w khlihy én dliy nlm daym dlicl wl nlm lolm. il mé gli ubé aiqyigaói vayiy,
ia góxl rk dlhahl ymgkdktmy hy mb dkhty, uby ny ubayty ymqtklthaiktakxyiqy,
dltuby il qayiy lqtl rytyhytl, w dltuby én nl xytygy, glxl nl vytá vbymqtk
xytgyh gbkihl ny vyk. w xám ny mé hygat: uby qlhl kubynnl uby gkiqk nl mkgk
hy mb gkfyek; uby ry líhl hygat uby ym xbw ctki ymqbhakiqy w dlyqk. w rkw
xám: uby gkhk vye uby ny vyl l ny lacl gkiqkt, qayxfnl qlhk w xy
mlftymknql, qyxytlmk hy uby xa dkhty ny glilegk w vyick yi glilgaxayiql hy
ibymqtlm hymylm. yi xa vahk ny ry rkfnkhl dknkftk, w, gli qlhl yml, ny
ubaytl hy xkiytk uby il ry hy dlhyt vavat mai én. ymql ym, myñltk xík, qlhl
nl uby lm dbyhl hygat hymqy xúmagl, gbwk vle qkiql lm rk gliqyiqkhl; uby yi
mlnk ynnk ygrktéam fayi hy vyt uby il ym xlel hy xbnkm, glxl hygím, mail
myñlt hy knxkm w nbcktym, glxl wl lm ry hagrl.

-il hacáam xám, myñltk hlñk gnktk -haol k ymqk mkeói hltlqyk, w ymql,
fymáihlnk xan vygym-; il hacáam xám, hacl, w ymdytkh uby vyick yn ibyvl
hík, uby wl ymdytl yi halm hy yigkxaikt hy xkiytk vbymqtlm iyclgalm, uby
qyicki yn pynagy pai uby qki rliymqlm dtaigadalm xytygyi.

-¡kw myñltk! -haol hlñk gnktk-, ¿ubé pai my dbyhy ymdytkt, ma mb dkhty ym
qki dtaigadkn w qki tagl uby ny dktygytá uby kbi wl il dbyhl myt gtakhk hy
mb raol, gbkiql xám ymdlmk? dbym gkmktxy wl k rbtql hy xa dkhty, il nl rkté
dlt gbkiql rkw yi yn xbihl. il ubyttík mail uby ymqy xlel my vlnvaymy w xy
hyokmy; ubaeá gli il vynny w gli nk ctki hamqkigak hyn gkxail uby nnyvkxlm
my xy knavaktík nk dyik uby krltk nnyvl, kbiuby mé hygat uby ymqy tyxyhal
uby xy axkcail xy rk hy kdtlvygrkt fayi dlgl. il mé ubé hakfnlm rk mahl
ymql, ia dlt hóihy my rk yiqtkhl ymqy kxlt uby ny qyicl, mayihl wl qki
xbgrkgrk w én qki xbgrkgrl, uby yi vythkh uby gtyl uby mlxlm hy bik yhkh
xymxk, w uby wl il qyicl gbxdnahlm haye w myam kñlm; uby dktk yn hík hy mki
xacbyn uby vyihtá hagy xa dkhty uby nlm gbxdnl.

il dbhl hyokt hy tyítmy hltlqyk, lwyihl gbái glxl iañk rkfnkfk hlñk gnktk,
k ubayi haol:

-tydlmyxlm, myñltk, nl dlgl uby gtyl ubyhk hy nk ilgry, w kxkiygytá halm w
xyhtktyxlm, l xkn xy kihktái nkm xkilm.

mlmycátlimy gli ymql, w yi qlhk nk vyiqk my cbkthkfk bi ctkihy manyigal;
mlnkxyiqy il hltxíki nk raok hy nk vyiqytk w xktaqltiym, mb gtakhk, nkm
gbknym, glxl wk mkfíki yn rbxlt hy uby dygkfk hli ubaolqy, w uby ymqkfk
pbytk hy nk vyiqk ktxkhl w k gkfknnl rkgayihl nk cbkthk, hyqytxaiktli nkm
hlm hy rkgynny kncbik fbtnk, l, k nl xyilm, hy dkmkt bi dlgl yn qayxdl
lwéihlny mbm hamdktkqym.

ym, dbym, yn gkml uby yi qlhk nk vyiqk il rkfík vyiqkik uby mknaymy kn
gkxdl, mail bi kcboytl hy bi dkokt, dlt hlihy ygrkfki nk dkok dlt hypbytk.
k ymqy kcboytl my dbmaytli nkm hlm myxahligynnkm, w vaytli uby hli ubaolqy
ymqkfk k gkfknnl, tyglmqkhl mlfty mb nkieói, hkihl hy gbkihl yi gbkihl qki
hlnayiqym w dtlpbihlm mbmdatlm uby dktygík, uby gli gkhk bil my ny
kttkigkfk yn knxk. w kmaxymxl lwytli uby hygík gli vle fnkihk, tycknkhk w
kxltlmk:

-¡lr xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, ymqtyxl hy qlhk rytxlmbtk, pai w tyxkqy
hy nk hamgtygaói, ktgravl hyn xyolt hlikaty, hydómaql hy nk rliymqahkh, w,
bnqaxkhkxyiqy, ahyk hy qlhl nl dtlvygrlml, rliymql w hynyaqkfny uby rkw yi
yn xbihl! w ¿ubé pktá kcltk nk qb xytgyh? ¿ma qyihtám dlt vyiqbtk nkm
xayiqym yi qb gkbqavl gkfknnytl, uby k qkiqlm dynactlm, dlt mónl mytvatqy,
hy mb vlnbiqkh rk ubytahl dliytmy? hkxy qú ibyvkm hynnk, ¡lr nbxaiktak hy
nkm qtym gktkm! ubaeá gli yivahak hy nk mbwk nk ymqám krltk xatkihl; uby, l
dkmyáihlmy dlt kncbik cknytík hy mbm mbiqblmlm dknkgalm, l wk dbymqk hy
dygrlm mlfty kncúi fkngói, ymqá glimahytkihl góxl, mknvk mb rliymqahkh w
ctkihyek, rk hy kxkimkt nk qltxyiqk uby dlt ynnk ymqy xa gbaqkhl gltkeói
dkhygy, ubé cnltak rk hy hkt k xam dyikm, ubé mlmaycl k xa gbahkhl w,
paiknxyiqy, ubé vahk k xa xbytqy w ubé dtyxal k xam mytvagalm. w qú, mln,
uby wk hyfym hy ymqkt kdtaymk yimannkihl qbm gkfknnlm, dlt xkhtbckt w mknat
k vyt k xa myñltk, kmí glxl nk vykm, mbdníglqy uby hy xa dktqy nk mknbhym;
dytl cbáthkqy uby kn vytnk w mknbhktnk il ny hym dke yi yn tlmqtl, uby
qyihté xám gynlm hy qa uby qú nlm qbvamqy hy kubynnk nacytk aictkqk uby
qkiql qy rael mbhkt w glttyt dlt nlm nnkilm hy qymknak, l dlt nkm tafytkm
hy dyiyl, uby il xy kgbythl fayi dlt hóihy glttamqy yiqligym gynlml w
yikxltkhl.

k ymqy dbiql nnyckfk yiqligym hli ubaolqy yi mb qki nkmqaxytl
tkelikxayiql, gbkihl nk raok hy nk vyiqytk ny glxyieó k gygykt w k
hygatny:

-myñlt xíl, nnécbymy kgá nk vbymqtk xytgyh ma ym mytvahl.

k gbwkm myñkm w vle vlnvaó hli ubaolqy nk gkfyek, w val, k nk nbe hy nk
nbik, uby yiqligym ymqkfk yi qlhk mb gnktahkh, góxl ny nnkxkfki hyn kcboytl
uby k én ny dktygaó vyiqkik, w kbi gli tyokm hltkhkm, glxl glivayiy uby nkm
qyicki qki taglm gkmqannlm glxl én my axkcaikfk uby ytk kubynnk vyiqk; w
nbycl yi yn aimqkiqy my ny tydtymyiqó yi mb nlgk axkcaikgaói uby lqtk vye,
glxl nk dkmkhk, nk hligynnk pytxlmk, raok hy nk myñltk hy kubyn gkmqannl,
vyigahk hy mb kxlt, qltikfk k mlnagaqktny; w gli ymqy dyimkxayiql, dlt il
xlmqtktmy hymgltqém w hymkctkhygahl, vlnvaó nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy w my
nnycó kn kcboytl, w, kmí glxl val k nkm hlm xlekm, haol:

-námqaxk lm qyicl, pytxlmk myñltk, hy uby rkwkhym dbymql vbymqtkm kxltlmkm
xayiqym yi dktqy hlihy il ym dlmafny glttymdlihytlm glipltxy xytygy vbymqtl
ctki vknlt w cyiqanyek; hy nl uby il hyféam hkt gbndk k ymqy xamytkfny
kihkiqy gkfknnytl, k ubayi qayiy kxlt axdlmafanaqkhl hy dlhyt yiqtyckt mb
vlnbiqkh k lqtk uby kubynnk uby, yi yn dbiql uby mbm lolm nk vaytli, nk
rael myñltk kfmlnbqk hy mb knxk. dythlikhxy, fbyik myñltk, w tyglcylm yi
vbymqtl kdlmyiql, w il ubytáam, gli maciapagktxy xám vbymqtlm hymylm, uby
wl xy xbymqty xám hymkctkhygahl; w ma hyn kxlt uby xy qyiéam rknnáam yi xí
lqtk glmk gli uby mkqampkgytlm, uby yn xamxl kxlt il myk, dyhíhxynk; uby wl
lm obtl, dlt kubynnk kbmyiqy yiyxack hbngy xík, hy hátlmnk yi gliqaiyiqy,
ma fayi xy dahaémyhym bik cbyhyok hy nlm gkfynnlm hy xyhbmk, uby ytki qlhlm
gbnyftkm, l wk nlm xymxlm tkwlm hyn mln yigyttkhlm yi bik tyhlxk.

-il rk xyiymqyt ikhk hyml xa myñltk, myñlt gkfknnytl -haol k ymqy dbiql
xktaqltiym.

-dbym, ¿ubé rk xyiymqyt, hamgtyqk hbyñk, vbymqtk myñltk? -tymdlihaó hli
ubaolqy.

-mlnk bik hy vbymqtkm rytxlmkm xkilm -haol xktaqltiym-, dlt dlhyt hymrlckt
gli ynnk yn ctki hymyl uby k ymqy kcboytl nk rk qtkíhl, qki k dynactl hy mb
rlilt uby ma mb myñlt dkhty nk rbfaytk myiqahl, nk xyilt qkokhk hynnk pbytk
nk ltyok.

-¡wk ubamaytk wl vyt yml! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; dytl én my cbkthktá fayi
hyml, ma wk il ubayty rkgyt yn xám hymkmqtkhl pai uby dkhty rael yi yn
xbihl, dlt rkfyt dbymql nkm xkilm yi nlm hynagkhlm xayxftlm hy mb yikxltkhk
raok.

dktygaóny k xktaqltiym uby mai hbhk hli ubaolqy hktík nk xkil uby ny rkfíki
dyhahl, w, dtldliayihl yi mb dyimkxayiql nl uby rkfík hy rkgyt, my fkoó hyn
kcboytl w my pby k nk gkfknnytaek, hlihy qlxó yn gkfymqtl hyn obxyiql hy
mkigrl dkiek, w gli xbgrk dtymqyek my vlnvaó k mb kcboytl, k qayxdl uby hli
ubaolqy my rkfík dbymql hy daym mlfty nk mannk hy tlgaikiqy, dlt kngkiekt k
nk vyiqkik yityokhk, hlihy my axkcaikfk ymqkt nk pytahk hligynnk; w, kn
hktny nk xkil, haol:

-qlxkh, myñltk, ymk xkil, l, dlt xyolt hygat, ymy vythbcl hy nlm
xknrygrltym hyn xbihl; qlxkh ymk xkil, hacl, k ubayi il rk qlgkhl lqtk hy
xboyt kncbik, ia kbi nk hy kubynnk uby qayiy yiqytk dlmymaói hy qlhl xa
gbytdl. il lm nk hlw dktk uby nk fyméam, mail dktk uby xatéam nk gliqymqbtk
hy mbm iytvalm, nk qtkfkeói hy mbm xúmgbnlm, nk kigrbtk w ymdkgalmahkh hy
mbm vyikm; hy hlihy mkgktéam ubé qkn hyfy hy myt nk pbytek hyn ftkel uby
qkn xkil qayiy.

-krltk nl vytyxlm -haol xktaqltiym.

w, rkgayihl bik nkekhk glttyhaek kn gkfymqtl, my nk ygró k nk xbñygk, w,
fkoáihlmy hyn kcboytl, kqó nl uby ubyhkfk kn gyttlol hy nk dbytqk hyn dkokt
xbw pbytqyxyiqy. hli ubaolqy, uby maiqaó nk kmdytyek hyn glthyn yi mb
xbñygk, haol:

-xám dktygy uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy tknnk uby il uby xy tycknk nk xkil; il nk
qtkqéam qki xkn, dbym ynnk il qayiy nk gbndk hyn xkn uby xa vlnbiqkh lm
rkgy, ia ym fayi uby yi qki dlgk dktqy vyicbéam yn qlhl hy vbymqtl yilol.
xatkh uby ubayi ubayty fayi il my vyick qki xkn.

dytl qlhkm ymqkm tkeliym hy hli ubaolqy wk il nkm ymgbgrkfk ikhay, dltuby,
kmí glxl xktaqltiym ny kqó, ynnk w nk lqtk my pbytli, xbytqkm hy tamk, w ny
hyoktli kmahl hy xkiytk uby pby axdlmafny mlnqktmy.

ymqkfk, dbym, glxl my rk hagrl, hy daym mlfty tlgaikiqy, xyqahl qlhl yn
ftkel dlt yn kcboytl w kqkhl hy nk xbñygk, w kn gyttlol hy nk dbytqk, gli
ctkihímaxl qyxlt w gbahkhl, uby ma tlgaikiqy my hymvakfk k bi gkfl l k
lqtl, rkfík hy ubyhkt glnckhl hyn ftkel; w kmí, il lmkfk rkgyt xlvaxayiql
kncbil, dbymql uby hy nk dkgayigak w ubayqbh hy tlgaikiqy fayi my dlhík
ymdytkt uby ymqktík mai xlvytmy bi macnl yiqytl.

yi tymlnbgaói, vaéihlmy hli ubaolqy kqkhl, w uby wk nkm hkxkm my rkfíki
ahl, my hal k axkcaikt uby qlhl kubynnl my rkgík dlt vík hy yigkiqkxyiql,
glxl nk vye dkmkhk, gbkihl yi kubyn xymxl gkmqannl ny xlnaó kubyn xltl
yigkiqkhl hyn kttaytl; w xknhygík yiqty mí mb dlgk hamgtygaói w hamgbtml,
dbym, rkfayihl mknahl qki xkn nk vye dtaxytk hy kubyn gkmqannl, my rkfík
kvyiqbtkhl k yiqtkt yi én nk mycbihk, mayihl khvytqaxayiql hy gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym uby, gbkihl rki dtlfkhl bik kvyiqbtk w il mknahl fayi gli ynnk, ym
myñkn uby il ymqá dktk ynnlm cbkthkhk, mail dktk lqtlm; w kmí, il qayiyi
iygymahkh hy dtlfktnk mycbihk vye. gli qlhl ymql, qatkfk hy mb ftkel, dlt
vyt ma dlhík mlnqktmy; xkm én ymqkfk qki fayi kmahl, uby qlhkm mbm dtbyfkm
pbytli yi vkil. fayi ym vythkh uby qatkfk gli qayiql, dltuby tlgaikiqy il
my xlvaymy; w, kbiuby én ubamaytk myiqktmy w dliytmy yi nk mannk, il dlhík
mail ymqkt yi day, l kttkigktmy nk xkil.

knní pby yn hymykt hy nk ymdkhk hy kxkhím, gliqtk ubayi il qyiík pbytek hy
yigkiqkxyiql kncbil; knní pby yn xknhygat hy mb pltqbik; knní pby yn
yzkcytkt nk pknqk uby rktík yi yn xbihl mb dtymyigak yn qayxdl uby knní
ymqbvaymy yigkiqkhl, uby mai hbhk kncbik my rkfík gtyíhl uby nl ymqkfk;
knní yn kglthktmy hy ibyvl hy mb ubytahk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml; knní pby yn
nnkxkt k mb fbyi ymgbhytl mkigrl dkiek, uby, mydbnqkhl yi mbyñl w qyihahl
mlfty yn knfkthk hy mb obxyiql, il my kglthkfk yi kubyn aimqkiqy hy nk
xkhty uby nl rkfík dktahl; knní nnkxó k nlm mkfalm natckihyl w knubapy, uby
ny kwbhkmyi; knní aivlgó k mb fbyik kxack btckihk, uby ny mlglttaymy, w,
paiknxyiqy, knní ny qlxó nk xkñkik, qki hymymdytkhl w glipbml uby ftkxkfk
glxl bi qltl; dltuby il ymdytkfk én uby gli yn hík my tyxyhaktk mb gbaqk,
dltuby nk qyiík dlt yqytik, qyiaéihlmy dlt yigkiqkhl. w rkgíkny gtyyt ymql
vyt uby tlgaikiqy dlgl ia xbgrl my xlvík, w gtyík uby hy kubynnk mbytqy,
mai glxyt ia fyfyt ia hltxat, rkfíki hy ymqkt én w mb gkfknnl, rkmqk uby
kubyn xkn aipnbol hy nkm ymqtynnkm my dkmkmy, l rkmqk uby lqtl xám mkfal
yigkiqkhlt ny hymyigkiqkmy.

dytl yickñómy xbgrl yi mb gtyyigak, dltuby, kdyikm glxyieó k kxkiygyt,
gbkihl nnycktli k nk vyiqk gbkqtl rlxftym hy k gkfknnl, xbw fayi dbymqlm w
khytyekhlm, gli mbm ymgldyqkm mlfty nlm kteliym. nnkxktli k nk dbytqk hy nk
vyiqk, uby kúi ymqkfk gyttkhk, gli ctkihym clndym; nl gbkn, vamql dlt hli
ubaolqy hymhy hlihy kúi il hyokfk hy rkgyt nk gyiqaiynk, gli vle kttlckiqy
w knqk haol:

-gkfknnytlm, l ymgbhytlm, l ubayiubaytk uby myáam: il qyiéam dktk ubé
nnkxkt k nkm dbytqkm hymqy gkmqannl; uby kmke hy gnktl ymqá uby k qknym
rltkm, l nlm uby ymqái hyiqtl hbytxyi, l il qayiyi dlt glmqbxfty hy kftatmy
nkm pltqknyekm rkmqk uby yn mln ymqé qyihahl dlt qlhl yn mbynl. hymvaklm
kpbytk, w ymdytkh uby kgnkty yn hík, w yiqligym vytyxlm ma mytá obmql l il
uby lm kftki.

-¿ubé hakfnlm hy pltqknyek l gkmqannl ym émqy -haol bil-, dktk lfnacktilm k
cbkthkt ymkm gytyxliakm? ma mlam yn vyiqytl, xkihkh uby ilm kftki, uby
mlxlm gkxaikiqym uby il ubytyxlm xám hy hkt gyfkhk k ibymqtkm gkfknckhbtkm
w dkmkt khynkiqy, dltuby vkxlm hy dtaymk.

-¿dktégylm, gkfknnytlm, uby qyicl wl qknny hy vyiqytl? -tymdlihaó hli
ubaolqy.

-il mé hy ubé qyiéam qknny -tymdlihaó yn lqtl-, dytl mé uby hygím
hamdktkqym yi nnkxkt gkmqannl k ymqk vyiqk.

-gkmqannl ym -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, w kbi hy nlm xyoltym hy qlhk ymqk
dtlvaigak; w cyiqy qayiy hyiqtl uby rk qyiahl gyqtl yi nk xkil w gltlik yi
nk gkfyek.

-xyolt pbytk kn tyvém -haol yn gkxaikiqy-: yn gyqtl yi nk gkfyek w nk
gltlik yi nk xkil. w mytá, ma k xkil vayiy, uby hyfy hy ymqkt hyiqtl kncbik
glxdkñík hy tydtymyiqkiqym, hy nlm gbknym ym qyiyt k xyibhl ymkm gltlikm w
gyqtlm uby hygím, dltuby yi bik vyiqk qki dyubyñk, w khlihy my cbkthk qkiql
manyigal glxl émqk, il gtyl wl uby my knloki dytmlikm hacikm hy gltlik w
gyqtl.

-mkféam dlgl hyn xbihl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dbym aciltáam nlm gkmlm uby
mbynyi kgliqygyt yi nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy.

gkimáfkimy nlm glxdkñytlm uby gli yn dtycbiqkiqy vyiíki hyn glnlubal uby
gli hli ubaolqy dkmkfk, w kmí, qltiktli k nnkxkt gli ctkihy pbtak; w pby hy
xlhl uby yn vyiqytl hymdytqó, w kbi qlhlm gbkiqlm yi nk vyiqk ymqkfki; w
kmí, my nyvkiqó k dtycbiqkt ubaéi nnkxkfk. mbgyhaó yi ymqy qayxdl uby bik
hy nkm gkfknckhbtkm yi uby vyiíki nlm gbkqtl uby nnkxkfki my nnycó k lnyt k
tlgaikiqy, uby, xynkigónagl w qtamqy, gli nkm ltyokm gkíhkm, mlmqyiík mai
xlvytmy k mb ymqatkhl myñlt; w glxl, yi pai, ytk hy gktiy, kbiuby dktygík
hy nyñl, il dbhl hyokt hy tymyiqatmy w qltikt k lnyt k ubayi ny nnyckfk k
rkgyt gktagakm; w kmí, il my rbfl xlvahl qkiql gbkiql, gbkihl my hymvaktli
nlm obiqlm daym hy hli ubaolqy, w, tymfknkihl hy nk mannk, haytki gli én yi
yn mbynl, k il ubyhkt glnckhl hyn ftkel: glmk uby ny gkbmó qkiql hlnlt uby
gtywó l uby nk xbñygk ny gltqkfki, l uby yn ftkel my ny kttkigkfk; dltuby
én ubyhó qki gytgk hyn mbynl uby gli nlm ymqtyxlm hy nkm dbiqkm hy nlm daym
fymkfk nk qayttk, uby ytk yi mb dytobagal, dltuby, glxl myiqík nl dlgl uby
ny pknqkfk dktk dliyt nkm dnkiqkm yi nk qayttk, pkqacáfkmy w ymqatáfkmy
gbkiql dlhík dlt kngkiekt kn mbynl: fayi kmí glxl nlm uby ymqái yi yn
qltxyiql hy nk ckttbgrk, dbymqlm k qlgk, il qlgk, uby ynnlm xymxlm mli
gkbmk hy kgtygyiqkt mb hlnlt, gli yn kríigl uby dliyi yi ymqatktmy,
yickñkhlm hy nk ymdytkiek uby my nym tydtymyiqk, uby gli dlgl xám uby my
ymqatyi nnycktái kn mbynl.





gkdíqbnl znav. hlihy my dtlmacbyi nlm aikbhaqlm mbgymlm hy nk vyiqk


yi ypyql, pbytli qkiqkm nkm vlgym uby hli ubaolqy hal, uby, kftayihl hy
dtymql nkm dbytqkm hy nk vyiqk, mknaó yn vyiqytl, hymdkvltahl, k vyt ubaéi
qknym ctaqlm hkfk, w nlm uby ymqkfki pbytk ragaytli nl xymxl. xktaqltiym,
uby wk rkfík hymdytqkhl k nkm xamxkm vlgym, axkcaikihl nl uby dlhík myt, my
pby kn dkokt w hymkqó, mai uby ikhay nl vaymy, yn gkfymqtl uby k hli
ubaolqy mlmqyiík, w én hal nbycl yi yn mbynl, k vamqk hyn vyiqytl w hy nlm
gkxaikiqym, uby, nnycáihlmy k én, ny dtycbiqktli ubé qyiík, uby qknym vlgym
hkfk. Én, mai tymdlihyt dknkftk, my ubaqó yn glthyn hy nk xbñygk, w,
nyvkiqáihlmy yi day, mbfaó mlfty tlgaikiqy, yxftkeó mb khktck, yitamqtó mb
nkieói, w, qlxkihl fbyik dktqy hyn gkxdl, vlnvaó k xyhal cknldy, hagayihl:

-gbknubaytk uby haoyty uby wl ry mahl gli obmql qíqbnl yigkiqkhl, glxl xa
myñltk nk dtaigymk xaglxaglik xy hé nagyigak dktk ynnl, wl ny hymxayiql, ny
tayql w hymkpíl k maicbnkt fkqknnk.

khxatkhlm my ubyhktli nlm ibyvlm gkxaikiqym hy nkm dknkftkm hy hli ubaolqy,
dytl yn vyiqytl nym ubaqó hy kubynnk khxatkgaói, hagaéihlnym uby ytk hli
ubaolqy, w uby il rkfík uby rkgyt gkml hén, dltuby ymqkfk pbytk hy obagal.

dtycbiqátliny kn vyiqytl ma kgkml rkfík nnyckhl k kubynnk vyiqk bi xbgrkgrl
hy rkmqk yhkh hy ubaigy kñlm, uby vyiík vymqahl glxl xlel hy xbnkm, hy
qknym w qknym myñkm, hkihl nkm xymxkm uby qtkík yn kxkiqy hy hlñk gnktk. yn
vyiqytl tymdlihaó uby rkfík qkiqk cyiqy yi nk vyiqk, uby il rkfík ygrkhl hy
vyt yi yn uby dtycbiqkfki. dytl, rkfayihl vamql bil hynnlm yn glgry hlihy
rkfík vyiahl yn lahlt, haol:

-kubí hyfy hy ymqkt mai hbhk, dltuby émqy ym yn glgry uby én hagyi uby
macby; ubéhymy bil hy ilmlqtlm k nk dbytqk w yiqtyi nlm hyxám k fbmgktny; w
kbi mytík fayi uby bil hy ilmlqtlm tlhykmy qlhk nk vyiqk, dltuby il my
pbymy dlt nkm fkthkm hy nlm glttknym.

-kmí my rktá -tymdlihaó bil hynnlm.

w, yiqtáihlmy nlm hlm hyiqtl, bil my ubyhó k nk dbytqk w yn lqtl my pby k
tlhykt nk vyiqk; qlhl nl gbkn vyík yn vyiqytl, w il mkfík kqaikt dktk ubé
my rkgíki kubynnkm hanacyigakm, dbymql uby fayi gtywó uby fbmgkfki kubyn
xlel gbwkm myñkm ny rkfíki hkhl.

wk k ymqk mkeói kgnktkfk yn hík; w, kmí dlt ymql glxl dlt yn tbahl uby hli
ubaolqy rkfík rygrl, ymqkfki qlhlm hymdaytqlm w my nyvkiqkfki,
ymdygaknxyiqy hlñk gnktk w hltlqyk, uby nk bik gli mlftymknql hy qyiyt qki
gytgk k mb kxkiqy, w nk lqtk gli yn hymyl hy vytny, rkfíki dlhahl hltxat
fayi xkn kubynnk ilgry. hli ubaolqy, uby val uby iaicbil hy nlm gbkqtl
gkxaikiqym rkgík gkml hén, ia ny tymdlihíki k mb hyxkihk, xltík w tkfakfk
hy hymdygrl w mkñk; w ma én rknnktk yi nkm lthyikiekm hy mb gkfknnytík uby
nígaqkxyiqy dlhík yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy qlxkt w yxdtyihyt lqtk yxdtymk,
rkfayihl hkhl mb dknkftk w py hy il dliytmy yi iaicbik rkmqk kgkfkt nk uby
rkfík dtlxyqahl, én yxfamqaytk gli qlhlm, w nym ragaytk tymdlihyt xkn hy mb
ctkhl. dytl, dlt dktygytny il glivyiatny ia ymqktny fayi glxyiekt ibyvk
yxdtymk rkmqk dliyt k xaglxaglik yi mb tyail, rbfl hy gknnkt w ymqktmy
ubyhl, ymdytkihl k vyt yi ubé dktkfki nkm hanacyigakm hy kubynnlm
gkxaikiqym; bil hy nlm gbknym rknnó kn xkigyfl uby fbmgkfk, hbtxayihl kn
nkhl hy bi xlel hy xbnkm, fayi hymgbahkhl hy uby ikhay ia ny fbmgkmy, ia
xyilm hy uby ny rknnkmy. yn rlxfty ny qtkfó hyn ftkel w ny haol:

-dlt gaytql, myñlt hli nbam, uby tymdlihy fayi k ubayi vlm mlam yn ráfaql
uby qyiéam, w uby hagy fayi nk gkxk yi uby lm rknnl kn tycknl gli uby
vbymqtk xkhty lm gtaó.

naxdaómy yn xlel nlm mlñlnayiqlm lolm w xató hy ymdkgal kn uby ny qyiík
kmahl, w nbycl glilgaó uby ytk gtakhl hy mb dkhty, hy uby tygafaó qkn
mlftymknql, uby il kgytqó l il dbhl rkfnktny dknkftk dlt bi fbyi ymdkgal. w
yn gtakhl dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-kubí il rkw uby rkgyt lqtk glmk, myñlt hli nbam, mail dtymqkt dkgayigak w
hkt nk vbynqk k gkmk, ma wk vbymqtk xytgyh il cbmqk uby mb dkhty w xa myñlt
nk hé kn lqtl xbihl, dltuby il my dbyhy ymdytkt lqtk glmk hy nk dyik gli
uby ubyhk dlt vbymqtk kbmyigak.

-dbym, ¿góxl mbdl xa dkhty -haol hli nbam- uby wl vyiík ymqy gkxail w yi
ymqy qtkoy?

-bi ymqbhakiqy -tymdlihaó yn gtakhl- k ubayi hamqym gbyiqk hy vbymqtlm
dyimkxayiqlm pby yn uby nl hymgbftaó, xlvahl k námqaxk hy nkm uby val uby
rkgík vbymqtl dkhty kn dbiql uby lm ygró hy xyilm; w kmí, hymdkgró k gbkqtl
hy mbm gtakhlm yi vbymqtk fbmgk, w qlhlm ymqkxlm kubí k vbymqtl mytvagal,
xám gliqyiqlm hy nl uby axkcaikt my dbyhy, dlt yn fbyi hymdkgrl gli uby
qltiktyxlm, nnyváihllm k nlm lolm uby qkiql lm ubaytyi.

-yml mytá glxl wl ubamayty, l glxl yn gaynl nl lthyikty -tymdlihaó hli
nbam.

-¿ubé rkféam hy ubytyt, l ubé rk hy lthyikt yn gaynl, pbytk hy glimyiqat yi
vlnvytlm?; dltuby il rk hy myt dlmafny lqtk glmk.

qlhkm ymqkm tkeliym uby yiqty nlm hlm dkmkfki lwó yn xlel hy xbnkm obiql k
ubayi hli nbam ymqkfk; w, nyvkiqáihlmy hy knní, pby k hygat nl uby dkmkfk k
hli pytikihl w k gkthyial, w k nlm hyxám, uby wk vymqahl my rkfíki; k nlm
gbknym haol góxl kubyn rlxfty nnkxkfk hy hli k kubyn xbgrkgrl, w nkm
tkeliym uby dkmkfki, w góxl ny ubytík vlnvyt k gkmk hy mb dkhty, w yn xlel
il ubytík. w gli ymql, w gli nl uby hén mkfíki hy nk fbyik vle uby yn gaynl
ny rkfík hkhl, vaiaytli qlhlm yi ctki hymyl hy mkfyt xám dktqagbnktxyiqy
ubaéi ytk, w kbi hy kwbhktny ma kncbik pbytek ny ubamaymyi rkgyt; w kmí, my
pbytli rkgak nk dktqy hlihy kúi ymqkfk rkfnkihl w dltpakihl gli mb gtakhl.

mkník yi ymql hltlqyk hy mb kdlmyiql, w qtkm ynnk hlñk gnktk, qlhk qbtfkhk;
w, nnkxkihl hltlqyk k gkthyial kdktqy, ny gliqó yi ftyvym tkeliym nk
ramqltak hyn xúmagl w hy hlñk gnktk, k ubayi én qkxfaéi haol nl uby dkmkfk
hy nk vyiahk k fbmgktny nlm gtakhlm hy mb dkhty, w il my nl haol qki
gknnkihl uby nl hyokmy hy lít gnktk; hy nl uby ubyhó qki pbytk hy mí uby,
ma hltlqyk il nnycktk k qyiytnk, haytk glimacl yi yn mbynl. gkthyial haol k
hltlqyk uby my vlnvaymyi kn kdlmyiql, uby én dtlgbtktík dliyt tyxyhal yi
qlhl, w ynnkm nl ragaytli.

wk ymqkfki qlhlm nlm gbkqtl uby vyiíki k fbmgkt k hli nbam hyiqtl hy nk
vyiqk w tlhykhlm hén, dytmbkhaéihlny uby nbycl, mai hyqyiytmy bi dbiql,
vlnvaymy k glimlnkt k mb dkhty. Én tymdlihaó uby yi iaicbik xkiytk nl dlhík
rkgyt rkmqk hkt pai k bi iyclgal yi uby ny afk nk vahk, nk rlitk w yn knxk.
kdtyqátliny yiqligym nlm gtakhlm, hagaéihlny uby yi iaicúi xlhl vlnvytíki
mai én, w uby ny nnyvktíki, ubamaymy l il ubamaymy.

-yml il rktéam vlmlqtlm -tydnagó hli nbam-, ma il ym nnyváihlxy xbytql;
kbiuby, hy gbknubaytk xkiytk uby xy nnyvéam, mytá nnyvktxy mai vahk.

wk k ymqk mkeói rkfíki kgbhahl k nk dltpík qlhlm nlm xám uby yi nk vyiqk
ymqkfki, ymdygaknxyiqy gkthyial, hli pytikihl, mbm gkxktkhkm, yn lahlt, yn
gbtk, yn fktfytl w hli ubaolqy, uby wk ny dktygaó uby il rkfík iygymahkh hy
cbkthkt xám yn gkmqannl. gkthyial, glxl wk mkfík nk ramqltak hyn xlel,
dtycbiqó k nlm uby nnyvktny ubytíki uby ubé nym xlvík k ubytyt nnyvkt
gliqtk mb vlnbiqkh kubyn xbgrkgrl.

-xbévyilm -tymdlihaó bil hy nlm gbkqtl- hkt nk vahk k mb dkhty, uby dlt nk
kbmyigak hymqy gkfknnytl ubyhk k dynactl hy dythytnk.

k ymql haol hli nbam:

-il rkw dktk ubé my hé gbyiqk kubí hy xam glmkm: wl mlw nafty, w vlnvyté ma
xy hayty cbmql, w ma il, iaicbil hy vlmlqtlm xy rk hy rkgyt pbytek.

-rktámynk k vbymqtk xytgyh nk tkeói -tymdlihaó yn rlxfty-; w, gbkihl ynnk

il fkmqkty gli vbymqtk xytgyh, fkmqktá gli ilmlqtlm dktk rkgyt k nl uby
vyiaxlm w nl uby mlxlm lfnackhlm.

-mydkxlm ubé ym ymql hy tkíe -haol k ymqy qayxdl yn lahlt.

dytl yn rlxfty, uby nl glilgaó, glxl vygail hy mb gkmk, tymdlihaó:

-¿il glilgy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt lahlt, k ymqy gkfknnytl, uby ym yn raol
hy mb vygail, yn gbkn my rk kbmyiqkhl hy gkmk hy mb dkhty yi yn ráfaql qki
aihygyiqy k mb gknahkh glxl vbymqtk xytgyh dbyhy vyt?

xatóny yiqligym yn lahlt xám kqyiqkxyiqy w glilgaóny; w, kftkeáihlny, haol:

-¿ubé iañytíkm mli émqkm, myñlt hli nbam, l ubé gkbmkm qki dlhytlmkm, uby
lm rkwki xlvahl k vyiat hymqk xkiytk, w yi ymqy qtkoy, uby hagy qki xkn gli
nk gknahkh vbymqtk?

kn xlel my ny vaiaytli nkm náctaxkm k nlm lolm, w il dbhl tymdlihyt
dknkftk. yn lahlt haol k nlm gbkqtl uby my mlmyckmyi, uby qlhl my rktík
fayi; w, qlxkihl dlt nk xkil k hli nbam, ny kdktqó k bik dktqy w ny
dtycbiqó ubé vyiahk rkfík mahl kubénnk.

w, yi qkiql uby ny rkgík ymqk w lqtkm dtycbiqkm, lwytli ctkihym vlgym k nk
dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, w ytk nk gkbmk hynnkm uby hlm rbémdyhym uby kubynnk
ilgry rkfíki knlokhl yi ynnk, vayihl k qlhk nk cyiqy lgbdkhk yi mkfyt nl
uby nlm gbkqtl fbmgkfki, rkfíki aiqyiqkhl k atmy mai dkckt nl uby hyfíki;
xkm yn vyiqytl, uby kqyihík xám k mb iyclgal uby k nlm koyilm, nym kmaó kn
mknat hy nk dbytqk w dahaó mb dkck, w nym kpyó mb xknk aiqyigaói gli qknym
dknkftkm, uby nym xlvaó k uby ny tymdlihaymyi gli nlm dbñlm; w kmí, ny
glxyiektli k hkt qkn xkil, uby yn dlfty vyiqytl qbvl iygymahkh hy hkt vlgym
w dyhat mlglttl. nk vyiqytk w mb raok il vaytli k lqtl xám hymlgbdkhl dktk
dlhyt mlglttytny uby k hli ubaolqy, k ubayi nk raok hy nk vyiqytk haol:

-mlglttk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, dlt nk vatqbh uby halm ny hal, k
xa dlfty dkhty, uby hlm xknlm rlxftym ny ymqái xlnayihl glxl k gafytk.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy, xbw hy ymdkgal w gli xbgrk pnyxk:

-pytxlmk hligynnk, il rk nbckt dlt krltk vbymqtk dyqagaói, dltuby ymqlw
axdyhahl hy yiqtyxyqytxy yi lqtk kvyiqbtk yi qkiql uby il hayty gaxk k bik
yi uby xa dknkftk xy rk dbymql. xkm nl uby wl dlhté rkgyt dlt mytvatlm ym
nl uby krltk haté: glttyh w hygah k vbymqtl dkhty uby my yiqtyqyick yi ymk
fkqknnk nl xyolt uby dbhayty, w uby il my hyoy vyigyt yi iaicúi xlhl, yi
qkiql uby wl dahl nagyigak k nk dtaigymk xaglxaglik dktk dlhyt mlglttytny
yi mb gbaqk; uby ma ynnk xy nk hk, qyiyh dlt gaytql uby wl ny mkgkté hynnk.

-¡dygkhltk hy xí! -haol k ymql xktaqltiym, uby ymqkfk hynkiqy-: dtaxytl uby
vbymqtk xytgyh kngkigy ymk nagyigak uby hagy, ymqktá wk xa myñlt yi yn lqtl
xbihl.

-hkhxy vlm, myñltk, uby wl kngkigy nk nagyigak uby hacl -tymdlihaó hli
ubaolqy-; uby, glxl wl nk qyick, dlgl rktá kn gkml uby én ymqé yi yn lqtl
xbihl; uby hy knní ny mkgkté k dymkt hyn xamxl xbihl uby nl gliqtkhack; l,
dlt nl xyilm, lm hkté qkn vyickiek hy nlm uby knná ny rbfaytyi yivakhl, uby
ubyhéam xám uby xyhakikxyiqy mkqampygrkm.

w mai hygat xám my pby k dliyt hy railolm kiqy hltlqyk, dahaéihlny gli
dknkftkm gkfknnytymgkm w kihkiqymgkm uby nk mb ctkihyek pbymy mytvahk hy
hktny nagyigak hy kglttyt w mlglttyt kn gkmqynnkil hy kubyn gkmqannl, uby
ymqkfk dbymql yi bik ctkvy xyicbk. nk dtaigymk my nk hal hy fbyi qknkiqy, w
én nbycl, yxftkekihl mb khktck w dliayihl xkil k mb ymdkhk, kgbhaó k nk
dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, khlihy kúi qlhkvík qtkíki nlm hlm rbémdyhym k xkn qtkyt
kn vyiqytl; dytl, kmí glxl nnycó, yxfkeó w my ymqbvl ubyhl, kbiuby
xktaqltiym w nk vyiqytk ny hygíki uby yi ubé my hyqyiík, uby mlglttaymy k
mb myñlt w xktahl.

-hyqéiclxy -haol hli ubaolqy- dltuby il xy ym nígaql dliyt xkil k nk ymdkhk
gliqtk cyiqy ymgbhytan; dytl nnkxkhxy kubí k xa ymgbhytl mkigrl, uby k én
qlgk w kqkñy ymqk hypyimk w vyickiek.

ymql dkmkfk yi nk dbytqk hy nk vyiqk, w yi ynnk kihkfki nkm dbñkhkm w
xloagliym xbw yi mb dbiql, qlhl yi hkñl hyn vyiqytl w yi tkfak hy
xktaqltiym, nk vyiqytk w mb raok, uby my hymymdytkfki hy vyt nk glfkthík hy
hli ubaolqy, w hy nl xkn uby nl dkmkfk mb xktahl, myñlt w dkhty.

dytl hyoéxlmny kubí, uby il pknqktá ubayi ny mlglttk, l ma il, mbptk w
gknny yn uby my kqtyvy k xám hy k nl uby mbm pbytekm ny dtlxyqyi, w
vlnváxlilm kqtám gaigbyiqk dkmlm, k vyt ubé pby nl uby hli nbam tymdlihaó
kn lahlt, uby ny hyokxlm kdktqy, dtycbiqáihlny nk gkbmk hy mb vyiahk k day
w hy qki van qtkoy vymqahl. k nl gbkn yn xlel, kmaéihlny pbytqyxyiqy hy nkm
xkilm, glxl yi myñkn hy uby kncúi ctki hlnlt ny kdtyqkfk yn gltkeói, w
hyttkxkihl náctaxkm yi ctkihy kfbihkigak, ny haol:

-myñlt xíl, wl il mé hygatlm lqtk glmk mail uby hymhy yn dbiql uby ubaml yn
gaynl w pkganaqó ibymqtk vygaihkh uby wl vaymy k xa myñltk hlñk gnktk, raok
vbymqtk w myñltk xík, hymhy kubyn aimqkiqy nk ragy hbyñl hy xa vlnbiqkh; w
ma nk vbymqtk, vythkhytl myñlt w dkhty xíl, il nl axdahy, yi ymqy xymxl hík
rk hy myt xa ymdlmk. dlt ynnk hyoé nk gkmk hy xa dkhty, w dlt ynnk xy dbmy
yi ymqy qtkoy, dktk mycbatnk hlihyubaytk uby pbymy, glxl nk mkyqk kn
fnkigl, l glxl yn xktaiytl kn iltqy. ynnk il mkfy hy xam hymylm xám hy nl
uby rk dlhahl yiqyihyt hy kncbikm vygym uby hymhy nyolm rk vamql nnltkt xam
lolm. wk, myñlt, mkféam nk taubyek w nk ilfnyek hy xam dkhtym, w glxl wl
mlw mb úiagl rytyhytl: ma lm dktygy uby émqkm mli dktqym dktk uby lm
kvyiqbtéam k rkgytxy yi qlhl vyiqbtlml, tygyfahxy nbycl dlt vbymqtl raol;
uby ma xa dkhty, nnyvkhl hy lqtlm hamacialm mbwlm, il cbmqkty hymqy fayi
uby wl mbdy fbmgktxy, xám pbytek qayiy yn qayxdl dktk hymrkgyt w xbhkt nkm
glmkm uby nkm rbxkikm vlnbiqkhym.

gknnó, yi hagayihl ymql, yn yikxltkhl xkigyfl, w yn lahlt ubyhó yi lítny
mbmdyiml, glipbml w khxatkhl, kmí hy rkfyt líhl yn xlhl w nk hamgtygaói gli
uby hli nbam ny rkfík hymgbfaytql mb dyimkxayiql, glxl hy vytmy yi dbiql
uby il mkfík yn uby dlhyt qlxkt yi qki tydyiqail w il ymdytkhl iyclgal; w
kmí, il tymdlihaó lqtk glmk mail uby my mlmyckmy dlt yiqligym, w
yiqtyqbvaymy k mbm gtakhlm, uby dlt kubyn hík il ny vlnvaymyi, dltuby my
qbvaymy qayxdl dktk glimahytkt nl uby xyolt k qlhlm ymqbvaymy. fymóny nkm
xkilm dlt pbytek hli nbam, w kbi my nkm fkñó gli náctaxkm, glmk uby dbhaytk
yiqytiygyt bi gltkeói hy xátxln, il mónl yn hyn lahlt, uby, glxl hamgtyql,
wk rkfík glilgahl gbái fayi ny ymqkfk k mb raok kubyn xkqtaxlial; dbymql
uby, ma pbytk dlmafny, nl ubamaytk ypyqbkt gli vlnbiqkh hyn dkhty hy hli
nbam, hyn gbkn mkfík uby dtyqyihík rkgyt hy qíqbnl k mb raol.

wk k ymqk mkeói ymqkfki yi dke nlm rbémdyhym gli yn vyiqytl, dbym, dlt
dytmbkmaói w fbyikm tkeliym hy hli ubaolqy, xám uby dlt kxyikekm, ny rkfíki
dkckhl qlhl nl uby én ubaml, w nlm gtakhlm hy hli nbam kcbkthkfki yn pai hy
nk dnáqagk hyn lahlt w nk tymlnbgaói hy mb kxl, gbkihl yn hyxlial, uby il
hbytxy, lthyió uby yi kubyn xymxl dbiql yiqtó yi nk vyiqk yn fktfytl k
ubayi hli ubaolqy ubaqó yn wynxl hy xkxftail w mkigrl dkiek nlm kdktyolm
hyn kmil, uby qtlgó gli nlm hyn mbwl; yn gbkn fktfytl, nnyvkihl mb obxyiql
k nk gkfknnytaek, val k mkigrl dkiek uby ymqkfk khytyekihl il mé ubé hy nk
knfkthk, w kmí glxl nk val nk glilgaó, w my kqtyvaó k kttyxyqyt k mkigrl,
hagayihl:

-¡kr hli nkhtói, uby kubí lm qyicl! ¡vyick xa fkgík w xa knfkthk, gli qlhlm
xam kdktyolm uby xy tlfkmqym!

mkigrl, uby my val kglxyqyt qki hy axdtlvaml w lwó nlm vaqbdytalm uby ny
hygíki, gli nk bik xkil kmaó hy nk knfkthk, w gli nk lqtk hal bi xloagói kn
fktfytl uby ny fkñó nlm hayiqym yi mkicty; dytl il dlt ymql hyoó yn fktfytl
nk dtymk uby qyiík rygrk yi yn knfkthk; kiqym, kneó nk vle hy qkn xkiytk
uby qlhlm nlm hy nk vyiqk kgbhaytli kn tbahl w dyihyigak, w hygík:

-¡kubí hyn tyw w hy nk obmqagak, uby, mlfty glftkt xa rkgayihk, xy ubayty
xkqkt ymqy nkhtói mknqykhlt hy gkxailm!

-xyiqím -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby wl il mlw mknqykhlt hy gkxailm; uby yi
fbyik cbyttk ckió xa myñlt hli ubaolqy ymqlm hymdlolm.

wk ymqkfk hli ubaolqy hynkiqy, gli xbgrl gliqyiql hy vyt gbái fayi my
hypyihík w lpyihík mb ymgbhytl, w qúvlny hymhy knní khynkiqy dlt rlxfty hy
dtl, w dtldbml yi mb gltkeói hy ktxknny gkfknnytl yi nk dtaxytk lgkmaói uby
my ny lptygaymy, dlt dktygytny uby mytík yi én fayi yxdnykhk nk lthyi hy nk
gkfknnytík. yiqty lqtkm glmkm uby yn fktfytl hygík yi yn hamgbtml hy nk
dyihyigak, vail k hygat:

-myñltym, kmí ymqk knfkthk ym xík glxl nk xbytqy uby hyfl k halm, w kmí nk
glilegl glxl ma nk rbfaytk dktahl; w krí ymqá xa kmil yi yn ymqkfnl, uby il
xy hyoktá xyiqat; ma il, dtbéfyimynk, w ma il ny vaiayty daiqadktkhk, wl
ubyhkté dlt aipkxy. w rkw xám: uby yn xamxl hík uby ynnk my xy ubaqó, xy
ubaqktli qkxfaéi bik fkgík hy keópkt ibyvk, uby il my rkfík ymqtyikhl, uby
ytk myñltk hy bi ymgbhl.

kubí il my dbhl gliqyiyt hli ubaolqy mai tymdlihyt: w, dliaéihlmy yiqty nlm
hlm w kdktqáihlnym, hydlmaqkihl nk knfkthk yi yn mbynl, uby nk qbvaymy hy
xkiapaymql rkmqk uby nk vythkh my kgnktkmy, haol:

-¡dltuby vyki vbymqtkm xytgyhym gnktk w xkiapaymqkxyiqy yn yttlt yi uby
ymqá ymqy fbyi ymgbhytl, dbym nnkxk fkgík k nl uby pby, ym w mytá wynxl hy
xkxftail, yn gbkn my nl ubaqé wl yi fbyik cbyttk, w xy ragy myñlt hén gli
nacíqaxk w nígaqk dlmymaói! yi nl hyn knfkthk il xy yiqtyxyql, uby nl uby
yi ynnl mkfté hygat ym uby xa ymgbhytl mkigrl xy dahaó nagyigak dktk ubaqkt
nlm okygym hyn gkfknnl hymqy vyigahl glfkthy, w gli ynnlm khltikt yn mbwl;
wl my nk ha, w én nlm qlxó, w, hy rkfytmy glivytqahl hy okye yi knfkthk, il
mkfté hkt lqtk tkeói ma il ym nk lthaiktak: uby glxl ymkm qtkimpltxkgaliym
my vyi yi nlm mbgymlm hy nk gkfknnytík; dktk glipatxkgaói hy nl gbkn,
gltty, mkigrl raol, w mkgk kubí yn wynxl uby ymqy fbyi rlxfty hagy myt
fkgík.

-¡dkthaye, myñlt -haol mkigrl-, ma il qyiyxlm lqtk dtbyfk hy ibymqtk
aiqyigaói uby nk uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, qki fkgík ym yn wynxl hy xknail
glxl yn okye hymqy fbyi rlxfty knfkthk!

-rke nl uby qy xkihl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby il qlhkm nkm glmkm hymqy
gkmqannl rki hy myt cbakhkm dlt yigkiqkxyiql.

mkigrl pby k hl ymqkfk nk fkgík w nk qtbol; w, kmí glxl hli ubaolqy nk val,
nk qlxó yi nkm xkilm w haol:

-xatyi vbymqtkm xytgyhym gli ubé gktk dlhík hygat ymqy ymgbhytl uby émqk ym
fkgík, w il yn wynxl uby wl ry hagrl; w obtl dlt nk lthyi hy gkfknnytík uby
dtlpyml uby ymqy wynxl pby yn xamxl uby wl ny ubaqé, mai rkfyt kñkhahl yi
én ia ubaqkhl glmk kncbik.

-yi yml il rkw hbhk -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl-, dltuby hymhy uby xa myñlt
ny ckió rkmqk kcltk il rk rygrl gli én xám hy bik fkqknnk, gbkihl naftó k
nlm mai vyiqbtk yigkhyikhlm; w ma il pbytk dlt ymqy fkgawynxl, il nl dkmktk
yiqligym xbw fayi, dltuby rbfl kmke hy dyhtkhkm yi kubyn qtkigy.





gkdíqbnl znv. hlihy my kgkfk hy kvytacbkt nk hbhk hyn wynxl hy xkxftail w
hy nk knfkthk, w lqtkm kvyiqbtkm mbgyhahkm, gli qlhk vythkh


-¿ubé nym dktygy k vbymqtkm xytgyhym, myñltym -haol yn fktfytl-, hy nl uby
kpatxki ymqlm cyiqanym rlxftym, dbym kúi dltpíki uby émqk il ym fkgík,
mail wynxl?

-w ubayi nl gliqtktal haoyty -haol hli ubaolqy-, ny rkté wl glilgyt uby
xayiqy, ma pbyty gkfknnytl, w ma ymgbhytl, uby tyxayiqy xan vygym.

ibymqtl fktfytl, uby k qlhl ymqkfk dtymyiqy, glxl qyiík qki fayi glilgahl
yn rbxlt hy hli ubaolqy, ubaml ympltekt mb hymkqail w nnyvkt khynkiqy nk
fbtnk dktk uby qlhlm taymyi, w haol, rkfnkihl gli yn lqtl fktfytl:

-myñlt fktfytl, l ubayi mlam, mkfyh uby wl qkxfaéi mlw hy vbymqtl lpagal, w
qyicl xám rk hy vyaiqy kñlm gktqk hy yzkxyi, w glilegl xbw fayi hy qlhlm
nlm aimqtbxyiqlm hy nk fktfytík, mai uby ny pknqy bil; w ia xám ia xyilm
pba bi qayxdl yi xa xlgyhkh mlnhkhl, w mé qkxfaéi ubé ym wynxl, w ubé ym
xlttaói, w gynkhk hy yigkoy, w lqtkm glmkm qlgkiqym k nk xanagak, hacl, k
nlm céiytlm hy ktxkm hy nlm mlnhkhlm; w hacl, mknvl xyolt dktygyt,
tyxaqaéihlxy mayxdty kn xyolt yiqyihaxayiql, uby ymqk dayek uby ymqá kubí
hynkiqy w uby ymqy fbyi myñlt qayiy yi nkm xkilm, il mónl il ym fkgík hy
fktfytl, dytl ymqá qki nyolm hy mytnl glxl ymqá nyolm nl fnkigl hy nl iyctl
w nk vythkh hy nk xyiqatk; qkxfaéi hacl uby émqy, kbiuby ym wynxl, il ym
wynxl yiqytl.

-il, dlt gaytql -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby ny pknqk nk xaqkh, uby ym nk
fkfytk.

-kmí ym -haol yn gbtk, uby wk rkfík yiqyihahl nk aiqyigaói hy mb kxacl yn
fktfytl.

w nl xamxl glipatxó gkthyial, hli pytikihl w mbm gkxktkhkm; w kbi yn lahlt,
ma il ymqbvaytk qki dyimkqavl gli yn iyclgal hy hli nbam, kwbhktk, dlt mb
dktqy, k nk fbtnk; dytl nkm vytkm hy nl uby dyimkfk ny qyiíki qki mbmdyiml,
uby dlgl l ikhk kqyihík k kubynnlm hlikatym.

-¡vánkxy halm! -haol k ymqk mkeói yn fktfytl fbtnkhl-; ¿uby ym dlmafny uby
qkiqk cyiqy rlitkhk hack uby émqk il ym fkgík, mail wynxl? glmk dktygy émqk
uby dbyhy dliyt yi khxatkgaói k qlhk bik biavytmahkh, dlt hamgtyqk uby myk.
fkmqk: ma ym uby ymqk fkgík ym wynxl, qkxfaéi hyfy hy myt ymqk knfkthk okye
hy gkfknnl, glxl ymqy myñlt rk hagrl.

-k xí knfkthk xy dktygy -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl wk ry hagrl uby yi yml il
xy yiqtyxyql.

-hy uby myk knfkthk l okye -haol yn gbtk- il ymqá yi xám hy hygatnl yn
myñlt hli ubaolqy; uby yi ymqkm glmkm hy nk gkfknnytík qlhlm ymqlm myñltym
w wl ny hkxlm nk vyiqkok.

-dlt halm, myñltym xílm -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby mli qkiqkm w qki ymqtkñkm
nkm glmkm uby yi ymqy gkmqannl, yi hlm vygym uby yi én ry knlokhl, xy rki
mbgyhahl, uby il xy kqtyvk k hygat kpatxkqavkxyiqy iaicbik glmk hy nl uby
kgytgk hy nl uby yi én my gliqayiy my dtycbiqkty, dltuby axkcail uby gbkiql
yi én my qtkqk vk dlt vík hy yigkiqkxyiql. nk dtaxytk vye xy pkqacó xbgrl
bi xltl yigkiqkhl uby yi én rkw, w k mkigrl il ny pby xbw fayi gli lqtlm
mbm mygbkgym; w kilgry ymqbvy glnckhl hymqy ftkel gkma hlm rltkm, mai mkfyt
góxl ia góxl il vaiy k gkyt yi kubynnk hymctkgak. kmí uby, dliytxy wl kcltk
yi glmk hy qkiqk glipbmaói k hkt xa dktygyt, mytá gkyt yi obagal qyxytktal.
yi nl uby qlgk k nl uby hagyi uby émqk ym fkgík, w il wynxl, wk wl qyicl
tymdlihahl; dytl, yi nl hy hygnktkt ma émk ym knfkthk l okye, il xy kqtyvl
k hkt myiqyigak hapaiaqavk: mónl nl hyol kn fbyi dktygyt hy vbymqtkm
xytgyhym. ubaeá dlt il myt ktxkhlm gkfknnytlm, glxl wl nl mlw, il qyihtái
uby vyt gli vbymqtkm xytgyhym nlm yigkiqkxyiqlm hymqy nbckt, w qyihtái nlm
yiqyihaxayiqlm naftym, w dlhtái obeckt hy nkm glmkm hymqy gkmqannl glxl
ynnkm mli tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy, w il glxl k xí xy dktygíki.

-il rkw hbhk -tymdlihaó k ymql hli pytikihl-, mail uby yn myñlt hli ubaolqy
rk hagrl xbw fayi rlw uby k ilmlqtlm qlgk nk hapaiagaói hymqy gkml; w,
dltuby vkwk gli xám pbihkxyiql, wl qlxkté yi mygtyql nlm vlqlm hymqlm
myñltym, w hy nl uby tymbnqkty hkté yiqytk w gnktk ilqagak.

dktk kubynnlm uby nk qyiíki hyn rbxlt hy hli ubaolqy, ytk qlhl ymql xkqytak
hy ctkihímaxk tamk; dytl, dktk nlm uby ny aciltkfki, nym dktygík yn xkwlt
hamdktkqy hyn xbihl, ymdygaknxyiqy k nlm gbkqtl gtakhlm hy hli nbam, w k
hli nbam ia xám ia xyilm, w k lqtlm qtym dkmkoytlm uby kgkml rkfíki nnyckhl
k nk vyiqk, uby qyiíki dktygyt hy myt gbkhtannytlm, glxl, yi ypyql, nl
ytki. dytl yn uby xám my hymymdytkfk ytk yn fktfytl, gbwk fkgík, knní
hynkiqy hy mbm lolm, my ny rkfík vbynql yi wynxl hy xkxftail, w gbwk
knfkthk dyimkfk mai hbhk kncbik uby my ny rkfík hy vlnvyt yi okye tagl hy
gkfknnl; w nlm bilm w nlm lqtlm my tyíki hy vyt góxl kihkfk hli pytikihl
qlxkihl nlm vlqlm hy bilm yi lqtlm, rkfnáihlnlm kn líhl dktk uby yi mygtyql
hygnktkmyi ma ytk knfkthk l okye kubynnk olwk mlfty ubayi qkiql my rkfík
dynykhl. w, hymdbém uby rbfl qlxkhl nlm vlqlm hy kubynnlm uby k hli ubaolqy
glilgíki, haol yi knqk vle:

-yn gkml ym, fbyi rlxfty, uby wk wl ymqlw gkimkhl hy qlxkt qkiqlm
dktygytym, dltuby vyl uby k iaicbil dtycbiql nl uby hymyl mkfyt uby il xy
hack uby ym hamdktkqy yn hygat uby émqk myk knfkthk hy obxyiql, mail okye
hy gkfknnl, w kbi hy gkfknnl gkmqael; w kmí, rkftéam hy qyiyt dkgayigak,
dltuby, k vbymqtl dymkt w kn hy vbymqtl kmil, émqy ym okye w il knfkthk, w
vlm rkféam knyckhl w dtlfkhl xbw xkn hy vbymqtk dktqy.

-il nk qyick wl yi yn gaynl -haol yn mlftyfktfytl- ma qlhlm vbymqtkm
xytgyhym il my yickñki, w uby kmí dktyegk xa áiaxk kiqy halm glxl ynnk xy
dktygy k xí knfkthk, w il okye; dytl knná vki nywym..., yqgéqytk; w il hacl
xám; w yi vythkh uby il ymqlw flttkgrl: uby il xy ry hymkwbikhl, ma hy
dygkt il.

il xyilm gkbmkfki tamk nkm iygyhkhym uby hygík yn fktfytl uby nlm
hamdktkqym hy hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn k ymqk mkeói haol:

-kubí il rkw xám uby rkgyt, mail uby gkhk bil qlxy nl uby ym mbwl, w k
ubayi halm my nk hal, mki dyhtl my nk fyihack.

bil hy nlm gbkqtl haol:

-ma wk il ym uby ymql myk fbtnk dymkhk, il xy dbyhl dytmbkhat uby rlxftym
hy qki fbyi yiqyihaxayiql glxl mli, l dktygyi, qlhlm nlm uby kubí ymqái, my
kqtyvki k hygat w kpatxkt uby émqk il ym fkgík, ia kubénnk knfkthk; xkm,
glxl vyl uby nl kpatxki w nl hagyi, xy hlw k yiqyihyt uby il gktygy hy
xamqytal yn dltpakt bik glmk qki gliqtktak hy nl uby ilm xbymqtk nk xamxk
vythkh w nk xamxk yzdytayigak; dltuby, ¡vlql k qkn! -w kttloóny tyhlihl-,
uby il xy hyi k xí k yiqyihyt gbkiqlm rlw vavyi yi yn xbihl kn tyvém hy uby
émqk il myk fkgík hy fktfytl w émqk knfkthk hy kmil.

-fayi dlhtík myt hy flttagk -haol yn gbtk.

-qkiql xliqk -haol yn gtakhl-, uby yn gkml il glimamqy yi yml, mail yi ma
ym l il ym knfkthk, glxl vbymqtkm xytgyhym hagyi.

lwyihl ymql bil hy nlm gbkhtannytlm uby rkfíki yiqtkhl, uby rkfík líhl nk
dyihyigak w ubamqaói, nnyil hy gónytk w hy yipkhl, haol:

-qki knfkthk ym glxl xa dkhty; w yn uby lqtk glmk rk hagrl l haoyty hyfy hy
ymqkt rygrl bvk.

-xyiqím glxl fynnkgl vannkil -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

w, knekihl yn nkieói, uby ibigk ny hyokfk hy nkm xkilm, ny afk k hymgktckt
qkn clndy mlfty nk gkfyek, uby, k il hymvaktmy yn gbkhtannytl, my ny hyoktk
knní qyihahl. yn nkieói my rael dyhkelm yi yn mbynl, w nlm hyxám
gbkhtannytlm, uby vaytli qtkqkt xkn k mb glxdkñytl, knektli nk vle dahayihl
pkvlt k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh.

yn vyiqytl, uby ytk hy nk gbkhtannk, yiqtó kn dbiql dlt mb vktannk w dlt mb
ymdkhk, w my dbml kn nkhl hy mbm glxdkñytlm; nlm gtakhlm hy hli nbam
tlhyktli k hli nbam, dltuby gli yn knfltlql il my nym pbymy; yn fktfytl,
vayihl nk gkmk tyvbynqk, qltió k kmat hy mb knfkthk, w nl xamxl rael
mkigrl; hli ubaolqy dbml xkil k mb ymdkhk w kttyxyqaó k nlm gbkhtannytlm.
hli nbam hkfk vlgym k mbm gtakhlm uby ny hyokmyi k én w kglttaymyi k hli
ubaolqy, w k gkthyial, w k hli pytikihl, uby qlhlm pkvltygíki k hli
ubaolqy. yn gbtk hkfk vlgym, nk vyiqytk ctaqkfk, mb raok my kpnacík,
xktaqltiym nnltkfk, hltlqyk ymqkfk glipbmk, nbmgaihk mbmdyimk w hlñk gnktk
hymxkwkhk. yn fktfytl kdlttykfk k mkigrl, mkigrl xlník kn fktfytl; hli
nbam, k ubayi bi gtakhl mbwl my kqtyvaó k kmatny hyn ftkel dltuby il my
pbymy, ny hal bik dbñkhk uby ny fkñó nlm hayiqym yi mkicty; yn lahlt ny
hypyihík, hli pytikihl qyiík hyfkol hy mbm daym k bi gbkhtannytl,
xahaéihlny yn gbytdl gli ynnlm xbw k mb mkflt. yn vyiqytl qltió k typltekt
nk vle, dahayihl pkvlt k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh: hy xlhl uby qlhk nk vyiqk ytk
nnkiqlm, vlgym, ctaqlm, glipbmaliym, qyxltym, mlftymknqlm, hymctkgakm,
gbgrannkhkm, xloagliym, dknlm, glgym w ypbmaói hy mkicty. w, yi nk xaqkh
hymqy gklm, xáubaik w nkfytaiql hy glmkm, my ny tydtymyiqó yi nk xyxltak hy
hli ubaolqy uby my vyík xyqahl hy rle w hy gle yi nk hamglthak hyn gkxdl hy
kctkxkiqy; w kmí haol, gli vle uby kqtlikfk nk vyiqk:

-¡qéickimy qlhlm; qlhlm yivkaiyi; qlhlm my mlmaycbyi; óackixy qlhlm, ma
qlhlm ubaytyi ubyhkt gli vahk!

k gbwk ctki vle, qlhlm my dktktli, w én dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-¿il lm haoy wl, myñltym, uby ymqy gkmqannl ytk yigkiqkhl, w uby kncbik
tycaói hy hyxlialm hyfy hy rkfaqkt yi én? yi glipatxkgaói hy nl gbkn,
ubaytl uby vyáam dlt vbymqtlm lolm góxl my rk dkmkhl kubí w qtkmnkhkhl
yiqty ilmlqtlm nk hamglthak hyn gkxdl hy kctkxkiqy. xatkh góxl knní my
dynyk dlt nk ymdkhk, kubí dlt yn gkfknnl, kgbnná dlt yn ácbank, kgá dlt yn
wynxl, w qlhlm dynykxlm, w qlhlm il ilm yiqyihyxlm. vyick, dbym, vbymqtk
xytgyh, myñlt lahlt, w vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gbtk, w yn bil matvk hy tyw
kctkxkiqy, w yn lqtl hy tyw mlftail, w dóickilm yi dke; dltuby dlt halm
qlhldlhytlml uby ym ctki fynnkubytík uby qkiqk cyiqy dtaigadkn glxl kubí
ymqkxlm my xkqy dlt gkbmkm qki navakikm.

nlm gbkhtannytlm, uby il yiqyihíki yn ptkmam hy hli ubaolqy, w my vyíki
xkndktkhlm hy hli pytikihl, gkthyial w mbm gkxktkhkm, il ubytíki mlmycktmy;
yn fktfytl mí, dltuby yi nk dyihyigak qyiík hymrygrkm nkm fktfkm w yn
knfkthk; mkigrl, k nk xám xíiaxk vle hy mb kxl, lfyhygaó glxl fbyi gtakhl;
nlm gbkqtl gtakhlm hy hli nbam qkxfaéi my ymqbvaytli ubyhlm, vayihl gbái
dlgl nym afk yi il ymqktnl. mónl yn vyiqytl dltpakfk uby my rkfíki hy
gkmqackt nkm aimlnyigakm hy kubyn nlgl, uby k gkhk dkml ny knfltlqkfk nk
vyiqk. paiknxyiqy, yn tbxlt my kdkgacbó dlt yiqligym, nk knfkthk my ubyhó
dlt okye rkmqk yn hík hyn obagal, w nk fkgík dlt wynxl w nk vyiqk dlt
gkmqannl yi nk axkcaikgaói hy hli ubaolqy.

dbymqlm, dbym, wk yi mlmaycl, w rygrlm kxaclm qlhlm k dytmbkmaói hyn lahlt
w hyn gbtk, vlnvaytli nlm gtakhlm hy hli nbam k dltpaktny uby kn xlxyiql my
vaiaymy gli ynnlm; w, yi qkiql uby én gli ynnlm my kvyiík, yn lahlt
glxbiagó gli hli pytikihl, gkthyial w yn gbtk ubé hyfík rkgyt yi kubyn
gkml, gliqáihlmynym gli nkm tkeliym uby hli nbam ny rkfík hagrl. yi pai,
pby kglthkhl uby hli pytikihl haoymy k nlm gtakhlm hy hli nbam ubaéi én ytk
w góxl ytk mb cbmql uby hli nbam my pbymy gli én kn kihknbgík, hlihy hy mb
rytxkil yn xktubém mytík ymqaxkhl glxl yn vknlt hy hli nbam xytygík; dltuby
hymqk xkiytk my mkfík hy nk aiqyigaói hy hli nbam uby il vlnvytík dlt
kubynnk vye k nlm lolm hy mb dkhty, ma ny ragaymyi dyhkelm. yiqyihahk,
dbym, hy nlm gbkqtl nk gknahkh hy hli pytikihl w nk aiqyigaói hy hli nbam,
hyqytxaiktli yiqty ynnlm uby nlm qtym my vlnvaymyi k gliqkt nl uby dkmkfk k
mb dkhty, w yn lqtl my ubyhkmy k mytvat k hli nbam, w k il hyoknny rkmqk
uby ynnlm vlnvaymyi dlt én, l vaymy nl uby mb dkhty nym lthyikfk.

hymqk xkiytk my kdkgacbó kubynnk xáubaik hy dyihyigakm, dlt nk kbqltahkh hy
kctkxkiqy w dtbhyigak hyn tyw mlftail; dytl, vaéihlmy yn yiyxacl hy nk
gliglthak w yn éxbnl hy nk dke xyilmdtygakhl w fbtnkhl, w yn dlgl ptbql uby
rkfík ctkioykhl hy rkfytnlm dbymql k qlhlm yi qki glipbml nkfytaiql, kglthó
hy dtlfkt lqtk vye nk xkil, tymbgaqkihl ibyvkm dyihyigakm w hymkmlmayclm.

ym, dbym, yn gkml uby nlm gbkhtannytlm my mlmycktli, dlt rkfyt yiqtylíhl nk
gknahkh hy nlm uby gli ynnlm my rkfíki glxfkqahl, w my tyqatktli hy nk
dyihyigak, dlt dktygytnym uby, hy gbknubaytk xkiytk uby mbgyhaymy, rkfíki
hy nnyvkt nl dylt hy nk fkqknnk; dytl bil hynnlm, uby pby yn uby pby xlnahl
w dkqykhl dlt hli pytikihl, ny vail k nk xyxltak uby, yiqty kncbilm
xkihkxayiqlm uby qtkík dktk dtyihyt k kncbilm hynaigbyiqym, qtkík bil
gliqtk hli ubaolqy, k ubayi nk mkiqk rytxkihkh rkfík xkihkhl dtyihyt, dlt
nk nafytqkh uby hal k nlm cknylqym, w glxl mkigrl, gli xbgrk tkeói, rkfík
qyxahl.

axkcaikihl, dbym, ymql, ubaml gytqapagktmy ma nkm myñkm uby hy hli ubaolqy
qtkík vyiíki fayi, w, mkgkihl hyn myil bi dytckxail, qldó gli yn uby
fbmgkfk; w, dliaéihlmyny k nyyt hy ymdkgal, dltuby il ytk fbyi nygqlt, k
gkhk dknkftk uby nyík dliík nlm lolm yi hli ubaolqy, w afk glqyokihl nkm
myñkm hyn xkihkxayiql gli yn tlmqtl hy hli ubaolqy, w rknnó uby, mai hbhk
kncbik, ytk yn uby yn xkihkxayiql tyekfk. w, kdyikm my rbfl gytqapagkhl,
gbkihl, tyglcayihl mb dytckxail, yi nk aeubaythk qlxó yn xkihkxayiql, w gli
nk hytygrk kmaó k hli ubaolqy hyn gbynnl pbytqyxyiqy, uby il ny hyokfk
knyiqkt, w k ctkihym vlgym hygík:

-¡pkvlt k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh! w, dktk uby my vyk uby nl dahl hy vytkm,
nékmy ymqy xkihkxayiql, hlihy my gliqayiy uby my dtyihk k ymqy mknqykhlt hy
gkxailm.

qlxó yn xkihkxayiql yn gbtk, w val glxl ytk vythkh gbkiql yn gbkhtannytl
hygík, w góxl glivyiík gli nkm myñkm gli hli ubaolqy; yn gbkn, vaéihlmy
qtkqkt xkn hy kubyn vannkil xknkihtíi, dbymqk nk gónytk yi mb dbiql w
gtboaéihlny nlm rbymlm hy mb gbytdl, glxl xyolt dbhl én, kmaó kn
gbkhtannytl gli yiqtkxfkm xkilm hy nk cktckiqk, uby, k il myt mlglttahl hy
mbm glxdkñytlm, knní hyoktk nk vahk kiqym uby hli ubaolqy nk dtymk. yn
vyiqytl, uby dlt pbytek rkfík hy pkvltygyt k nlm hy mb lpagal, kgbhaó nbycl
k hknny pkvlt. nk vyiqytk, uby val hy ibyvl k mb xktahl yi dyihyigakm, hy
ibyvl kneó nk vle, gbwl qyilt ny nnyvktli nbycl xktaqltiym w mb raok,
dahayihl pkvlt kn gaynl w k nlm uby knní ymqkfki. mkigrl haol, vayihl nl
uby dkmkfk:

-¡vavy yn myñlt, uby ym vythkh gbkiql xa kxl hagy hy nlm yigkiqlm hymqy
gkmqannl, dbym il ym dlmafny vavat bik rltk gli ubayqbh yi én!

hli pytikihl hymdktqaó kn gbkhtannytl w k hli ubaolqy, w, gli cbmql hy
yiqtkxflm, nym hymyignkvaoó nkm xkilm, uby yn bil yi yn glnnkt hyn mkwl hyn
bil, w yn lqtl yi nk cktckiqk hyn lqtl, fayi kmahkm qyiíki; dytl il dlt
ymql gymkfki nlm gbkhtannytlm hy dyhat mb dtyml, w uby nym kwbhkmyi k
hátmyny kqkhl w yiqtyckhl k qlhk mb vlnbiqkh, dltuby kmí glivyiík kn
mytvagal hyn tyw w hy nk mkiqk rytxkihkh, hy gbwk dktqy hy ibyvl nym dyhíki
mlglttl w pkvlt dktk rkgyt kubynnk dtamaói hy kubyn tlfkhlt w mknqykhlt hy
myihkm w hy gkttytkm. tyíkmy hy lít hygat ymqkm tkeliym hli ubaolqy; w, gli
xbgrl mlmaycl, haol:

-vyiah kgá, cyiqy mlye w xknikgahk: ¿mknqykt hy gkxailm nnkxáam kn hkt
nafytqkh k nlm yigkhyikhlm, mlnqkt nlm dtymlm, kglttyt k nlm xamytkfnym,
knekt nlm gkíhlm, tyxyhakt nlm xyiymqytlmlm? ¡kr cyiqy aipkxy, hacik dlt
vbymqtl fkol w van yiqyihaxayiql uby yn gaynl il lm glxbiauby yn vknlt uby
my yigayttk yi nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy, ia lm hé k yiqyihyt yn dygkhl y
aciltkigak yi uby ymqáam yi il tyvytyigakt nk mlxftk, gbkiql xám nk
kmamqyigak, hy gbknubayt gkfknnytl kihkiqy! vyiah kgá, nkhtliym yi
gbkhtannk, uby il gbkhtannytlm, mknqykhltym hy gkxailm gli nagyigak hy nk
mkiqk rytxkihkh; hygahxy: ¿ubaéi pby yn aciltkiqy uby patxó xkihkxayiql hy
dtamaói gliqtk bi qkn gkfknnytl glxl wl mlw? ¿ubaéi yn uby aciltó uby mli
ymyiqlm hy qlhl obhagakn pbytl nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, w uby mb nyw ym mb
ymdkhk; mbm pbytlm, mbm ftílm; mbm dtyxáqagkm, mb vlnbiqkh? ¿ubaéi pby yn
xyiqygkql, vbynvl k hygat, uby il mkfy uby il rkw mygbqltak hy rahkncl gli
qkiqkm dtyyxaiyigakm, ia ymyigaliym, glxl nk uby khubayty bi gkfknnytl
kihkiqy yn hík uby my ktxk gkfknnytl w my yiqtyck kn hbtl yoytgagal hy nk
gkfknnytík? ¿ubé gkfknnytl kihkiqy dkcó dygrl, kngkfknk, grkdíi hy nk
tyaik, xliyhk pltytk, dltqkecl ia fktgk? ¿ubé mkmqty ny nnyvó rygrbtk hy
vymqahl uby ny ragaymy? ¿ubé gkmqynnkil ny kglcaó yi mb gkmqannl uby ny
ragaymy dkckt yn ymglqy? ¿ubé tyw il ny kmyiqó k mb xymk? ¿ubé hligynnk il
my ny kpagalió w my ny yiqtycó tyihahk, k qlhl mb qknkiqy w vlnbiqkh? w,
paiknxyiqy, ¿ubé gkfknnytl kihkiqy rk rkfahl, rkw ia rkftá yi yn xbihl, uby
il qyick ftílm dktk hkt én mlnl gbkqtlgayiqlm dknlm k gbkqtlgayiqlm
gbkhtannytlm uby my ny dlicki hynkiqy?





gkdíqbnl znva. hy nk ilqkfny kvyiqbtk hy nlm gbkhtannytlm, w nk ctki
pytlgahkh hy ibymqtl fbyi gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy


yi qkiql uby hli ubaolqy ymql hygík, ymqkfk dytmbkhayihl yn gbtk k nlm
gbkhtannytlm glxl hli ubaolqy ytk pknql hy obagal, glxl nl vyíki dlt mbm
lftkm w dlt mbm dknkftkm, w uby il qyiíki dktk ubé nnyvkt kubyn iyclgal
khynkiqy, dbym, kbiuby ny dtyihaymyi w nnyvkmyi, nbycl ny rkfíki hy hyokt
dlt nlgl; k nl uby tymdlihaó yn hyn xkihkxayiql uby k én il qlgkfk obeckt
hy nk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy, mail rkgyt nl uby dlt mb xkwlt ny ytk xkihkhl,
w uby bik vye dtyml, maubaytk ny mlnqkmyi qtygayiqkm.

-gli qlhl yml -haol yn gbtk-, dlt ymqk vye il ny rkféam hy nnyvkt, ia kbi
én hyoktá nnyvktmy, k nl uby wl yiqayihl.

yi ypyql, qkiql nym mbdl yn gbtk hygat, w qkiqkm nlgbtkm mbdl hli ubaolqy
rkgyt, uby xám nlglm pbytki uby il én nlm gbkhtannytlm ma il glilgaytki nk
pknqk hy hli ubaolqy; w kmí, qbvaytli dlt fayi hy kdkgacbktmy, w kbi hy myt
xyhakiytlm hy rkgyt nkm dkgym yiqty yn fktfytl w mkigrl dkiek, uby qlhkvík
kmamqíki gli ctki tkiglt k mb dyihyigak. paiknxyiqy, ynnlm, glxl xayxftlm
hy obmqagak, xyhaktli nk gkbmk w pbytli átfaqtlm hynnk, hy qkn xlhl uby
kxfkm dktqym ubyhktli, ma il hyn qlhl gliqyiqkm, k nl xyilm yi kncl
mkqampygrkm, dltuby my qtlgktli nkm knfkthkm, w il nkm gaigrkm w oáubaxkm;
w yi nl uby qlgkfk k nl hyn wynxl hy xkxftail, yn gbtk, k mlgkdk w mai uby
hli ubaolqy nl yiqyihaymy, ny hal dlt nk fkgík lgrl tyknym, w yn fktfytl ny
rael bik géhbnk hyn tygafl w hy il nnkxktmy k yickñl dlt yiqligym, ia dlt
mayxdty okxám kxéi.

mlmyckhkm, dbym, ymqkm hlm dyihyigakm, uby ytki nkm xám dtaigadknym w hy
xám qlxl, tymqkfk uby nlm gtakhlm hy hli nbam my gliqyiqkmyi hy vlnvyt nlm
qtym, w uby yn bil ubyhkmy dktk kglxdkñktny hlihy hli pytikihl ny ubytík
nnyvkt; w, glxl wk nk fbyik mbytqy w xyolt pltqbik rkfík glxyiekhl k tlxdyt
nkiekm w k pkganaqkt hapagbnqkhym yi pkvlt hy nlm kxkiqym hy nk vyiqk w hy
nlm vknayiqym hynnk, ubaml nnyvktnl kn gkfl w hkt k qlhl pynagy mbgyml,
dltuby nlm gtakhlm my gliqyiqktli hy gbkiql hli nbam ubytík; hy uby tygafaó
qkiql gliqyiql hlñk gnktk, uby iaicbil yi kubynnk mkeói nk xatktk kn tlmqtl
uby il glilgaytk yn tyclgaol hy mb knxk.

eltkahk, kbiuby il yiqyihík fayi qlhlm nlm mbgymlm uby rkfík vamql, my
yiqtamqygík w knyctkfk k fbnql, glipltxy vyík w ilqkfk nlm myxfnkiqym k
gkhk bil, ymdygaknxyiqy hy mb ymdkñln, yi ubayi qyiík mayxdty dbymqlm nlm
lolm w qtkík glnckhk yn knxk. yn vyiqytl, k ubayi il my ny dkmó dlt knql
nk háhavk w tyglxdyimk uby yn gbtk rkfík rygrl kn fktfytl, dahaó yn ymglqy
hy hli ubaolqy, gli yn xyilmgkfl hy mbm gbytlm w pknqk hy vail, obtkihl uby
il mknhtík hy nk vyiqk tlgaikiqy, ia yn obxyiql hy mkigrl, mai uby my ny
dkckmy dtaxytl rkmqk yn únqaxl kthaqy. qlhl nl kdkgacbó yn gbtk, w nl dkcó
hli pytikihl, dbymql uby yn lahlt, hy xbw fbyik vlnbiqkh, rkfík qkxfaéi
lptygahl nk dkck; w hy qkn xkiytk ubyhktli qlhlm yi dke w mlmaycl, uby wk
il dktygík nk vyiqk nk hamglthak hyn gkxdl hy kctkxkiqy, glxl hli ubaolqy
rkfík hagrl, mail nk xamxk dke w ubayqbh hyn qayxdl hy lqkvakil; hy qlhl nl
gbkn pby glxúi ldaiaói uby my hyfíki hkt nkm ctkgakm k nk fbyik aiqyigaói w
xbgrk ynlgbyigak hyn myñlt gbtk w k nk aiglxdktkfny nafytknahkh hy hli
pytikihl.

vaéihlmy, dbym, hli ubaolqy nafty w hymyxfktkekhl hy qkiqkm dyihyigakm, kmí
hy mb ymgbhytl glxl mbwkm, ny dktygaó uby mytík fayi mycbat mb glxyiekhl
vakoy w hkt pai k kubynnk ctkihy kvyiqbtk dktk uby rkfík mahl nnkxkhl w
ymglcahl; w kmí, gli tymlnbqk hyqytxaikgaói my pby k dliyt hy railolm kiqy
hltlqyk, nk gbkn il ny glimaiqaó uby rkfnkmy dknkftk rkmqk uby my
nyvkiqkmy; w én, dlt lfyhygynnk, my dbml yi day w ny haol:

-ym glxúi dtlvytfal, pytxlmk myñltk, uby nk hanacyigak ym xkhty hy nk fbyik
vyiqbtk, w yi xbgrkm w ctkvym glmkm rk xlmqtkhl nk yzdytayigak uby nk
mlnagaqbh hyn iyclgakiqy qtky k fbyi pai yn dnyaql hbhlml; dytl yi iaicbikm
glmkm my xbymqtk xám ymqk vythkh uby yi nkm hy nk cbyttk, khlihy nk
gynytahkh w dtymqyek dtyvayiy nlm hamgbtmlm hyn yiyxacl, w kngkiek nk
vaqltak kiqym uby yn gliqtktal my dlick yi hypyimk. qlhl ymql hacl, knqk w
dtygalmk myñltk, dltuby xy dktygy uby nk ymqkhk ibymqtk yi ymqy gkmqannl wk
ym mai dtlvygrl, w dlhtík mytilm hy qkiql hkñl uby nl ygrámyxlm hy vyt
kncúi hík; dltuby, ¿ubaéi mkfy ma dlt lgbnqkm ymdíkm w hanacyiqym rkftá
mkfahl wk vbymqtl yiyxacl yn cackiqy hy uby wl vlw k hymqtbanny?; w,
háihlny nbckt yn qayxdl, my pltqapagkmy yi kncúi aiyzdbcikfny gkmqannl l
pltqknyek gliqtk ubayi vknaymyi dlgl xam hanacyigakm w nk pbytek hy xa
aigkimkfny ftkel. kmí uby, myñltk xík, dtyvyickxlm, glxl qyicl hagrl, gli
ibymqtk hanacyigak mbm hymacialm, w dktqáxlilm nbycl k nk fbyik vyiqbtk;
uby il ymqá xám hy qyiytnk vbymqtk ctkihyek glxl hymyk, hy gbkiql wl qkthy
hy vytxy gli vbymqtl gliqtktal.

gknnó w il haol xám hli ubaolqy, w ymdytó gli xbgrl mlmaycl nk tymdbymqk hy
nk pytxlmk aipkiqk; nk gbkn, gli khyxái myñltan w kglxlhkhl kn ymqanl hy
hli ubaolqy, ny tymdlihaó hymqk xkiytk:

-wl lm kctkhyegl, myñlt gkfknnytl, yn hymyl uby xlmqtáam qyiyt hy
pkvltygytxy yi xa ctki gbaqk, fayi kmí glxl gkfknnytl, k ubayi ym kiyol w
gligytiayiqy pkvltygyt nlm rbétpkilm w xyiymqytlmlm; w ubaytk yn gaynl uby
yn vbymqtl w xa hymyl my gbxdnki, dktk uby vyáam uby rkw kctkhygahkm
xboytym yi yn xbihl. w yi nl hy xa dktqahk, myk nbycl; uby wl il qyicl xám
vlnbiqkh uby nk vbymqtk: hamdliyh vlm hy xí k qlhk vbymqtk cbamk w qknkiqy;
uby nk uby bik vye lm yiqtycó nk hypyimk hy mb dytmlik w dbml yi vbymqtkm
xkilm nk tymqkbtkgaói hy mbm myñltílm il rk hy ubytyt at gliqtk nl uby nk
vbymqtk dtbhyigak lthyikty.

-k nk xkil hy halm -haol hli ubaolqy-; dbym kmí ym uby bik myñltk my xy
rbxannk, il ubaytl wl dythyt nk lgkmaói hy nyvkiqknnk w dliynnk yi mb
rytyhkhl qtlil. nk dktqahk myk nbycl, dltuby xy vk dliayihl ymdbynkm kn
hymyl w kn gkxail nl uby mbyny hygatmy uby yi nk qkthkiek ymqá yn dynactl.
w, dbym il rk gtakhl yn gaynl, ia vamql yn aipaytil, iaicbil uby xy ymdkiqy
ia kglfkthy, yimannk, mkigrl, k tlgaikiqy, w kdktyok qb obxyiql w yn
dknkptéi hy nk tyaik, w hymdaháxlilm hyn gkmqynnkil w hymqlm myñltym, w
vkxlm hy kubí nbycl kn dbiql.

mkigrl, uby k qlhl ymqkfk dtymyiqy, haol, xyiykihl nk gkfyek k bik dktqy w
k lqtk:

-¡kw myñlt, myñlt, w góxl rkw xám xkn yi yn knhycüynk uby my mbyik, gli
dythói myk hagrl hy nkm qlgkhkm rlitkhkm!

-¿ubé xkn dbyhy rkfyt yi iaicbik knhyk, ia yi qlhkm nkm gabhkhym hyn xbihl,
uby dbyhk mliktmy yi xyilmgkfl xíl, vannkil?

-ma vbymqtk xytgyh my yilok -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, wl gknnkté, w hyokté hy
hygat nl uby mlw lfnackhl glxl fbyi ymgbhytl, w glxl hyfy bi fbyi gtakhl
hygat k mb myñlt.

-ha nl uby ubamaytym -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, glxl qbm dknkftkm il my
yigkxaiyi k dliytxy xayhl; uby ma qú ny qayiym, rkgym glxl ubayi ytym, w ma
wl il ny qyicl, rkcl glxl ubayi mlw.

-il ym yml, ¡dygkhlt pba wl k halm! -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mail uby wl qyicl
dlt gaytql w dlt kvytacbkhl uby ymqk myñltk uby my hagy myt tyaik hyn ctki
tyail xaglxagói il nl ym xám uby xa xkhty; dltuby, k myt nl uby ynnk hagy,
il my kihbvaytk rlgagkihl gli kncbil hy nlm uby ymqái yi nk tbyhk, k vbynqk
hy gkfyek w k gkhk qtkmdbymqk.

dktómy glnltkhk gli nkm tkeliym hy mkigrl hltlqyk, dltuby ytk vythkh uby mb
ymdlml hli pytikihl, kncbik vye, k rbtql hy lqtlm lolm, rkfík glcahl gli
nlm nkfalm dktqy hyn dtyxal uby xytygíki mbm hymylm (nl gbkn rkfík vamql
mkigrl, w dktygaéihlny uby kubynnk hymyivlnqbtk xám ytk hy hkxk gltqymkik
uby hy tyaik hy qki ctki tyail), w il dbhl ia ubaml tymdlihyt dknkftk k
mkigrl, mail hyoóny dtlmycbat yi mb dnáqagk, w én pby hagayihl:

-ymql hacl, myñlt, dltuby, ma kn gkfl hy rkfyt kihkhl gkxailm w gkttytkm, w
dkmkhl xknkm ilgrym w dyltym híkm, rk hy vyiat k glcyt yn ptbql hy ibymqtlm
qtkfkolm yn uby my ymqá rlnckihl yi ymqk vyiqk, il rkw dktk ubé hktxy
dtaymk k uby yimanny k tlgaikiqy, knfkthy yn obxyiql w khytygy kn dknkptéi,
dbym mytá xyolt uby ilm ymqyxlm ubyhlm, w gkhk dbqk rany, w glxkxlm.

¡lr, vánkxy halm, w gbái ctkihy uby pby yn yilol uby tygafaó hli ubaolqy,
lwyihl nkm hymglxdbymqkm dknkftkm hy mb ymgbhytl! hacl uby pby qkiql, uby,
gli vle kqtldynnkhk w qktqkxbhk nyicbk, nkiekihl vavl pbycl dlt nlm lolm,
haol:

-¡lr fynnkgl vannkil, xkn xatkhl, hymglxdbymql, aciltkiqy, aipkgbihl,
hymnyicbkhl, kqtyvahl, xbtxbtkhlt w xknhagayiqy! ¿qknym dknkftkm rkm lmkhl
hygat yi xa dtymyigak w yi nk hymqkm íignaqkm myñltkm, w qknym
hymrliymqahkhym w kqtyvaxayiqlm lmkmqy dliyt yi qb glipbmk axkcaikgaói?
¡vyqy hy xa dtymyigak, xlimqtbl hy ikqbtknyek, hydlmaqktal hy xyiqatkm,
knxktal hy yxfbmqym, manl hy fynnkubytíkm, aivyiqlt hy xknhkhym, dbfnagkhlt
hy mkihygym, yiyxacl hyn hygltl uby my hyfy k nkm tyknym dytmlikm! ¡vyqy;
il dktyegkm hynkiqy hy xí, ml dyik hy xa atk!

w, hagayihl ymql, yiktgó nkm gyokm, raigró nlm gkttannlm, xató k qlhkm
dktqym, w hal gli yn day hytygrl bik ctki dkqkhk yi yn mbynl, myñknym qlhkm
hy nk atk uby yigyttkfk yi mbm yiqtkñkm. k gbwkm dknkftkm w pbtafbihlm
khyxkiym ubyhó mkigrl qki yiglcahl w xyhtlml, uby my rlncktk uby yi kubyn
aimqkiqy my kftaytk hyfkol hy mbm daym nk qayttk w ny qtkcktk. w il mbdl
ubé rkgytmy, mail vlnvyt nkm ymdknhkm w ubaqktmy hy nk yilokhk dtymyigak hy
mb myñlt. dytl nk hamgtyqk hltlqyk, uby qki yiqyihahl qyiík wk yn rbxlt hy
hli ubaolqy, haol, dktk qyxdnktny nk atk:

-il lm hymdygréam, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, hy nkm mkihygym uby
vbymqtl fbyi ymgbhytl rk hagrl, dltuby ubaeá il nkm hyfy hy hygat mai
lgkmaói, ia hy mb fbyi yiqyihaxayiql w gtamqakik gligayigak my dbyhy
mlmdygrkt uby nyvkiqy qymqaxlial k ikhay; w kmí, my rk hy gtyyt, mai dliyt
hbhk yi ynnl, uby, glxl yi ymqy gkmqannl, mycúi vlm, myñlt gkfknnytl,
hygím, qlhkm nkm glmkm vki w mbgyhyi dlt xlhl hy yigkiqkxyiql, dlhtík myt,
hacl, uby mkigrl rbfaymy vamql dlt ymqk hakfónagk vík nl uby én hagy uby
val, qki yi lpyimk hy xa rliymqahkh.

-dlt yn lxiadlqyiqy halm obtl -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, uby nk
vbymqtk ctkihyek rk hkhl yi yn dbiql, w uby kncbik xknk vamaói my ny dbml
hynkiqy k ymqy dygkhlt hy mkigrl, uby ny rael vyt nl uby pbytk axdlmafny
vytmy hy lqtl xlhl uby dlt yn hy yigkiqlm il pbytk; uby mé wl fayi hy nk
flihkh y ailgyigak hymqy hymhagrkhl, uby il mkfy nyvkiqkt qymqaxlialm k
ikhay.

-kimí ym w kimí mytá -haol hli pytikihl-; dlt nl gbkn hyfy vbymqtk xytgyh,
myñlt hli ubaolqy, dythliknny w tyhbganny kn ctyxal hy mb ctkgak, magbq
ytkq ai dtaigadal, kiqym uby nkm qknym vamaliym ny mkgkmyi hy obagal.

hli ubaolqy tymdlihaó uby én ny dythlikfk, w yn gbtk pby dlt mkigrl, yn
gbkn vail xbw rbxanhy, w, raigáihlmy hy tlhannkm, dahaó nk xkil k mb kxl; w
én my nk hal, w, hymdbém hy rkfétmynk hyokhl fymkt, ny ygró nk fyihagaói,
hagayihl:

-kcltk kgkfktám hy glilgyt, mkigrl raol, myt vythkh nl uby wl lqtkm xbgrkm
vygym qy ry hagrl hy uby qlhkm nkm glmkm hymqy gkmqannl mli rygrkm dlt vík
hy yigkiqkxyiql.

-kmí nl gtyl wl -haol mkigrl-, yzgydql kubynnl hy nk xkiqk, uby tyknxyiqy
mbgyhaó dlt vík lthaiktak.

-il nl gtykm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; uby ma kmí pbytk, wl qy vyicktk
yiqligym, w kbi kcltk; dytl ia yiqligym ia kcltk dbhy ia va yi ubaéi qlxkt
vyickiek hy qb kctkval.

hymyktli mkfyt qlhlm ubé ytk kubynnl hy nk xkiqk, w yn vyiqytl nl gliqó,
dbiql dlt dbiql: nk vlnkqytík hy mkigrl dkiek, hy uby il dlgl my taytli
qlhlm; w hy uby il xyilm my glttaytk mkigrl, ma hy ibyvl il ny kmycbtktk mb
kxl uby ytk yigkiqkxyiql; dbymql uby okxám nnycó nk mkihye hy mkigrl k
qkiql, uby gtywymy il myt vythkh dbtk w kvytacbkhk, mai xyegnk hy yickñl
kncbil, nl hy rkfyt mahl xkiqykhl dlt dytmlikm hy gktiy w rbyml, w il dlt
pkiqkmxkm mlñkhkm ia axkcaikhkm, glxl mb myñlt nl gtyík w nl kpatxkfk.

hlm híkm ytki wk dkmkhlm nlm uby rkfík uby qlhk kubynnk anbmqty glxdkñík
ymqkfk yi nk vyiqk; w, dktygaéihlnym uby wk ytk qayxdl hy dktqatmy, haytli
lthyi dktk uby, mai dliytmy kn qtkfkol hy vlnvyt hltlqyk w hli pytikihl gli
hli ubaolqy k mb knhyk, gli nk aivyigaói hy nk nafytqkh hy nk tyaik
xaglxaglik, dbhaymyi yn gbtk w yn fktfytl nnyvátmyny, glxl hymykfki, w
dtlgbtkt nk gbtk hy mb nlgbtk yi mb qayttk. w nl uby lthyiktli pby uby my
gligytqktli gli bi gkttyqytl hy fbywym uby kgkml kgytqó k dkmkt dlt knní,
dktk uby nl nnyvkmy yi ymqk pltxk: ragaytli bik glxl okbnk hy dknlm
yityokhlm, gkdke uby dbhaymy yi ynnk gkfyt rlnckhkxyiqy hli ubaolqy; w
nbycl hli pytikihl w mbm gkxktkhkm, gli nlm gtakhlm hy hli nbam w nlm
gbkhtannytlm, obiqkxyiqy gli yn vyiqytl, qlhlm dlt lthyi w dktygyt hyn
gbtk, my gbftaytli nlm tlmqtlm w my hamptkektli, ubaéi hy bik xkiytk w
ubaéi hy lqtk, hy xlhl uby k hli ubaolqy ny dktygaymy myt lqtk cyiqy hy nk
uby yi kubyn gkmqannl rkfík vamql.

rygrl ymql, gli ctkihímaxl manyigal my yiqtktli khlihy én ymqkfk hbtxayihl
w hymgkimkihl hy nkm dkmkhkm typtayckm. nnycátlimy k én, uby nafty w mycbtl
hy qkn kgliqygaxayiql hltxík, w, kmaéihlny pbytqyxyiqy, ny kqktli xbw fayi
nkm xkilm w nlm daym, hy xlhl uby, gbkihl én hymdytqó gli mlftymknql, il
dbhl xyiyktmy, ia rkgyt lqtk glmk xám uby khxatktmy w mbmdyihytmy hy vyt
hynkiqy hy mí qki ymqtkñlm vamkoym; w nbycl hal yi nk gbyiqk hy nl uby mb
gliqaibk w hymvktakhk axkcaikgaói ny tydtymyiqkfk, w my gtywó uby qlhkm
kubynnkm pacbtkm ytki pkiqkmxkm hy kubyn yigkiqkhl gkmqannl, w uby, mai
hbhk kncbik, wk ymqkfk yigkiqkhl, dbym il my dlhík xyiykt ia hypyihyt: qlhl
k dbiql glxl rkfík dyimkhl uby mbgyhytík yn gbtk, qtkekhlt hymqk xáubaik.
mónl mkigrl, hy qlhlm nlm dtymyiqym, ymqkfk yi mb xymxl obagal w yi mb
xymxk pacbtk; yn gbkn, kbiuby ny pknqkfk fayi dlgl dktk qyiyt nk xymxk
yipytxyhkh hy mb kxl, il hyoó hy glilgyt ubaéi ytki qlhkm kubynnkm
gliqtkrygrkm pacbtkm; xkm il lmó hymglmyt mb flgk, rkmqk vyt yi ubé dktkfk
kubyn kmknql w dtamaói hy mb kxl, yn gbkn qkxdlgl rkfnkfk dknkftk,
kqyihayihl k vyt yn dktkhytl hy mb hymctkgak; uby pby uby, qtkwyihl knní nk
okbnk, ny yigyttktli hyiqtl, w ny gnkvktli nlm xkhytlm qki pbytqyxyiqy uby
il my dbhaytki tlxdyt k hlm qatliym.

qlxátliny nbycl yi rlxftlm, w, kn mknat hyn kdlmyiql, my lwó bik vle
qyxytlmk, qlhl gbkiql nk mbdl pltxkt yn fktfytl, il yn hyn knfkthk, mail yn
lqtl, uby hygík:

-¡lr gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk!, il qy hé kpaigkxayiql nk dtamaói yi
uby vkm, dltuby kmí glivayiy dktk kgkfkt xám dtymql nk kvyiqbtk yi uby qb
ctki ympbytel qy dbml; nk gbkn my kgkfktá gbkihl yn pbtafbihl nyói xkigrkhl
gli nk fnkigk dknlxk qlflmaik wlcbaytyi yi bil, wk hymdbém hy
rbxannkhkm nkm knqkm gytvagym kn fnkihl wbcl xkqtaxlñymgl; hy gbwl aikbhaql
glimltgal mknhtái k nk nbe hyn ltfy nlm ftkvlm gkgrlttlm, uby axaqktái nkm
tbxdkiqym ckttkm hyn vknytlml dkhty. w ymql mytá kiqym uby yn mycbahlt hy
nk pbcaqavk iaipk pkck hlm vyckhkm nk vamaqk hy nkm nbgayiqym axácaiym gli
mb tádahl w ikqbtkn gbtml. w qú, ¡lr, yn xám ilfny w lfyhayiqy ymgbhytl uby
qbvl ymdkhk yi gaiqk, fktfkm yi tlmqtl w lnpkql yi nkm iktagym!, il qy
hymxkwy ia hymgliqyiqy vyt nnyvkt kimí hynkiqy hy qbm lolm xymxlm k nk pnlt
hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy; uby dtymql, ma kn dnkmxkhlt hyn xbihl ny dnkgy,
qy vytám qki knql w qki mbfnaxkhl uby il qy glilegkm, w il mknhtái
hyptkbhkhkm nkm dtlxymkm uby qy rk pygrl qb fbyi myñlt. w kmycútlqy, hy
dktqy hy nk mkfak xyiqatliakik, uby qb mknktal qy myk dkckhl, glxl nl vytám
dlt nk lftk; w macby nkm damkhkm hyn vknytlml w yigkiqkhl gkfknnytl, uby
glivayiy uby vkwkm hlihy dktéam yiqtkxflm. w, dltuby il xy ym nígaql hygat
lqtk glmk, k halm ubyhkh, uby wl xy vbynvl khlihy wl xy mé.

w, kn kgkfkt hy nk dtlpygík, kneó nk vle hy dbiql, w haxaibwónk hymdbém,
gli qki qaytil kgyiql, uby kbi nlm mkfahltym hy nk fbtnk ymqbvaytli dlt
gtyyt uby ytk vythkh nl uby líki.

ubyhó hli ubaolqy glimlnkhl gli nk ymgbgrkhk dtlpygík, dltuby nbycl glnacaó
hy qlhl yi qlhl nk maciapagkgaói hy ynnk; w val uby ny dtlxyqíki yn vytmy
kwbiqkhlm yi mkiql w hyfahl xkqtaxlial gli mb ubytahk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml,
hy gbwl pynagy vayiqty mknhtíki nlm gkgrlttlm, uby ytki mbm raolm, dktk
cnltak dytdyqbk hy nk xkigrk. w, gtywyihl ymql fayi w patxyxyiqy, kneó nk
vle, w, hkihl bi ctki mbmdatl, haol:

-¡lr qú, ubayiubaytk uby mykm, uby qkiql fayi xy rkm dtlilmqagkhl!, tbéclqy
uby dahkm hy xa dktqy kn mkfal yigkiqkhlt uby xam glmkm qayiy k gktcl, uby
il xy hyoy dytygyt yi ymqk dtamaói hlihy kcltk xy nnyvki, rkmqk vyt
gbxdnahkm qki knyctym y aiglxdktkfnym dtlxymkm glxl mli nkm uby kubí my xy
rki rygrl; uby, glxl ymql myk, qyihté dlt cnltak nkm dyikm hy xa gátgyn, w
dlt knaval ymqkm gkhyikm uby xy gañyi, w il dlt hbtl gkxdl hy fkqknnk ymqy
nygrl yi uby xy kgbymqki, mail dlt gkxk fnkihk w qánkxl hagrlml. w, yi nl
uby qlgk k nk glimlnkgaói hy mkigrl dkiek, xa ymgbhytl, wl glipíl hy mb
flihkh w fbyi dtlgyhyt uby il xy hyoktá yi fbyik ia yi xknk mbytqy; dltuby,
gbkihl il mbgyhk, dlt nk mbwk l dlt xa gltqk vyiqbtk, yn dlhytny wl hkt nk
íimbnk, l lqtk glmk yubavknyiqy uby ny qyicl dtlxyqahk, dlt nl xyilm mb
mknktal il dlhtá dythytmy; uby yi xa qymqkxyiql, uby wk ymqá rygrl, hyol
hygnktkhl nl uby my ny rk hy hkt, il glipltxy k mbm xbgrlm w fbyilm
mytvagalm, mail k nk dlmafanahkh xík.

mkigrl dkiek my ny aignaió gli xbgrl glxyhaxayiql, w ny fymó yiqtkxfkm nkm
xkilm, dltuby nk bik il dbhaytk, dlt ymqkt kqkhkm yiqtkxfkm.

nbycl qlxktli nk okbnk yi rlxftlm kubynnkm vamaliym, w nk kglxlhktli yi yn
gkttl hy nlm fbywym.





gkdíqbnl znvaa. hyn ymqtkñl xlhl gli uby pby yigkiqkhl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, gli lqtlm pkxlmlm mbgymlm


gbkihl hli ubaolqy my val hy kubynnk xkiytk yiokbnkhl w yigaxk hyn gkttl,
haol:

-xbgrkm w xbw ctkvym ramqltakm ry wl nyíhl hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, dytl
okxám ry nyíhl, ia vamql, ia líhl, uby k nlm gkfknnytlm yigkiqkhlm nlm
nnyvyi hymqk xkiytk w gli yn ymdkgal uby dtlxyqyi ymqlm dytyelmlm w qkthílm
kiaxknym; dltuby mayxdty nlm mbynyi nnyvkt dlt nlm katym, gli ymqtkñk
nacytyek, yigyttkhlm yi kncbik dkthk w ymgbtk ibfy, l yi kncúi gkttl hy
pbycl, l wk mlfty kncúi radlctapl l lqtk fymqak myxyokiqy; dytl uby xy
nnyvyi k xí kcltk mlfty bi gkttl hy fbywym, ¡vavy halm uby xy dliy yi
glipbmaói! dytl ubaeá nk gkfknnytík w nlm yigkiqlm hymqlm ibymqtlm qayxdlm
hyfyi hy mycbat lqtl gkxail uby macbaytli nlm kiqacblm. w qkxfaéi dlhtík
myt uby, glxl wl mlw ibyvl gkfknnytl yi yn xbihl, w yn dtaxytl uby rk
tymbgaqkhl yn wk lnvahkhl yoytgagal hy nk gkfknnytík kvyiqbtytk, qkxfaéi
ibyvkxyiqy my rkwki aivyiqkhl lqtlm céiytlm hy yigkiqkxyiqlm w lqtlm xlhlm
hy nnyvkt k nlm yigkiqkhlm. ¿ubé qy dktygy hymql, mkigrl raol?

-il mé wl nl uby xy dktygy -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dlt il myt qki nyíhl glxl
vbymqtk xytgyh yi nkm ymgtaqbtkm kihkiqym; dytl, gli qlhl yml, lmktík
kpatxkt w obtkt uby ymqkm vamaliym uby dlt kubí kihki, uby il mli hyn qlhl
gkqónagkm.

-¿gkqónagkm? ¡xa dkhty! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. ¿góxl rki hy myt gkqónagkm
ma mli qlhlm hyxlialm uby rki qlxkhl gbytdlm pkiqámqaglm dktk vyiat k rkgyt
ymql w k dliytxy yi ymqy ymqkhl? w ma ubaytym vyt ymqk vythkh, qógknlm w
dándknlm, w vytám glxl il qayiyi gbytdl mail hy katy, w glxl il glimamqy
xám hy yi nk kdktayigak.

-dkt halm, myñlt -tydnagó mkigrl-, wk wl nlm ry qlgkhl; w ymqy hakfnl uby
kubí kihk qki mlnígaql ym tlnnael hy gktiym, w qayiy lqtk dtldayhkh xbw
hapytyiqy hy nk uby wl ry líhl hygat uby qayiyi nlm hyxlialm; dltuby, mycúi
my hagy, qlhlm rbynyi k dayhtk kebpty w k lqtlm xknlm lnltym; dytl émqy
rbyny k áxfkt hy xyhak nycbk.

hygík ymql mkigrl dlt hli pytikihl, uby, glxl qki myñlt, hyfík hy lnyt k nl
uby mkigrl hygík.

-il qy xktkvannym hyml, mkigrl kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby qy
rkcl mkfyt uby nlm hakfnlm mkfyi xbgrl, w, dbymql uby qtkacki lnltym
glimacl, ynnlm il rbynyi ikhk, dltuby mli ymdítaqbm, w ma rbynyi, il dbyhyi
lnyt glmkm fbyikm, mail xknkm w rahalihkm. w nk tkeói ym uby glxl ynnlm,
hlihyubaytk uby ymqái, qtkyi yn aipaytil glimacl, w il dbyhyi tygyfat
céiytl hy knaval kncbil yi mbm qltxyiqlm, w yn fbyi lnlt myk glmk uby
hynyaqk w gliqyiqk, il ym dlmafny uby ynnlm rbynki glmk fbyik. w ma k qa qy
dktygy uby ymy hyxlial uby hagym rbyny k áxfkt, l qú qy yickñkm, l én
ubayty yickñktqy gli rkgyt uby il ny qyickm dlt hyxlial.

qlhlm ymqlm glnlubalm dkmktli yiqty kxl w gtakhl; w, qyxayihl hli pytikihl
w gkthyial uby mkigrl il vaiaymy k gkyt hyn qlhl yi nk gbyiqk hy mb
aivyigaói, k ubayi kihkfk wk xbw yi nlm kngkigym, hyqytxaiktli hy kftyvakt
gli nk dktqahk; w, nnkxkihl kdktqy kn vyiqytl, ny lthyiktli uby yimannkmy k
tlgaikiqy w yiknfkthkmy yn obxyiql hy mkigrl; yn gbkn nl rael gli xbgrk
dtymqyek.

wk yi ymql, yn gbtk my rkfík gligytqkhl gli nlm gbkhtannytlm uby ny
kglxdkñkmyi rkmqk mb nbckt, háihlnym bi qkiql gkhk hík. glncó gkthyial hyn
kteói hy nk mannk hy tlgaikiqy, hyn bi gkfl nk khktck w hyn lqtl nk fkgík,
w dlt myñkm xkihó k mkigrl uby mbfaymy yi mb kmil w qlxkmy hy nkm tayihkm
k tlgaikiqy, w dbml k nlm hlm nkhlm hyn gkttl k nlm hlm gbkhtannytlm gli
mbm ymgldyqkm. dytl, kiqym uby my xlvaymy yn gkttl, mknaó nk vyiqytk, mb
raok w xktaqltiym k hymdyhatmy hy hli ubaolqy, paicayihl uby nnltkfki hy
hlnlt hy mb hymctkgak; k ubayi hli ubaolqy haol:

-il nnltéam, xam fbyikm myñltkm, uby qlhkm ymqkm hymhagrkm mli kiyzkm k nlm
uby dtlpymki nl uby wl dtlpyml; w ma ymqkm gknkxahkhym il xy kgliqygaytki,
il xy qbvaytk wl dlt pkxlml gkfknnytl kihkiqy; dltuby k nlm gkfknnytlm hy
dlgl ilxfty w pkxk ibigk nym mbgyhyi myxyokiqym gkmlm, dltuby il rkw yi yn
xbihl ubayi my kgbythy hynnlm. k nlm vknytlmlm mí, uby qayiyi yivahalmlm hy
mb vatqbh w vknyiqík k xbgrlm dtíigadym w k xbgrlm lqtlm gkfknnytlm, uby
dtlgbtki dlt xknkm víkm hymqtbat k nlm fbyilm. dytl, gli qlhl yml, nk
vatqbh ym qki dlhytlmk uby, dlt mí mlnk, k dymkt hy qlhk nk iactlxkigak uby
mbdl mb dtaxyt aivyiqlt, eltlkmqym, mknhtá vyigyhltk hy qlhl qtkigy, w hktá
hy mí nbe yi yn xbihl, glxl nk hk yn mln yi yn gaynl. dythlikhxy, pytxlmkm
hkxkm, ma kncúi hymkcbamkhl, dlt hymgbahl xíl, lm ry pygrl, uby, hy
vlnbiqkh w k mkfayihkm, okxám ny ha k ikhay; w tlckh k halm xy mkuby hymqkm
dtamaliym, hlihy kncúi xkn aiqyigalikhl yigkiqkhlt xy rk dbymql; uby ma hy
ynnkm xy vyl nafty, il my xy gkytá hy nk xyxltak nkm xytgyhym uby yi ymqy
gkmqannl xy rkfyhym pygrl, dktk ctkqapagknnkm, mytvannkm w tyglxdyimknnkm
glxl ynnkm xytygyi.

yi qkiql uby nkm hkxkm hyn gkmqannl ymql dkmkfki gli hli ubaolqy, yn gbtk w
yn fktfytl my hymdahaytli hy hli pytikihl w mbm gkxktkhkm, w hyn gkdaqái w
hy mb rytxkil w qlhkm kubynnkm gliqyiqkm myñltkm, ymdygaknxyiqy hy hltlqyk
w nbmgaihk. qlhlm my kftkektli w ubyhktli hy hktmy ilqagak hy mbm mbgymlm,
hagayihl hli pytikihl kn gbtk hóihy rkfík hy ymgtafatny dktk kvamktny yi nl
uby dktkfk hli ubaolqy, kmycbtáihlny uby il rkftík glmk uby xám cbmql ny
haymy uby mkfytnl; w uby én, kmaxymxl, ny kvamktík hy qlhl kubynnl uby én
vaymy uby dlhtík hktny cbmql, kmí hy mb gkmkxayiql glxl hyn fkbqamxl hy
eltkahk, w mbgyml hy hli nbam, w vbynqk hy nbmgaihk k mb gkmk. yn gbtk
lptygaó hy rkgyt gbkiql my ny xkihkfk, gli qlhk dbiqbknahkh. qltiktli k
kftkektmy lqtk vye, w lqtk vye qltiktli k ibyvlm lptygaxayiqlm.

yn vyiqytl my nnycó kn gbtk w ny hal bilm dkdynym, hagaéihlny uby nlm rkfík
rknnkhl yi bi kplttl hy nk xknyqk hlihy my rknnó nk ilvynk hyn gbtalml
axdytqaiyiqy, w uby, dbym mb hbyñl il rkfík vbynql xám dlt knní, uby my nlm
nnyvkmy qlhlm; uby, dbym én il mkfík nyyt, il nlm ubytík. yn gbtk my nl
kctkhygaó, w, kftaéihlnlm nbycl, val uby kn dtaigadal hy nl ymgtaql hygík:
ilvynk hy taigliyqy w gltqkhannl, dlt hlihy yiqyihaó myt kncbik ilvynk w
glnacaó uby, dbym nk hyn gbtalml axdytqaiyiqy rkfík mahl fbyik, uby qkxfaéi
nl mytík kubénnk, dbym dlhtík myt pbymyi qlhkm hy bi xymxl kbqlt; w kmí, nk
cbkthó, gli dtlmbdbymql hy nyytnk gbkihl qbvaymy glxlhahkh.

mbfaó k gkfknnl, w qkxfaéi mb kxacl yn fktfytl, gli mbm kiqapkgym, dltuby
il pbymyi nbycl glilgahlm hy hli ubaolqy, w dbmaétlimy k gkxaikt qtkm yn
gkttl. w nk lthyi uby nnyvkfki ytk émqk: afk dtaxytl yn gkttl, cbaáihlny mb
hbyñl; k nlm hlm nkhlm afki nlm gbkhtannytlm, glxl my rk hagrl, gli mbm
ymgldyqkm; mycbík nbycl mkigrl dkiek mlfty mb kmil, nnyvkihl hy tayihk k
tlgaikiqy. hyqtám hy qlhl ymql afki yn gbtk w yn fktfytl mlfty mbm
dlhytlmkm xbnkm, gbfaytqlm nlm tlmqtlm, glxl my rk hagrl, gli ctkvy w
tydlmkhl gliqaiyiqy, il gkxaikihl xám hy nl uby dytxaqík yn dkml qkthl hy
nlm fbywym. hli ubaolqy afk myiqkhl yi nk okbnk, nkm xkilm kqkhkm, qyihahlm
nlm daym, w kttaxkhl k nkm vytokm, gli qkiql manyigal w qkiqk dkgayigak
glxl ma il pbytk rlxfty hy gktiy, mail ymqkqbk hy dayhtk.

w kmí, gli kubyn ymdkgal w manyigal gkxaiktli rkmqk hlm nycbkm, uby
nnycktli k bi vknny, hlihy ny dktygaó kn flwytl myt nbckt kglxlhkhl dktk
tydlmkt w hkt dkmql k nlm fbywym; w, glxbiagáihlnl gli yn gbtk, pby hy
dktygyt yn fktfytl uby gkxaikmyi bi dlgl xám, dltuby én mkfík, hyqtám hy bi
tygbymql uby gytgk hy knní my xlmqtkfk, rkfík bi vknny hy xám wytfk w xbgrl
xyolt uby kubyn hlihy dktkt ubytíki. qlxómy yn dktygyt hyn fktfytl, w kmí,
qltiktli k dtlmycbat mb gkxail.

yi ymql, vlnvaó yn gbtk yn tlmqtl, w val uby k mbm ymdknhkm vyiíki rkmqk
myam l mayqy rlxftym hy k gkfknnl, fayi dbymqlm w khytyekhlm, hy nlm gbknym
pbytli dtymql kngkiekhlm, dltuby gkxaikfki il gli nk pnyxk w tydlml hy nlm
fbywym, mail glxl ubayi afk mlfty xbnkm hy gkióiaclm w gli hymyl hy nnyckt
dtymql k mymqykt k nk vyiqk, uby xyilm hy bik nycbk hy knní my dktygík.
nnycktli nlm hanacyiqym k nlm dytyelmlm w mknbhátlimy gltqémxyiqy; w bil hy
nlm uby vyiíki, uby, yi tymlnbgaói, ytk gkióiacl hy qlnyhl w myñlt hy nlm
hyxám uby ny kglxdkñkfki, vayihl nk gligytqkhk dtlgymaói hyn gkttl,
gbkhtannytlm, mkigrl, tlgaikiqy, gbtk w fktfytl, w xám k hli ubaolqy,
yiokbnkhl w kdtamalikhl, il dbhl hyokt hy dtycbiqkt ubé maciapagkfk nnyvkt
kubyn rlxfty hy kubynnk xkiytk; kbiuby wk my rkfík hkhl k yiqyihyt, vayihl
nkm aimaciakm hy nlm gbkhtannytlm, uby hyfík hy myt kncúi pkgailtlml
mknqykhlt, l lqtl hynaigbyiqy gbwl gkmqacl qlgkmy k nk mkiqk rytxkihkh. bil
hy nlm gbkhtannytlm, k ubayi pby rygrk nk dtycbiqk, tymdlihaó kimí:

-myñlt, nl uby maciapagk at ymqy gkfknnytl hymqk xkiytk, hícknl én, dltuby
ilmlqtlm il nl mkfyxlm.

lwó hli ubaolqy nk dnáqagk, w haol:

-¿dlt hagrk vbymqtkm xytgyhym, myñltym gkfknnytlm, mli vytmkhlm w dytagqlm
yi ymql hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy? dltuby ma nl mli, glxbiagkté gli ynnlm
xam hymctkgakm, w ma il, il rkw dktk ubé xy gkimy yi hygannkm.

w, k ymqy qayxdl, rkfíki wk nnyckhl yn gbtk w yn fktfytl, vayihl uby nlm
gkxaikiqym ymqkfki yi dnáqagkm gli hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, dktk tymdlihyt
hy xlhl uby il pbymy hymgbfaytql mb ktqapagal.

yn gkióiacl, k nl uby hli ubaolqy haol, tymdlihaó:

-yi vythkh, rytxkil, uby mé xám hy naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm uby hy nkm múxbnkm
hy vannkndkihl. kimí uby, ma il ymqá xám uby yi ymql, mycbtkxyiqy dlhéam
glxbiagkt glixacl nl uby ubamaétyhym.

-k nk xkil hy halm -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. dbym kmí ym, ubaytl, myñlt
gkfknnytl, uby mydkhym uby wl vlw yigkiqkhl yi ymqk okbnk, dlt yivahak w
ptkbhy hy xknlm yigkiqkhltym; uby nk vatqbh xám ym dytmycbahk hy nlm xknlm
uby kxkhk hy nlm fbyilm. gkfknnytl kihkiqy mlw, w il hy kubynnlm hy gbwlm
ilxftym okxám nk pkxk my kglthó dktk yqytiaektnlm yi mb xyxltak, mail hy
kubynnlm uby, k hymdygrl w dymkt hy nk xymxk yivahak, w hy gbkiqlm xkclm
gtaó dytmak, ftkgxkiym nk aihak, cailmlpamqkm nk yqaldík, rk hy dliyt mb
ilxfty yi yn qyxdnl hy nk aixltqknahkh dktk uby matvk hy yoyxdnl w hygrkhl
yi nlm vyiahytlm macnlm, hlihy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym vyki nlm dkmlm uby
rki hy mycbat, ma ubamaytyi nnyckt k nk gbxfty w knqyek rlitlmk hy nkm
ktxkm.

-hagy vythkh yn myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk -haol k ymqk mkeói yn gbtk-;
uby én vk yigkiqkhl yi ymqk gkttyqk, il dlt mbm gbndkm w dygkhlm, mail dlt
nk xknk aiqyigaói hy kubynnlm k ubayi nk vatqbh yipkhk w nk vknyiqík yilok.
Émqy ym, myñlt, yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, ma wk ny límqym ilxftkt
yi kncúi qayxdl, gbwkm vknytlmkm rkekñkm w ctkihym rygrlm mytái ymgtaqkm
yi ftligym hbtlm w yi yqytilm xátxlnym, dlt xám uby my gkimy nk yivahak yi
ymgbtygytnlm w nk xknagak yi lgbnqktnlm.

gbkihl yn gkióiacl lwó rkfnkt kn dtyml w kn nafty yi myxyokiqy ymqanl,
ymqbvl dlt rkgytmy nk gtbe, hy khxatkhl, w il dlhík mkfyt nl uby ny rkfík
kgliqyigahl; w yi nk xymxk khxatkgaói gkwytli qlhlm nlm uby gli én vyiíki.
yi ymql, mkigrl dkiek, uby my rkfík kgytgkhl k lít nk dnáqagk, dktk
khlfktnl qlhl, haol:

-krltk, myñltym, ubaétkixy fayi l ubaétkixy xkn dlt nl uby haoyty, yn gkml
hy ynnl ym uby kmí vk yigkiqkhl xa myñlt hli ubaolqy glxl xa xkhty; én
qayiy mb yiqytl obagal, én glxy w fyfy w rkgy mbm iygymahkhym glxl nlm
hyxám rlxftym, w glxl nkm rkgík kwyt, kiqym uby ny yiokbnkmyi. mayihl ymql
kimí, ¿góxl ubaytyi rkgytxy k xí yiqyihyt uby vk yigkiqkhl? dbym wl ry líhl
hygat k xbgrkm dytmlikm uby nlm yigkiqkhlm ia glxyi, ia hbytxyi, ia rkfnki,
w xa kxl, ma il ny vki k nk xkil, rkfnktá xám uby qtyaiqk dtlgbtkhltym.

w, vlnvaéihlmy k xatkt kn gbtk, dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-¡kr myñlt gbtk, myñlt gbtk! ¿dyimkfk vbymqtk xytgyh uby il ny glilegl, w
dyimktá uby wl il gknl w khavail khóihy my yigkxaiki ymqlm ibyvlm
yigkiqkxyiqlm? dbym mydk uby ny glilegl, dlt xám uby my yigbftk yn tlmqtl,
w mydk uby ny yiqayihl, dlt xám uby hamaxbny mbm yxfbmqym. yi pai, hlihy
tyaik nk yivahak il dbyhy vavat nk vatqbh, ia khlihy rkw ymgkmyek nk
nafytknahkh. !xkn rkwk yn hakfnl!; uby, ma dlt mb tyvytyigak il pbytk, émqk
pbytk wk nk rltk uby xa myñlt ymqbvaytk gkmkhl gli nk aipkiqk xaglxaglik, w
wl pbytk glihy, dlt nl xyilm, dbym il my dlhík ymdytkt lqtk glmk, kmí hy nk
flihkh hy xa myñlt yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk glxl hy nk ctkihyek hy xam
mytvagalm. dytl wk vyl uby ym vythkh nl uby my hagy dlt krí: uby nk tbyhk
hy nk pltqbik kihk xám namqk uby bik tbyhk hy xlnail, w uby nlm uby kwyt
ymqkfki yi daickiaqlm rlw ymqái dlt yn mbynl. hy xam raolm w hy xa xboyt xy
dymk, dbym gbkihl dlhíki w hyfíki ymdytkt vyt yiqtkt k mb dkhty dlt mbm
dbytqkm rygrl clfytikhlt l vamlttyw hy kncbik íimbnk l tyail, ny vytái
yiqtkt rygrl xlel hy gkfknnlm. qlhl ymql uby ry hagrl, myñlt gbtk, il ym
xám hy dlt yigktygyt k mb dkqytiahkh rkck gligayigak hyn xkn qtkqkxayiql
uby k xa myñlt my ny rkgy, w xaty fayi il ny dahk halm yi nk lqtk vahk ymqk
dtamaói hy xa kxl, w my ny rkck gktcl hy qlhlm kubynnlm mlglttlm w fayiym
uby xa myñlt hli ubaolqy hyok hy rkgyt yi ymqy qayxdl uby ymqá dtyml.

-¡khófkxy ymlm gkihanym! -haol k ymqy dbiql yn fktfytl-. ¿qkxfaéi vlm,
mkigrl, mlam hy nk glptkhík hy vbymqtl kxl? ¡vavy yn myñlt, uby vlw vayihl
uby ny rkféam hy qyiyt glxdkñík yi nk okbnk, w uby rkféam hy ubyhkt qki
yigkiqkhl glxl én, dlt nl uby lm qlgk hy mb rbxlt w hy mb gkfknnytík! yi
xkn dbiql lm yxdtyñkmqym hy mbm dtlxymkm, w yi xkn rltk my lm yiqtó yi nlm
gkmglm nk íimbnk uby qkiql hymyáam.

-wl il ymqlw dtyñkhl hy ikhay -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ia mlw rlxfty uby xy
hyoktík yxdtyñkt, hyn tyw uby pbymy; w, kbiuby dlfty, mlw gtamqakil vayol,
w il hyfl ikhk k ikhay; w ma íimbnkm hymyl, lqtlm hymyki lqtkm glmkm
dyltym; w gkhk bil ym raol hy mbm lftkm; w, hyfkol hy myt rlxfty, dbyhl
vyiat k myt dkdk, gbkiql xám clfytikhlt hy bik íimbnk, w xám dbhayihl ckikt
qkiqkm xa myñlt uby ny pknqy k ubayi hknnkm. vbymqtk xytgyh xaty góxl
rkfnk, myñlt fktfytl; uby il ym qlhl rkgyt fktfkm, w kncl vk hy dyhtl k
dyhtl. híclnl dltuby qlhlm ilm glilgyxlm, w k xí il my xy rk hy ygrkt hkhl
pknml. w yi ymql hyn yigkiql hy xa kxl, halm mkfy nk vythkh; w ubéhymy
kubí, dltuby ym dylt xyiyknnl.

il ubaml tymdlihyt yn fktfytl k mkigrl, dltuby il hymgbftaymy gli mbm
maxdnagahkhym nl uby én w yn gbtk qkiql dtlgbtkfki yigbftat; w, dlt ymqy
xymxl qyxlt, rkfík yn gbtk hagrl kn gkióiacl uby gkxaikmyi bi dlgl hynkiqy:
uby én ny hatík yn xamqytal hyn yiokbnkhl, gli lqtkm glmkm uby ny haymyi
cbmql. ríelnl kmí yn gkióiacl, w khynkiqómy gli mbm gtakhlm w gli én:
ymqbvl kqyiql k qlhl kubynnl uby hygatny ubaml hy nk glihagaói, vahk,
nlgbtk w glmqbxftym hy hli ubaolqy, gliqáihlny ftyvyxyiqy yn dtaigadal w
gkbmk hy mb hymvktíl, w qlhl yn dtlctyml hy mbm mbgymlm, rkmqk rkfytnl
dbymql yi kubynnk okbnk, w yn hamacial uby nnyvkfki hy nnyvktny k mb
qayttk, dktk vyt ma dlt kncúi xyhal rknnkfki tyxyhal k mb nlgbtk.
khxatátlimy hy ibyvl nlm gtakhlm w yn gkióiacl hy lít nk dytyctaik ramqltak
hy hli ubaolqy, w, yi kgkfáihlnk hy lít, haol:

-vythkhytkxyiqy, myñlt gbtk, wl rknnl dlt xa gbyiqk uby mli dytobhagaknym
yi nk tydúfnagk ymqlm uby nnkxki naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm; w, kbiuby ry nyíhl,
nnyvkhl hy bi lgalml w pknml cbmql, gkma yn dtaigadal hy qlhlm nlm xám uby
rkw axdtymlm, okxám xy ry dlhahl kglxlhkt k nyyt iaicbil hyn dtaigadal kn
gkfl, dltuby xy dktygy uby, gbán xám, gbán xyilm, qlhlm ynnlm mli bik xymxk
glmk, w il qayiy xám émqy uby kubén, ia ymqlqtl uby yn lqtl. w, mycúi k xí
xy dktygy, ymqy céiytl hy ymgtaqbtk w glxdlmagaói gky hyfkol hy kubyn hy
nkm páfbnkm uby nnkxki xanymakm, uby mli gbyiqlm hamdktkqkhlm, uby kqayihyi
mlnkxyiqy k hynyaqkt, w il k yimyñkt: kn gliqtktal hy nl uby rkgyi nkm
páfbnkm kdónlckm, uby hynyaqki w yimyñki obiqkxyiqy. w, dbymql uby yn
dtaigadkn aiqyiql hy myxyokiqym naftlm myk yn hynyaqkt, il mé wl góxl
dbyhki glimycbatny, wyihl nnyilm hy qkiqlm w qki hymkpltkhlm hamdktkqym;
uby yn hynyaqy uby yi yn knxk my gligafy rk hy myt hy nk rytxlmbtk w
gliglthkigak uby vyy l gliqyxdnk yi nkm glmkm uby nk vamqk l nk axkcaikgaói
ny dliyi hynkiqy; w qlhk glmk uby qayiy yi mí pyknhkh w hymglxdlmqbtk il
ilm dbyhy gkbmkt gliqyiql kncbil. dbym, ¿ubé rytxlmbtk dbyhy rkfyt, l ubé
dtldltgaói hy dktqym gli yn qlhl w hyn qlhl gli nkm dktqym, yi bi naftl l
páfbnk hlihy bi xlel hy haye w myam kñlm hk bik gbgrannkhk k bi cackiqy
glxl bik qltty, w ny havahy yi hlm xaqkhym, glxl ma pbytk hy knpyñauby; w
uby, gbkihl ilm ubaytyi daiqkt bik fkqknnk, hymdbém hy rkfyt hagrl uby rkw
hy nk dktqy hy nlm yiyxaclm bi xannói hy glxdyqayiqym, glxl myk gliqtk
ynnlm yn myñlt hyn naftl, pltelmkxyiqy, xkn uby ilm dymy, rkfyxlm hy
yiqyihyt uby yn qkn gkfknnytl kngkieó nk vaqltak dlt mlnl yn vknlt hy mb
pbytqy ftkel? dbym, ¿ubé hatyxlm hy nk pkganahkh gli uby bik tyaik l
yxdytkqtae rytyhytk my glihbgy yi nlm ftkelm hy bi kihkiqy w il glilgahl
gkfknnytl? ¿ubé aicyial, ma il ym hyn qlhl fátfktl y aigbnql, dlhtá
gliqyiqktmy nywyihl uby bik ctki qltty nnyik hy gkfknnytlm vk dlt nk xkt
khynkiqy, glxl ikvy gli dtómdytl vayiql, w rlw kilgrygy yi nlxfkthík, w
xkñkik kxkiyegk yi qayttkm hyn dtymqy obki hy nkm aihakm, l yi lqtkm uby ia
nkm hymgbftaó qlnlxyl ia nkm val xktgl dlnl? w, ma k ymql my xy tymdlihaymy
uby nlm uby qknym naftlm glxdliyi nlm ymgtafyi glxl glmkm hy xyiqatk, w uby
kmí, il ymqái lfnackhlm k xatkt yi hynagkhyekm ia vythkhym, tymdlihytnym
rík wl uby qkiql nk xyiqatk ym xyolt gbkiql xám dktygy vythkhytk, w qkiql
xám kctkhk gbkiql qayiy xám hy nl hbhlml w dlmafny. rkimy hy gkmkt nkm
páfbnkm xyiqatlmkm gli yn yiqyihaxayiql hy nlm uby nkm nywytyi,
ymgtafaéihlmy hy mbytqy uby, pkganaqkihl nlm axdlmafnym, knnkikihl nkm
ctkihyekm, mbmdyihayihl nlm áiaxlm, khxatyi, mbmdyihki, knfltlgyi w
yiqtyqyicki, hy xlhl uby kihyi k bi xamxl dkml nk khxatkgaói w nk knyctík
obiqkm; w qlhkm ymqkm glmkm il dlhtá rkgyt yn uby rbwyty hy nk
vytamaxanaqbh w hy nk axaqkgaói, yi ubayi glimamqy nk dytpygaói hy nl uby
my ymgtafy. il ry vamql iaicúi naftl hy gkfknnytíkm uby rkck bi gbytdl hy
páfbnk yiqytl gli qlhlm mbm xayxftlm, hy xkiytk uby yn xyhal glttymdlihk kn
dtaigadal, w yn pai kn dtaigadal w kn xyhal; mail uby nlm glxdliyi gli
qkiqlm xayxftlm, uby xám dktygy uby nnyvki aiqyigaói k pltxkt bik ubaxytk l
bi xlimqtbl uby k rkgyt bik pacbtk dtldltgalikhk. pbytk hymql, mli yi yn
ymqanl hbtlm; yi nkm rkekñkm, aigtyífnym; yi nlm kxltym, nkmgavlm; yi nkm
gltqymíkm, xkn xatkhlm; nktclm yi nkm fkqknnkm, iygalm yi nkm tkeliym,
hamdktkqkhlm yi nlm vakoym, w, paiknxyiqy, koyilm hy qlhl hamgtyql
ktqapagal, w dlt ymql hacilm hy myt hymqyttkhlm hy nk tydúfnagk gtamqakik,
glxl k cyiqy aiúqan.

yn gbtk ny ymqbvl ymgbgrkihl gli ctkihy kqyigaói, w dktygaóny rlxfty hy
fbyi yiqyihaxayiql, w uby qyiík tkeói yi gbkiql hygík; w kmí, ny haol uby,
dlt myt én hy mb xymxk ldaiaói w qyiyt loytaek k nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm,
rkfík ubyxkhl qlhlm nlm hy hli ubaolqy, uby ytki xbgrlm. w gliqóny yn
ymgtbqaial uby hynnlm rkfík rygrl, w nlm uby rkfík glihyikhl kn pbycl w
hyokhl gli vahk, hy uby il dlgl my taó yn gkióiacl, w haol uby, gli qlhl
gbkiql xkn rkfík hagrl hy qknym naftlm, rknnkfk yi ynnlm bik glmk fbyik:
uby ytk yn mboyql uby lptygíki dktk uby bi fbyi yiqyihaxayiql dbhaymy
xlmqtktmy yi ynnlm, dltuby hkfki nktcl w ymdkgalml gkxdl dlt hlihy mai
yxdkgrl kncbil dbhaymy glttyt nk dnbxk, hymgbftayihl ikbptkcalm, qltxyiqkm,
tyigbyiqtlm w fkqknnkm; daiqkihl bi gkdaqái vknytlml gli qlhkm nkm dktqym
uby dktk myt qkn my tyubaytyi, xlmqtáihlmy dtbhyiqy dtyvaiayihl nkm
kmqbgakm hy mbm yiyxaclm, w ynlgbyiqy ltkhlt dytmbkhayihl l hambkhayihl k
mbm mlnhkhlm, xkhbtl yi yn glimyol, dtymql yi nl hyqytxaikhl, qki vknayiqy
yi yn ymdytkt glxl yi yn kglxyqyt; daiqkihl ltk bi nkxyiqkfny w qtácagl
mbgyml, krltk bi knycty w il dyimkhl kgliqygaxayiql; knní bik rytxlmímaxk
hkxk, rliymqk, hamgtyqk w tygkqkhk; kubí bi gkfknnytl gtamqakil, vknayiqy w
glxyhahl; kgbnná bi hymkpltkhl fátfktl pkipkttói; kgá bi dtíigady gltqém,
vknytlml w fayi xatkhl; tydtymyiqkihl flihkh w nyknqkh hy vkmknnlm,
ctkihyekm w xytgyhym hy myñltym. wk dbyhy xlmqtktmy kmqtónlcl, wk
glmxóctkpl yzgynyiqy, wk xúmagl, wk aiqynacyiqy yi nkm xkqytakm hy ymqkhl,
w qkn vye ny vyihtá lgkmaói hy xlmqtktmy iactlxkiqy, ma ubamayty. dbyhy
xlmqtkt nkm kmqbgakm hy bnazym, nk dayhkh hy yiykm, nk vknyiqík hy kubanym,
nkm hymctkgakm hy régqlt, nkm qtkagaliym hy maiói, nk kxamqkh hy ybtaknal,
nk nafytknahkh hy knyokihtl, yn vknlt hy gémkt, nk gnyxyigak w vythkh hy
qtkokil, nk pahynahkh hy eldatl, nk dtbhyigak hy gkqói; w, paiknxyiqy,
qlhkm kubynnkm kggaliym uby dbyhyi rkgyt dytpygql k bi vktói anbmqty, krltk
dliaéihlnkm yi bil mlnl, krltk havahaéihlnkm yi xbgrlm.

-w, mayihl ymql rygrl gli kdkgafanahkh hy ymqanl w gli aicyialmk aivyigaói,
uby qaty nl xám uby pbyty dlmafny k nk vythkh, mai hbhk glxdlihtá bik qynk
hy vktalm w rytxlmlm nkelm qyoahk, uby, hymdbém hy kgkfkhk, qkn dytpygaói w
rytxlmbtk xbymqty, uby glimack yn pai xyolt uby my dtyqyihy yi nlm
ymgtaqlm, uby ym yimyñkt w hynyaqkt obiqkxyiqy, glxl wk qyicl hagrl. dltuby
nk ymgtaqbtk hymkqkhk hymqlm naftlm hk nbckt k uby yn kbqlt dbyhk xlmqtktmy
édagl, nítagl, qtácagl, góxagl, gli qlhkm kubynnkm dktqym uby yigayttki yi
mí nkm hbngímaxkm w kctkhkfnym gayigakm hy nk dlymík w hy nk ltkqltak; uby
nk édagk qkxfaéi dbyhy ymgtyfatmy yi dtlmk glxl yi vytml.





gkdíqbnl znvaaa. hlihy dtlmacby yn gkióiacl nk xkqytak hy nlm naftlm hy
gkfknnytíkm, gli lqtkm glmkm hacikm hy mb aicyial


-kmí ym glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, myñlt gkióiacl -haol yn gbtk-, w dlt ymqk
gkbmk mli xám hacilm hy tydtyryimaói nlm uby rkmqk kubí rki glxdbymql
myxyokiqym naftlm mai qyiyt khvytqyigak k iaicúi fbyi hamgbtml, ia kn ktqy
w tycnkm dlt hlihy dbhaytki cbaktmy w rkgytmy pkxlmlm yi dtlmk, glxl nl mli
yi vytml nlm hlm dtíigadym hy nk dlymík ctayck w nkqaik.

-wl, k nl xyilm -tydnagó yn gkióiacl-, ry qyiahl gaytqk qyiqkgaói hy rkgyt
bi naftl hy gkfknnytíkm, cbkthkihl yi én qlhlm nlm dbiqlm uby ry
maciapagkhl; w ma ry hy glipymkt nk vythkh, qyicl ymgtaqkm xám hy gayi
rlokm. w dktk rkgyt nk yzdytayigak hy ma glttymdlihíki k xa ymqaxkgaói, nkm
ry glxbiagkhl gli rlxftym kdkmalikhlm hymqk nywyihk, hlqlm w hamgtyqlm, w
gli lqtlm aciltkiqym, uby mónl kqayihyi kn cbmql hy lít hamdktkqym, w hy
qlhlm ry rknnkhl bik kctkhkfny kdtlfkgaói; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, il ry
dtlmycbahl khynkiqy, kmí dlt dktygytxy uby rkcl glmk koyik hy xa dtlpymaói,
glxl dlt vyt uby ym xám yn iúxytl hy nlm maxdnym uby hy nlm dtbhyiqym; w
uby, dbymql uby ym xyolt myt nlkhl hy nlm dlglm mkfalm uby fbtnkhl hy nlm
xbgrlm iygalm, il ubaytl mboyqktxy kn glipbml obagal hyn hymvkiygahl vbncl,
k ubayi dlt nk xkwlt dktqy qlgk nyyt myxyokiqym naftlm. dytl nl uby xám xy
ny ubaqó hy nkm xkilm, w kbi hyn dyimkxayiql, hy kgkfktny, pby bi ktcbxyiql
uby ragy glixacl xymxl, mkgkhl hy nkm glxyhakm uby krltk my tydtymyiqk,
hagayihl: ''ma ymqkm uby krltk my bmki, kmí nkm axkcaikhkm glxl nkm hy
ramqltak, qlhkm l nkm xám mli glilgahlm hamdktkqym w glmkm uby il nnyvki
daym ia gkfyek, w, gli qlhl yml, yn vbncl nkm lwy gli cbmql, w nkm qayiy w
nkm kdtbyfk dlt fbyikm, ymqkihl qki nyolm hy mytnl, w nlm kbqltym uby nkm
glxdliyi w nlm kgqltym uby nkm tydtymyiqki hagyi uby kmí rki hy myt, dltuby
kmí nkm ubayty yn vbncl, w il hy lqtk xkiytk; w uby nkm uby nnyvki qtkek w
macbyi nk páfbnk glxl yn ktqy dahy, il matvyi mail dktk gbkqtl hamgtyqlm
uby nkm yiqayihyi, w qlhlm nlm hyxám my ubyhki kwbilm hy yiqyihyt mb
ktqapagal, w uby k ynnlm nym ymqá xyolt ckikt hy glxyt gli nlm xbgrlm, uby
il ldaiaói gli nlm dlglm, hymqy xlhl vyihtá k myt bi naftl, kn gkfl hy
rkfytxy ubyxkhl nkm gyokm dlt cbkthkt nlm dtygydqlm typytahlm, w vyihté k
myt yn mkmqty hyn gkiqannl''. w, kbiuby kncbikm vygym ry dtlgbtkhl
dytmbkhat k nlm kgqltym uby my yickñki yi qyiyt nk ldaiaói uby qayiyi, w
uby xám cyiqy kqtkytái w xám pkxk glftktái tydtymyiqkihl glxyhakm uby rkcki
yn ktqy uby il gli nkm hamdktkqkhkm, w ymqái qki kmahlm w yigltdltkhlm yi
mb dktygyt, uby il rkw tkeói ia yvahyigak uby hén nlm mkuby. kgbéthlxy uby
bi hík haoy k bil hymqlm dytqaikgym: ''hygahxy, ¿il lm kgltháam uby rk
dlglm kñlm uby my tydtymyiqktli yi ymdkñk qtym qtkcyhakm uby glxdbml bi
pkxlml dlyqk hymqlm tyailm, nkm gbknym pbytli qknym, uby khxatktli,
knyctktli w mbmdyihaytli k qlhlm gbkiqlm nkm lwytli, kmí maxdnym glxl
dtbhyiqym, kmí hyn vbncl glxl hy nlm ymglcahlm, w haytli xám haiytlm k nlm
tydtymyiqkiqym ynnkm qtym mlnkm uby qtyaiqk hy nkm xyoltym uby hymdbém kgá
my rki rygrl?'' ''mai hbhk -tymdlihaó yn kbqlt uby hacl-, uby hyfy hy hygat
vbymqtk xytgyh dlt nk amkfynk, nk panam w nk knyokihtk''. ''dlt émkm hacl
-ny tydnaubé wl-; w xatkh ma cbkthkfki fayi nlm dtygydqlm hyn ktqy, w ma
dlt cbkthktnlm hyoktli hy dktygyt nl uby ytki w hy kctkhkt k qlhl yn xbihl.
kmí uby il ymqá nk pknqk yi yn vbncl, uby dahy hamdktkqym, mail yi kubynnlm
uby il mkfyi tydtymyiqkt lqtk glmk. mí, uby il pby hamdktkqy nk aictkqaqbh
vyickhk, ia ny qbvl nk ibxkigak, ia my ny rknnó yi nk hyn xytgkhyt kxkiqy,
ia xyilm yi nk yiyxack pkvltkfny, ia yi lqtkm kncbikm uby hy kncbilm
yiqyihahlm dlyqkm rki mahl glxdbymqkm, dktk pkxk w tyilxfty mbwl, w dktk
ckikigak hy nlm uby nkm rki tydtymyiqkhl''. w lqtkm glmkm kñkhí k émqkm,
gli uby, k xa dktygyt, ny hyoé kncl glipbml, dytl il mkqampygrl ia
glivyigahl dktk mkgktny hy mb yttkhl dyimkxayiql.

-yi xkqytak rk qlgkhl vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkióiacl -haol k ymqk mkeói yn
gbtk-, uby rk hymdytqkhl yi xí bi kiqacbl tkiglt uby qyicl gli nkm glxyhakm
uby kcltk my bmki, qkn, uby acbknk kn uby qyicl gli nlm naftlm hy
gkfknnytíkm; dltuby, rkfayihl hy myt nk glxyhak, mycúi ny dktygy k qbnal,
ymdyol hy nk vahk rbxkik, yoyxdnl hy nkm glmqbxftym w axkcyi hy nk vythkh,
nkm uby krltk my tydtymyiqki mli ymdyolm hy hamdktkqym, yoyxdnlm hy
iygyhkhym y axácyiym hy nkmgavak. dltuby, ¿ubé xkwlt hamdktkqy dbyhy myt yi
yn mboyql uby qtkqkxlm uby mknat bi iañl yi xkiqannkm yi nk dtaxytk gyik
hyn dtaxyt kgql, w yi nk mycbihk mknat wk rygrl rlxfty fktfkhl? w ¿ubé
xkwlt uby daiqktilm bi vayol vknayiqy w bi xlel glfkthy, bi nkgkwl
tygqótagl, bi dkoy glimyoytl, bi tyw ckikdái w bik dtaigymk ptyclik? ¿ubé
haté, dbym, hy nk lfmytvkigak uby cbkthki yi nlm qayxdlm yi uby dbyhyi l
dlhíki mbgyhyt nkm kggaliym uby tydtymyiqki, mail uby ry vamql glxyhak uby
nk dtaxytk oltikhk glxyieó yi ybtldk, nk mycbihk yi kmak, nk qytgytk my
kgkfó yi kptagk, w kimí pbytk hy gbkqtl oltikhkm, nk gbktqk kgkfkfk yi
kxétagk, w kmí my rbfaytk rygrl yi qlhkm nkm gbkqtl dktqym hyn xbihl? w ma
ym uby nk axaqkgaói ym nl dtaigadkn uby rk hy qyiyt nk glxyhak, ¿góxl ym
dlmafny uby mkqampkck k iaicúi xyhakil yiqyihaxayiql uby, paicayihl bik
kggaói uby dkmk yi qayxdl hyn tyw dydail w gktnlxkcil, yn xamxl uby yi ynnk
rkgy nk dytmlik dtaigadkn ny kqtafbwki uby pby yn yxdytkhlt rytkgnal, uby
yiqtó gli nk gtbe yi oytbmknéi, w yn uby ckió nk gkmk mkiqk, glxl clhlpty
hy fbnnói, rkfayihl aipaiaqlm kñlm hy nl bil k nl lqtl; w pbiháihlmy nk
glxyhak mlfty glmk paicahk, kqtafbatny vythkhym hy ramqltak, w xyegnktny
dyhkelm hy lqtkm mbgyhahkm k hapytyiqym dytmlikm w qayxdlm, w ymql, il gli
qtkekm vytamíxanym, mail gli dkqyiqym yttltym hy qlhl dbiql aiyzgbmkfnym? w
ym nl xknl uby rkw aciltkiqym uby hacki uby ymql ym nl dytpygql, w uby nl
hyxám ym fbmgkt cbnnbtíkm. dbym, ¿ubé ma vyiaxlm k nkm glxyhakm havaikm?:
¡ubé hy xankctlm pknmlm paicyi yi ynnkm, ubé hy glmkm kdógtapkm w xkn
yiqyihahkm, kqtafbwyihl k bi mkiql nlm xankctlm hy lqtl! w kbi yi nkm
rbxkikm my kqtyvyi k rkgyt xankctlm, mai xám tymdyql ia glimahytkgaói uby
dktygytnym uby knní ymqktá fayi yn qkn xankctl w kdktayigak, glxl ynnlm
nnkxki, dktk uby cyiqy aciltkiqy my khxaty w vyick k nk glxyhak; uby qlhl
ymql ym yi dytobagal hy nk vythkh w yi xyilmgkfl hy nkm ramqltakm, w kbi yi
ldtlftal hy nlm aicyialm ymdkñlnym; dltuby nlm ymqtkioytlm, uby gli xbgrk
dbiqbknahkh cbkthki nkm nywym hy nk glxyhak, ilm qayiyi dlt fátfktlm y
aciltkiqym, vayihl nlm kfmbthlm w hamdktkqym hy nkm uby rkgyxlm. w il mytík
fkmqkiqy hamgbndk hymql hygat uby yn dtaigadkn aiqyiql uby nkm tydúfnagkm
fayi lthyikhkm qayiyi, dytxaqayihl uby my rkcki dúfnagkm glxyhakm, ym dktk
yiqtyqyiyt nk glxbiahkh gli kncbik rliymqk tygtykgaói, w havytqatnk k vygym
hy nlm xknlm rbxltym uby mbyny yicyihtkt nk lgalmahkh; w uby, dbym émqy my
glimacby gli gbknubayt glxyhak, fbyik l xknk, il rkw dktk ubé dliyt nywym,
ia ymqtygrkt k nlm uby nkm glxdliyi w tydtymyiqki k uby nkm rkcki glxl
hyfíki rkgytmy, dbym, glxl ry hagrl, gli gbknubaytk my glimacby nl uby gli
ynnkm my dtyqyihy. k nl gbkn tymdlihytík wl uby ymqy pai my glimycbatík
xbgrl xyolt, mai glxdktkgaói kncbik, gli nkm glxyhakm fbyikm uby gli nkm il
qknym; dltuby, hy rkfyt líhl nk glxyhak ktqapagalmk w fayi lthyikhk,
mknhtík yn lwyiqy knycty gli nkm fbtnkm, yimyñkhl gli nkm vytkm, khxatkhl
hy nlm mbgymlm, hamgtyql gli nkm tkeliym, khvytqahl gli nlm yxfbmqym, mkcke
gli nlm yoyxdnlm, katkhl gliqtk yn vagal w yikxltkhl hy nk vatqbh; uby
qlhlm ymqlm kpygqlm rk hy hymdytqkt nk fbyik glxyhak yi yn áiaxl hyn uby nk
ymgbgrkty, dlt túmqagl w qltdy uby myk; w hy qlhk axdlmafanahkh ym
axdlmafny hyokt hy knyctkt w yiqtyqyiyt, mkqampkgyt w gliqyiqkt, nk glxyhak
uby qlhkm ymqkm dktqym qbvayty xbgrl xám uby kubynnk uby gktygayty hynnkm,
glxl dlt nk xkwlt dktqy gktygyi ymqkm uby hy lthaiktal kcltk my
tydtymyiqki. w il qayiyi nk gbndk hymql nlm dlyqkm uby nkm glxdliyi, dltuby
kncbilm rkw hynnlm uby glilgyi xbw fayi yi nl uby wyttki, w mkfyi
ymqtyxkhkxyiqy nl uby hyfyi rkgyt; dytl, glxl nkm glxyhakm my rki rygrl
xytgkhytík vyihafny, hagyi, w hagyi vythkh, uby nlm tydtymyiqkiqym il my
nkm glxdtktíki ma il pbymyi hy kubyn okye; w kmí, yn dlyqk dtlgbtk
kglxlhktmy gli nl uby yn tydtymyiqkiqy uby ny rk hy dkckt mb lftk ny dahy.
w uby ymql myk vythkh vékmy dlt xbgrkm y aipaiaqkm glxyhakm uby rk
glxdbymql bi pynagímaxl aicyial hymqlm tyailm, gli qkiqk cknk, gli qkiql
hlikaty, gli qki ynyckiqy vytml, gli qki fbyikm tkeliym, gli qki ctkvym
myiqyigakm w, paiknxyiqy, qki nnyikm hy ynlgbgaói w knqyek hy ymqanl, uby
qayiy nnyil yn xbihl hy mb pkxk. w, dlt ubytyt kglxlhktmy kn cbmql hy nlm
tydtymyiqkiqym, il rki nnyckhl qlhkm, glxl rki nnyckhl kncbikm, kn dbiql hy
nk dytpyggaói uby tyubaytyi. lqtlm nkm glxdliyi qki mai xatkt nl uby rkgyi,
uby hymdbém hy tydtymyiqkhkm qayiyi iygymahkh nlm tygaqkiqym hy rbatmy w
kbmyiqktmy, qyxytlmlm hy myt gkmqackhlm, glxl nl rki mahl xbgrkm vygym, dlt
rkfyt tydtymyiqkhl glmkm yi dytobagal hy kncbilm tywym w yi hymrlitk hy
kncbilm naikoym. w qlhlm ymqlm aiglivaiayiqym gymktíki, w kbi lqtlm xbgrlm
xám uby il hacl, gli uby rbfaymy yi nk gltqy bik dytmlik aiqynacyiqy w
hamgtyqk uby yzkxaikmy qlhkm nkm glxyhakm kiqym uby my tydtymyiqkmyi (il
mónl kubynnkm uby my ragaymyi yi nk gltqy, mail qlhkm nkm uby my ubamaymyi
tydtymyiqkt yi ymdkñk), mai nk gbkn kdtlfkgaói, mynnl w patxk, iaicbik
obmqagak yi mb nbckt hyokmy tydtymyiqkt glxyhak kncbik; w, hymqk xkiytk,
nlm glxyhakiqym qyihtíki gbahkhl hy yivakt nkm glxyhakm k nk gltqy, w gli
mycbtahkh dlhtíki tydtymyiqknnkm, w kubynnlm uby nkm glxdliyi xatktíki gli
xám gbahkhl w ymqbhal nl uby rkgíki, qyxltlmlm hy rkfyt hy dkmkt mbm lftkm
dlt yn tacbtlml yzkxyi hy ubayi nl yiqayihy; w hymqk xkiytk my rktíki
fbyikm glxyhakm w my glimycbatík pynagímaxkxyiqy nl uby yi ynnkm my
dtyqyihy: kmí yn yiqtyqyiaxayiql hyn dbyfnl, glxl nk ldaiaói hy nlm
aicyialm hy ymdkñk, yn aiqytém w mycbtahkh hy nlm tygaqkiqym w yn krlttl
hyn gbahkhl hy gkmqacknnlm. w ma haymy gktcl k lqtl, l k ymqy xamxl, uby
yzkxaikmy nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm uby hy ibyvl my glxdbmaymyi, mai hbhk
dlhtíki mknat kncbilm gli nk dytpyggaói uby vbymqtk xytgyh rk hagrl,
yitaubygayihl ibymqtk nyicbk hyn kctkhkfny w dtygalml qymltl hy nk
ynlgbyigak, hkihl lgkmaói uby nlm naftlm vayolm my ymgbtygaymyi k nk nbe hy
nlm ibyvlm uby mknaymyi, dktk rliymql dkmkqayxdl, il mlnkxyiqy hy nlm
lgalmlm, mail hy nlm xám lgbdkhlm; dbym il ym dlmafny uby ymqé gliqaibl yn
ktgl ktxkhl, ia nk glihagaói w pnkubyek rbxkik my dbyhk mbmqyiqkt mai
kncbik nígaqk tygtykgaói.

k ymqy dbiql hy mb glnlubal nnyckfki yn gkióiacl w yn gbtk, gbkihl,
khynkiqáihlmy yn fktfytl, nnycó k ynnlm, w haol kn gbtk:

-kubí, myñlt nagyigakhl, ym yn nbckt uby wl haoy uby ytk fbyil dktk uby,
mymqykihl ilmlqtlm, qbvaymyi nlm fbywym ptymgl w kfbihlml dkmql.

-kmí xy nl dktygy k xí -tymdlihaó yn gbtk.

w, hagaéihlny kn gkióiacl nl uby dyimkfk rkgyt, én qkxfaéi ubaml ubyhktmy
gli ynnlm, glivahkhl hyn maqal hy bi rytxlml vknny uby k nk vamqk my nym
lptygík. w, kmí dlt clekt hén glxl hy nk glivytmkgaói hyn gbtk, hy ubayi wk
afk kpagalikhl, w dlt mkfyt xám dlt xyibhl nkm rkekñkm hy hli ubaolqy,
xkihó k kncbilm hy mbm gtakhlm uby my pbymyi k nk vyiqk, uby il nyolm hy
knní ymqkfk, w qtboymyi hynnk nl uby rbfaymy hy glxyt, dktk qlhlm, dltuby
én hyqytxaikfk hy mymqykt yi kubyn nbckt kubynnk qkthy; k nl gbkn bil hy
mbm gtakhlm tymdlihaó uby yn kgéxank hyn tydbymql, uby wk hyfík hy ymqkt yi
nk vyiqk, qtkík tygkhl fkmqkiqy dktk il lfnackt k il qlxkt hy nk vyiqk xám
uby gyfkhk.

-dbym kmí ym -haol yn gkióiacl-, nnévyimy knná qlhkm nkm gkfknckhbtkm, w
rkgyh vlnvyt nk kgéxank.

yi qkiql uby ymql dkmkfk, vayihl mkigrl uby dlhík rkfnkt k mb kxl mai nk
gliqaibk kmamqyigak hyn gbtk w yn fktfytl, uby qyiík dlt mlmdygrlmlm, my
nnycó k nk okbnk hlihy afk mb kxl, w ny haol:

-myñlt, dktk hymgktcl hy xa gligayigak, ny ubaytl hygat nl uby dkmk gytgk
hy mb yigkiqkxyiql; w ym uby kubymqlm hlm uby vayiyi kubí gbfaytqlm nlm
tlmqtlm mli yn gbtk hy ibymqtl nbckt w yn fktfytl; w axkcail rki hkhl ymqk
qtkek hy nnyvknny hymqk xkiytk, hy dbtk yivahak uby qayiyi glxl vbymqtk
xytgyh my nym khynkiqk yi rkgyt pkxlmlm rygrlm. dtymbdbymqk, dbym, ymqk
vythkh, mícbymy uby il vk yigkiqkhl, mail yxfkíhl w qliql. dktk dtbyfk hy
nl gbkn ny ubaytl dtycbiqkt bik glmk; w ma xy tymdlihy glxl gtyl uby xy rk
hy tymdlihyt, qlgktá gli nk xkil ymqy yickñl w vytá glxl il vk yigkiqkhl,
mail qtkmqltikhl yn obagal.

-dtycbiqk nl uby ubamaytym, raol mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby wl qy
mkqampkté w tymdlihyté k qlhk qb vlnbiqkh. w yi nl uby hagym uby kubynnlm
uby knní vki w vayiyi gli ilmlqtlm mli yn gbtk w yn fktfytl, ibymqtlm
glxdkqtalqlm w glilgahlm, fayi dlhtá myt uby dktyegk uby mli ynnlm xymxlm;
dytl uby nl myki tyknxyiqy w yi ypyql, yml il nl gtykm yi iaicbik xkiytk.
nl uby rkm hy gtyyt w yiqyihyt ym uby ma ynnlm my nym dktygyi, glxl hagym,
hyfy hy myt uby nlm uby xy rki yigkiqkhl rkftái qlxkhl ymk kdktayigak w
myxyokiek; dltuby ym págan k nlm yigkiqkhltym qlxkt nk pacbtk uby my nym
kiqlok, w rkftái qlxkhl nkm hymqlm ibymqtlm kxaclm, dktk hktqy k qa lgkmaói
hy uby dayimym nl uby dayimkm, w dliytqy yi bi nkfytaiql hy axkcaikgaliym,
uby il kgaytqym k mknat hén, kbiuby qbvaymym nk mlck hy qymyl. w qkxfaéi nl
rkftái rygrl dktk uby wl vkgany yi xa yiqyihaxayiql, w il mydk kqaikt hy
hóihy xy vayiy ymqy hkñl; dltuby ma, dlt bik dktqy, qú xy hagym uby xy
kglxdkñki yn fktfytl w yn gbtk hy ibymqtl dbyfnl, w, dlt lqtk, wl xy vyl
yiokbnkhl, w mé hy xí uby pbytekm rbxkikm, glxl il pbytki mlftyikqbtknym,
il pbytki fkmqkiqym dktk yiokbnktxy, ¿ubé ubaytym uby hack l dayimy mail
uby nk xkiytk hy xa yigkiqkxyiql yzgyhy k gbkiqkm wl ry nyíhl yi qlhkm
nkm ramqltakm uby qtkqki hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym uby rki mahl yigkiqkhlm?
kimí uby, fayi dbyhym hktqy dke w mlmaycl yi ymql hy gtyyt uby mli nlm uby
hagym, dltuby kmí mli ynnlm glxl wl mlw qbtgl. w, yi nl uby qlgk k ubytyt
dtycbiqktxy kncl, ha, uby wl qy tymdlihyté, kbiuby xy dtycbiqym hy kubí k
xkñkik.

-¡vánkxy ibymqtk myñltk! -tymdlihaó mkigrl, hkihl bik ctki vle-. w ¿ym
dlmafny uby myk vbymqtk xytgyh qki hbtl hy gynyftl, w qki pknql hy xylnnl,
uby il ygry hy vyt uby ym dbtk vythkh nk uby ny hacl, w uby yi ymqk mb
dtamaói w hymctkgak qayiy xám dktqy nk xknagak uby yn yigkiql? dytl, dbym
kmí ym, wl ny ubaytl dtlfkt yvahyiqyxyiqy glxl il vk yigkiqkhl. ma il,
híckxy, kmí halm ny mkuby hymqk qltxyiqk, w kmí my vyk yi nlm ftkelm hy xa
myñltk hbngaiyk gbkihl xyilm my dayimy...

-kgkfk hy gliobtktxy -haol hli ubaolqy-, w dtycbiqk nl uby ubamaytym; uby
wk qy ry hagrl uby qy tymdlihyté gli qlhk dbiqbknahkh.

-yml dahl -tydnagó mkigrl-; w nl uby ubaytl mkfyt ym uby xy hack, mai
kñkhat ia ubaqkt glmk iaicbik, mail gli qlhk vythkh, glxl my ymdytk uby nk
rki hy hygat w nk hagyi qlhlm kubynnlm uby dtlpymki nkm ktxkm, glxl vbymqtk
xytgyh nkm dtlpymk, hyfkol hy qíqbnl hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym...

-hacl uby il xyiqaté yi glmk kncbik -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. kgkfk wk hy
dtycbiqkt, uby yi vythkh uby xy gkimkm gli qkiqkm mknvkm, dnycktakm w
dtyvyigaliym, mkigrl.

-hacl uby wl ymqlw mycbtl hy nk flihkh w vythkh hy xa kxl; w kmí, dltuby
rkgy kn gkml k ibymqtl gbyiql, dtycbiql, rkfnkihl gli kgkqkxayiql, ma kgkml
hymdbém uby vbymqtk xytgyh vk yiokbnkhl w, k mb dktygyt, yigkiqkhl yi ymqk
okbnk, ny rk vyiahl ckik w vlnbiqkh hy rkgyt kcbkm xkwltym l xyiltym, glxl
mbyny hygatmy.

-il yiqayihl yml hy rkgyt kcbkm, mkigrl; kgnátkqy xám, ma ubaytym uby qy
tymdlihk hytygrkxyiqy.

-¿ym dlmafny uby il yiqayihy vbymqtk xytgyh hy rkgyt kcbkm xyiltym l
xkwltym? dbym yi nk ymgbynk hymqyqki k nlm xbgrkgrlm gli ynnl. dbym mydk
uby ubaytl hygat ma ny rk vyiahl ckik hy rkgyt nl uby il my ymgbmk.

-¡wk, wk qy yiqayihl, mkigrl! w xbgrkm vygym; w kbi kcltk nk qyicl. ¡mágkxy
hymqy dynactl, uby il kihk qlhl naxdal!





gkdíqbnl znaz. hlihy my qtkqk hyn hamgtyql glnlubal uby mkigrl dkiek qbvl
gli mb myñlt hli ubaolqy


-¡kr -haol mkigrl-; glcahl ny qyicl! ymql ym nl uby wl hymykfk mkfyt, glxl
kn knxk w glxl k nk vahk. vyick kgá, myñlt: ¿dlhtík iyckt nl uby glxúixyiqy
mbyny hygatmy dlt krí gbkihl bik dytmlik ymqá hy xknk vlnbiqkh: "il mé ubé
qayiy pbnkil, uby ia glxy, ia fyfy, ia hbytxy, ia tymdlihy k dtldómaql k nl
uby ny dtycbiqki, uby il dktygy mail uby ymqá yigkiqkhl"? hy hlihy my vayiy
k mkgkt uby nlm uby il glxyi, ia fyfyi, ia hbytxyi, ia rkgyi nkm lftkm
ikqbtknym uby wl hacl, ymqlm qknym ymqái yigkiqkhlm; dytl il kubynnlm uby
qayiyi nk ckik uby vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy w uby fyfy gbkihl my nl hki, w glxy
gbkihl nl qayiy, w tymdlihy k qlhl kubynnl uby ny dtycbiqki.

-vythkh hagym, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dytl wk qy ry hagrl uby rkw
xbgrkm xkiytkm hy yigkiqkxyiqlm, w dlhtík myt uby gli yn qayxdl my rbfaymyi
xbhkhl hy bilm yi lqtlm, w uby kcltk my bmy uby nlm yigkiqkhlm rkcki qlhl
nl uby wl rkcl, kbiuby kiqym il nl rkgíki. hy xkiytk uby gliqtk yn bml hy
nlm qayxdlm il rkw uby ktcüat ia hy ubé rkgyt glimygbyigakm. wl mé w qyicl
dktk xí uby vlw yigkiqkhl, w ymql xy fkmqk dktk nk mycbtahkh hy xa
gligayigak; uby nk pltxktík xbw ctkihy ma wl dyimkmy uby il ymqkfk
yigkiqkhl w xy hyokmy ymqkt yi ymqk okbnk, dytyelml w glfkthy, hyptkbhkihl
yn mlglttl uby dlhtík hkt k xbgrlm xyiymqytlmlm w iygymaqkhlm uby hy xa
kwbhk w kxdktl hyfyi qyiyt k nk rltk hy krltk dtygamk w ymqtyxk iygymahkh.

-dbym, gli qlhl yml -tydnagó mkigrl-, hacl uby, dktk xkwlt kfbihkigak w
mkqampkgaói, mytík fayi uby vbymqtk xytgyh dtlfkmy k mknat hymqk gátgyn,
uby wl xy lfnacl gli qlhl xa dlhyt k pkganaqktnl, w kbi k mkgktny hynnk, w
dtlfkmy hy ibyvl k mbfat mlfty mb fbyi tlgaikiqy, uby qkxfaéi dktygy uby vk
yigkiqkhl, mycúi vk hy xknyigónagl w qtamqy; w, rygrl ymql, dtlfámyxlm lqtk
vye nk mbytqy hy fbmgkt xám kvyiqbtkm; w ma il ilm mbgyhaymy fayi, qayxdl
ilm ubyhk dktk vlnvytilm k nk okbnk, yi nk gbkn dtlxyql, k nyw hy fbyi w
nykn ymgbhytl, hy yigyttktxy obiqkxyiqy gli vbymqtk xytgyh, ma kgkml pbyty
vbymqtk xytgyh qki hymhagrkhl, l wl qki maxdny, uby il kgaytqy k mknat gli
nl uby hacl.

-wl mlw gliqyiql hy rkgyt nl uby hagym, mkigrl rytxkil -tydnagó hli
ubaolqy-; w gbkihl qú vykm glwbiqbtk hy dliyt yi lftk xa nafytqkh, wl qy
lfyhygyté yi qlhl w dlt qlhl; dytl qú, mkigrl, vytám glxl qy yickñkm yi yn
glilgaxayiql hy xa hymctkgak.

yi ymqkm dnáqagkm my yiqtyqbvaytli yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy w yn xkn kihkiqy
ymgbhytl, rkmqk uby nnycktli hlihy, wk kdykhlm, nlm kcbkthkfki yn gbtk, yn
gkióiacl w yn fktfytl. hymbigaó nbycl nlm fbywym hy nk gkttyqk yn flwytl, w
hyoónlm kihkt k mbm kigrbtkm dlt kubyn vythy w kdkgafny maqal, gbwk
ptymgbtk glivahkfk k ubytytnk clekt, il k nkm dytmlikm qki yigkiqkhkm glxl
hli ubaolqy, mail k nlm qki khvytqahlm w hamgtyqlm glxl mb ymgbhytl; yn
gbkn tlcó kn gbtk uby dytxaqaymy uby mb myñlt mknaymy dlt bi tkql hy nk
okbnk, dltuby ma il ny hyokfki mknat, il atík qki naxdak kubynnk dtamaói
glxl tyubatík nk hygyigak hy bi qkn gkfknnytl glxl mb kxl. yiqyihaóny yn
gbtk, w haol uby hy xbw fbyik ckik rktík nl uby ny dyhík ma il qyxaytk uby,
yi vaéihlmy mb myñlt yi nafytqkh, rkfík hy rkgyt hy nkm mbwkm, w atmy hlihy
okxám cyiqym ny vaymyi.

-wl ny píl hy nk pbck -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-w wl w qlhl -haol yn gkióiacl-; w xám ma én xy hk nk dknkftk, glxl
gkfknnytl, hy il kdktqktmy hy ilmlqtlm rkmqk uby myk ibymqtk vlnbiqkh.

-mí hlw -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy, uby qlhl nl ymqkfk ymgbgrkihl-; gbkiql xám,
uby yn uby ymqá yigkiqkhl, glxl wl, il qayiy nafytqkh dktk rkgyt hy mb
dytmlik nl uby ubamayty, dltuby yn uby ny yigkiqó ny dbyhy rkgyt uby il my
xbyvk hy bi nbckt yi qtym macnlm; w ma rbfayty rbahl, ny rktá vlnvyt yi
vlnkihkm. -w uby, dbym ymql ytk kmí, fayi dlhíki mlnqknny, w xám, mayihl
qki yi dtlvygrl hy qlhlm; w hyn il mlnqknny nym dtlqymqkfk uby il dlhík
hyokt hy pkqacknnym yn lnpkql, ma hy knní il my hymvakfki.

qlxóny nk xkil yn gkióiacl, kbiuby nkm qyiík kqkhkm, w, hyfkol hy mb fbyik
py w dknkftk, ny hymyiokbnktli, hy uby én my knyctó aipaiaql w yi ctkihy
xkiytk hy vytmy pbytk hy nk okbnk. w nl dtaxytl uby rael pby ymqatktmy qlhl
yn gbytdl, w nbycl my pby hlihy ymqkfk tlgaikiqy, w, háihlny hlm dknxkhkm
yi nkm kigkm, haol:

-kúi ymdytl yi halm w yi mb fyihaqk xkhty, pnlt w ymdyol hy nlm gkfknnlm,
uby dtymql ilm ryxlm hy vyt nlm hlm gbkn hymykxlm; qú, gli qb myñlt k
gbymqkm; w wl, yigaxk hy qa, yoytgaqkihl yn lpagal dktk uby halm xy ygró kn
xbihl.

w, hagayihl ymql, hli ubaolqy my kdktqó gli mkigrl yi tyxlqk dktqy, hy
hlihy vail xám knavakhl w gli xám hymylm hy dliyt yi lftk nl uby mb
ymgbhytl lthyikmy.

xatáfknl yn gkióiacl, w khxatáfkmy hy vyt nk ymqtkñyek hy mb ctkihy nlgbtk,
w hy uby, yi gbkiql rkfnkfk w tymdlihík, xlmqtkfk qyiyt fliímaxl
yiqyihaxayiql: mlnkxyiqy vyiík k dythyt nlm ymqtaflm, glxl lqtkm vygym my
rk hagrl, yi qtkqáihlny hy gkfknnytík. w kmí, xlvahl hy glxdkmaói, hymdbém
hy rkfytmy myiqkhl qlhlm yi nk vythy wytfk, dktk ymdytkt yn tydbymql hyn
gkióiacl, ny haol:

-¿ym dlmafny, myñlt rahkncl, uby rkwk dlhahl qkiql gli vbymqtk xytgyh nk
kxktck w lgalmk nyqbtk hy nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, uby ny rkwki vbynql yn
obagal hy xlhl uby vyick k gtyyt uby vk yigkiqkhl, gli lqtkm glmkm hymqy
okye, qki nyolm hy myt vythkhytkm glxl nl ymqá nk xymxk xyiqatk hy nk
vythkh? w ¿góxl ym dlmafny uby rkwk yiqyihaxayiql rbxkil uby my hé k
yiqyihyt uby rk rkfahl yi yn xbihl kubynnk aipaiahkh hy kxkhamym, w kubynnk
qbtfkxbnqk hy qkiql pkxlml gkfknnytl, qkiql yxdytkhlt hy qtkdamlihk, qkiql
pynazxktqy hy ratgkiak, qkiql dknkptéi, qkiqk hligynnk kihkiqy, qkiqkm
maytdym, qkiqlm yihtakclm, qkiqlm cackiqym, qkiqkm aikbhaqkm kvyiqbtkm,
qkiql céiytl hy yigkiqkxyiqlm, qkiqkm fkqknnkm, qkiqlm hymkpltkhlm
yigbyiqtlm, qkiqk faekttík hy qtkoym, qkiqkm dtaigymkm yikxltkhkm, qkiqlm
ymgbhytlm glihym, qkiqlm yikilm ctkgalmlm, qkiql fannyqy, qkiql tyubayftl,
qkiqkm xboytym vknayiqym; w, paiknxyiqy, qkiqlm w qki hamdktkqkhlm gkmlm
glxl nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm gliqayiyi? hy xí mé hygat uby, gbkihl nlm
nyl, yi qkiql uby il dlicl nk axkcaikgaói yi dyimkt uby mli qlhlm xyiqatk w
navakihkh, xy hki kncúi gliqyiql; dytl, gbkihl gkacl yi nk gbyiqk hy nl uby
mli, hlw gli yn xyolt hynnlm yi nk dktyh, w kbi haytk gli én yi yn pbycl ma
gytgk l dtymyiqy ny qbvaytk, fayi glxl k xytygyhltym hy qkn dyik, dlt myt
pknmlm w yxfbmqytlm, w pbytk hyn qtkql uby dahy nk glxúi ikqbtknyek, w glxl
k aivyiqltym hy ibyvkm mygqkm w hy ibyvl xlhl hy vahk, w glxl k ubayi hk
lgkmaói uby yn vbncl aciltkiqy vyick k gtyyt w k qyiyt dlt vythkhytkm
qkiqkm iygyhkhym glxl gliqayiyi. w kbi qayiyi qkiql kqtyvaxayiql, uby my
kqtyvyi k qbtfkt nlm aicyialm hy nlm hamgtyqlm w fayi ikgahlm rahknclm,
glxl my ygrk fayi hy vyt dlt nl uby gli vbymqtk xytgyh rki rygrl, dbym ny
rki qtkíhl k qétxailm uby myk pltelml yigyttktny yi bik okbnk, w qtkytny
mlfty bi gkttl hy fbywym, glxl ubayi qtky l nnyvk kncúi nyói l kncúi qacty,
hy nbckt yi nbckt, dktk ckikt gli én hyokihl uby ny vyki. ¡yk, myñlt hli
ubaolqy, hbénkmy hy mí xamxl, w tyhúeckmy kn ctyxal hy nk hamgtygaói, w
mydk bmkt hy nk xbgrk uby yn gaynl pby mytvahl hy hktny, yxdnykihl yn
pynagímaxl qknyiql hy mb aicyial yi lqtk nyqbtk uby tyhbihy yi
kdtlvygrkxayiql hy mb gligayigak w yi kbxyiql hy mb rlitk! w ma qlhkvík,
nnyvkhl hy mb ikqbtkn aignaikgaói, ubamayty nyyt naftlm hy rkekñkm w hy
gkfknnytíkm, nyk yi nk mkgtk ymgtaqbtk yn hy nlm obygym; uby knní rknnktá
vythkhym ctkihalmkm w rygrlm qki vythkhytlm glxl vknayiqym. bi vatakql qbvl
nbmaqkiak; bi gémkt, tlxk; bi kiafkn, gktqkcl; bi knyokihtl, ctygak; bi
glihy pytiái clieánye, gkmqannk; bi gah, vknyigak; bi clieknl pytiáihye,
kihknbgík; bi haycl cktgík hy dktyhym, ymqtyxkhbtk; bi cktga détye hy
vktckm, oytye; bi cktgankml, qlnyhl; bi hli xkibyn hy nyói, myvannk, gbwk
nygaói hy mbm vknytlmlm rygrlm dbyhy yiqtyqyiyt, yimyñkt, hynyaqkt w
khxatkt k nlm xám knqlm aicyialm uby nlm nywytyi. Émqk mí mytá nyqbtk hacik
hyn fbyi yiqyihaxayiql hy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy xíl, hy nk gbkn
mknhtá ytbhaql yi nk ramqltak, yikxltkhl hy nk vatqbh, yimyñkhl yi nk
flihkh, xyoltkhl yi nkm glmqbxftym, vknayiqy mai qyxytahkh, lmkhl mai
glfkthík, w qlhl ymql, dktk rlitk hy halm, dtlvygrl mbwl w pkxk hy nk
xkigrk; hl, mycúi ry mkfahl, qtky vbymqtk xytgyh mb dtaigadal w ltacyi.

kqyiqímaxkxyiqy ymqbvl hli ubaolqy ymgbgrkihl nkm tkeliym hyn gkióiacl; w,
gbkihl val uby wk rkfík dbymql pai k ynnkm, hymdbém hy rkfytny ymqkhl bi
fbyi ymdkgal xatkihl, ny haol:

-dktégyxy, myñlt rahkncl, uby nk dnáqagk hy vbymqtk xytgyh my rk yigkxaikhl
k ubytyt hktxy k yiqyihyt uby il rk rkfahl gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yi yn xbihl,
w uby qlhlm nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm mli pknmlm, xyiqatlmlm, hkñkhltym y
aiúqanym dktk nk tydúfnagk; w uby wl ry rygrl xkn yi nyytnlm, w dylt yi
gtyytnlm, w xám xkn yi axaqktnlm, rkfaéihlxy dbymql k mycbat nk hbtímaxk
dtlpymaói hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy, uby ynnlm yimyñki, iycáihlxy uby il rk
rkfahl yi yn xbihl kxkhamym, ia hy ckbnk ia hy ctygak, ia qlhlm nlm lqtlm
gkfknnytlm hy uby nkm ymgtaqbtkm ymqái nnyikm.

-qlhl ym kn day hy nk nyqtk glxl vbymqtk xytgyh nl vk tynkqkihl -haol k
ymqá mkeói yn gkióiacl.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-kñkhaó qkxfaéi vbymqtk xytgyh, hagayihl uby xy rkfíki rygrl xbgrl hkñl
qknym naftlm, dbym xy rkfíki vbynql yn obagal w dbémqlxy yi bik okbnk, w
uby xy mytík xyolt rkgyt nk yixayihk w xbhkt hy nyqbtk, nywyihl lqtlm xám
vythkhytlm w uby xyolt hynyaqki w yimyñki.

-kmí ym -haol yn gkióiacl.

-dbym wl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy- rknnl dlt xa gbyiqk uby yn mai obagal w yn
yigkiqkhl ym vbymqtk xytgyh, dbym my rk dbymql k hygat qkiqkm fnkmpyxakm
gliqtk bik glmk qki tygyfahk yi yn xbihl, w qyiahk dlt qki vythkhytk, uby
yn uby nk iyckmy, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh nk iayck, xytygík nk xymxk dyik uby
vbymqtk xytgyh hagy uby hk k nlm naftlm gbkihl nlm nyy w ny yipkhki. dltuby
ubytyt hkt k yiqyihyt k ikhay uby kxkhím il pby yi yn xbihl, ia qlhlm nlm
lqtlm gkfknnytlm kvyiqbtytlm hy uby ymqái glnxkhkm nkm ramqltakm, mytá
ubytyt dytmbkhat uby yn mln il knbxftk, ia yn wynl yiptík, ia nk qayttk
mbmqyiqk; dltuby, ¿ubé aicyial dbyhy rkfyt yi yn xbihl uby dbyhk dytmbkhat
k lqtl uby il pby vythkh nl hy nk aipkiqk pnltadym w cbw hy fltclñk, w nl
hy paytkftám gli nk dbyiqy hy xkiqafny, uby mbgyhaó yi yn qayxdl hy
gktnlxkcil; uby vlql k qkn uby ym qkiqk vythkh glxl ym krltk hy hík? w ma
ym xyiqatk, qkxfaéi nl hyfy hy myt uby il rbfl régqlt, ia kubanym, ia nk
cbyttk hy qtlwk, ia nlm hlgy dktym hy ptkigak, ia yn tyw ktqúm hy
aicknkqyttk, uby kihk rkmqk krltk glivytqahl yi gbytvl w ny ymdytki yi mb
tyail dlt xlxyiqlm. w qkxfaéi my kqtyvytái k hygat uby ym xyiqatlmk nk
ramqltak hy cbktail xyeubail, w nk hy nk hyxkihk hyn mkiql ctakn, w uby mli
kdógtaplm nlm kxltym hy hli qtamqái w nk tyaik amyl, glxl nlm hy caiyftk w
nkiektlqy, rkfayihl dytmlikm uby gkma my kgbythki hy rkfyt vamql k nk hbyñk
ubaiqkñlik, uby pby nk xyolt ymgkigakhltk hy vail uby qbvl nk ctki ftyqkñk.
w ym ymql qki kimí, uby xy kgbythl wl uby xy hygík bik xa kcüynk hy dktqym
hy xa dkhty, gbkihl vyík kncbik hbyñk gli qlgkm tyvytyihkm: ''kubénnk,
iayql, my dktygy k nk hbyñk ubaiqkñlik''; hy hlihy ktcbwl wl uby nk hyfaó
hy glilgyt ynnk l, dlt nl xyilm, hyfaó hy kngkiekt k vyt kncúi tyqtkql
mbwl. dbym, ¿ubaéi dlhtá iyckt il myt vythkhytk nk ramqltak hy dayttym w nk
naihk xkcknlik, dbym kbi rkmqk rlw hík my vyy yi nk ktxytík hy nlm tywym nk
gnkvaok gli uby vlnvík kn gkfknnl hy xkhytk, mlfty ubayi afk yn vknayiqy
dayttym dlt nlm katym, uby ym bi dlgl xkwlt uby bi qaxói hy gkttyqk? w
obiql k nk gnkvaok ymqá nk mannk hy fkfaygk, w yi tligymvknnym ymqá yn
gbytil hy tlnhái, qkxkñl glxl bik ctkihy vack: hy hlihy my aipayty uby rbfl
hlgy dktym, uby rbfl dayttym, uby rbfl gahym, w lqtlm gkfknnytlm
myxyokiqym,

   hémqlm uby hagyi nkm cyiqym
   uby k mbm kvyiqbtkm vki.

ma il, híckixy qkxfaéi uby il ym vythkh uby pby gkfknnytl kihkiqy yn
vknayiqy nbmaqkil obki hy xytnl, uby pby k fltclñk w my glxfkqaó yi nk
gabhkh hy tkm gli yn pkxlml myñlt hy grktií, nnkxkhl xlméi dayttym, w
hymdbém, yi nk gabhkh hy fkmanyk, gli xlméi yitauby hy tyxymqái, mknayihl
hy yiqtkxfkm yxdtymkm vyigyhlt w nnyil hy rlitlmk pkxk; w nkm kvyiqbtkm w
hymkpílm uby qkxfaéi kgkfktli yi fltclñk nlm vknayiqym ymdkñlnym dyhtl
fktfk w cbqaytty ubaokhk (hy gbwk kngbtiak wl hygayihl dlt níiyk tygqk hy
vktói), vyigayihl k nlm raolm hyn glihy hy mki dlnl. iaécbyixy, kmaxymxl,
uby il pby k fbmgkt nkm kvyiqbtkm k knyxkiak hli pytikihl hy cbyvktk, hlihy
my glxfkqaó gli xagyt oltcy, gkfknnytl hy nk gkmk hyn hbuby hy kbmqtak;
hacki uby pbytli fbtnk nkm obmqkm hy mbytl hy ubañliym, hyn dkml; nkm
yxdtymkm hy xlméi nbam hy pkngym gliqtk hli clieknl hy cbexái, gkfknnytl
gkmqynnkil, gli lqtkm xbgrkm rkekñkm rygrkm dlt gkfknnytlm gtamqakilm,
hémqlm w hy nlm tyailm ymqtkioytlm, qki kbqéiqagkm w vythkhytkm, uby qltil
k hygat uby yn uby nkm iyckmy gktygytík hy qlhk tkeói w fbyi hamgbtml.

khxatkhl ubyhó yn gkióiacl hy lít nk xyegnk uby hli ubaolqy rkgík hy
vythkhym w xyiqatkm, w hy vyt nk ilqagak uby qyiík hy qlhkm kubynnkm glmkm
qlgkiqym w gligytiayiqym k nlm rygrlm hy mb kihkiqy gkfknnytík; w kmí, ny
tymdlihaó:

-il dbyhl wl iyckt, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby il myk vythkh kncl hy nl uby
vbymqtk xytgyh rk hagrl, ymdygaknxyiqy yi nl uby qlgk k nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym ymdkñlnym; w, kmaxymxl, ubaytl gligyhyt uby rbfl hlgy dktym hy
ptkigak, dytl il ubaytl gtyyt uby ragaytli qlhkm kubynnkm glmkm uby yn
ktelfamdl qbtdíi hynnlm ymgtafy; dltuby nk vythkh hynnl ym uby pbytli
gkfknnytlm ymglcahlm dlt nlm tywym hy ptkigak, k ubayi nnkxktli dktym dlt
myt qlhlm acbknym yi vknlt, yi gknahkh w yi vknyiqík; k nl xyilm, ma il nl
ytki, ytk tkeói uby nl pbymyi w ytk glxl bik tynacaói hy nkm uby krltk my
bmki hy mkiqakcl l hy gknkqtkvk, uby my dtymbdliy uby nlm uby nk dtlpymki
rki hy myt, l hyfyi myt, gkfknnytlm vknytlmlm, vknayiqym w fayi ikgahlm; w,
glxl krltk hagyi gkfknnytl hy mki obki, l hy kngáiqktk, hygíki yi kubyn
qayxdl gkfknnytl hy nlm hlgy dktym, dltuby il pbytli hlgy acbknym nlm uby
dktk ymqk tynacaói xanaqkt my ymglcaytli. yi nl hy uby rbfl gah il rkw
hbhk, ia xyilm fytikthl hyn gktdal, dytl hy uby ragaytli nkm rkekñkm uby
hagyi, gtyl uby nk rkw xbw ctkihy. yi nl lqtl hy nk gnkvaok uby vbymqtk
xytgyh hagy hyn glihy dayttym, w uby ymqá obiql k nk mannk hy fkfaygk yi nk
ktxytík hy nlm tywym, glipayml xa dygkhl; uby mlw qki aciltkiqy, l qki
gltql hy vamqk, uby, kbiuby ry vamql nk mannk, il ry ygrkhl hy vyt nk
gnkvaok, w xám mayihl qki ctkihy glxl vbymqtk xytgyh rk hagrl.

-dbym knní ymqá, mai hbhk kncbik -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-; w, dlt xám myñkm,
hagyi uby ymqá xyqahk yi bik pbihk hy vkubyqk, dltuby il my qlxy hy xlrl.

-qlhl dbyhy myt -tymdlihaó yn gkióiacl-; dytl, dlt nkm óthyiym uby tygyfí,
uby il xy kgbythl rkfytnk vamql. xkm, dbymql uby gligyhk uby ymqá knní, il
dlt yml xy lfnacl k gtyyt nkm ramqltakm hy qkiqlm kxkhamym, ia nkm hy qkiqk
qbtfkxbnqk hy gkfknnytlm glxl dlt krí ilm gbyiqki; ia ym tkeói uby bi
rlxfty glxl vbymqtk xytgyh, qki rlitkhl w hy qki fbyikm dktqym, w hlqkhl hy
qki fbyi yiqyihaxayiql, my hé k yiqyihyt uby mli vythkhytkm qkiqkm w qki
ymqtkñkm nlgbtkm glxl nkm uby ymqái ymgtaqkm yi nlm hamdktkqkhlm naftlm hy
gkfknnytíkm.





gkdíqbnl n. hy nkm hamgtyqkm knqytgkgaliym uby hli ubaolqy w yn gkióiacl
qbvaytli, gli lqtlm mbgymlm


-¡fbyil ymqá yml! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. nlm naftlm uby ymqái axdtymlm
gli nagyigak hy nlm tywym w gli kdtlfkgaói hy kubynnlm k ubayi my
tyxaqaytli, w uby gli cbmql cyiytkn mli nyíhlm w gynyftkhlm hy nlm ctkihym
w hy nlm graglm, hy nlm dlftym w hy nlm taglm, hy nlm nyqtkhlm y
aciltkiqym, hy nlm dnyfywlm w gkfknnytlm, paiknxyiqy, hy qlhl céiytl hy
dytmlikm, hy gbknubayt ymqkhl w glihagaói uby myki, ¿rkfíki hy myt
xyiqatk?; w xám nnyvkihl qkiqk kdktayigak hy vythkh, dbym ilm gbyiqki yn
dkhty, nk xkhty, nk dkqtak, nlm dktayiqym, nk yhkh, yn nbckt w nkm rkekñkm,
dbiql dlt dbiql w hík dlt hík, uby yn qkn gkfknnytl rael, l gkfknnytlm
ragaytli. gknny vbymqtk xytgyh, il hack qkn fnkmpyxak (w gtékxy uby ny
kglimyol yi ymql nl uby hyfy hy rkgyt glxl hamgtyql), mail néknlm, w vytá
yn cbmql uby tygafy hy mb nywyihk. ma il, híckxy: ¿rkw xkwlt gliqyiql uby
vyt, glxl ma haoémyxlm: kubí krltk my xbymqtk hynkiqy hy ilmlqtlm bi ctki
nkcl hy dye ratvayihl k fltflnnliym, w uby kihki ikhkihl w gtbekihl dlt én
xbgrkm mytdayiqym, gbnyftkm w nkcktqlm, w lqtlm xbgrlm céiytlm hy kiaxknym
pytlgym w ymdkiqkfnym, w uby hyn xyhal hyn nkcl mkny bik vle qtamqímaxk uby
hagy: ''qú, gkfknnytl, ubayiubaytk uby mykm, uby yn qyxytlml nkcl ymqám
xatkihl, ma ubaytym kngkiekt yn fayi uby hyfkol hymqkm iyctkm kcbkm my
yigbfty, xbymqtk yn vknlt hy qb pbytqy dygrl w kttóokqy yi xaqkh hy mb
iyctl w yigyihahl naglt; dltuby ma kmí il nl rkgym, il mytám hacil hy vyt
nkm knqkm xktkvannkm uby yi mí yigayttki w gliqayiyi nlm mayqy gkmqannlm hy
nkm mayqy pkhkm uby hyfkol hymqk iyctycbtk wkgyi?'' ¿w uby, kdyikm yn
gkfknnytl il rk kgkfkhl hy lít nk vle qyxytlmk, gbkihl, mai yiqtkt xám yi
gbyiqkm glimacl, mai dliytmy k glimahytkt yn dynactl k uby my dliy, w kbi
mai hymdloktmy hy nk dymkhbxfty hy mbm pbytqym ktxkm, yiglxyiháihlmy k halm
w k mb myñltk, my kttlok yi xaqkh hyn fbnnyiqy nkcl, w, gbkihl il my gkqk
ia mkfy hóihy rk hy dktkt, my rknnk yiqty bilm pnltahlm gkxdlm, gli ubayi
nlm ynímylm il qayiyi uby vyt yi iaicbik glmk? knní ny dktygy uby yn gaynl
ym xám qtkimdktyiqy, w uby yn mln nbgy gli gnktahkh xám ibyvk; lptégymyny k
nlm lolm bik kdkgafny pnltymqk hy qki vythym w ptlihlmlm átflnym glxdbymqk,
uby knyctk k nk vamqk mb vythbtk, w yiqtyqayiy nlm líhlm yn hbngy w il
kdtyihahl gkiql hy nlm dyubyñlm, aipaiaqlm w daiqkhlm dkoktannlm uby dlt
nlm aiqtagkhlm tkxlm vki gtbekihl. kubí hymgbfty bi kttlwbynl, gbwkm
ptymgkm kcbkm, uby níubahlm gtamqknym dktygyi, glttyi mlfty xyibhkm ktyikm
w fnkigkm dyhtyebynkm, uby ltl gytiahl w dbtkm dytnkm myxyoki; kgbnná vyy
bik ktqapagalmk pbyiqy hy okmdy vktakhl w hy naml xátxln glxdbymqk; kgá vyy
lqtk k nl ftbqymgl khltikhk, khlihy nkm xyibhkm gligrkm hy nkm knxyokm, gli
nkm qltgahkm gkmkm fnkigkm w kxktannkm hyn gktkgln, dbymqkm gli lthyi
hymlthyikhk, xyegnkhlm yiqty ynnkm dyhkelm hy gtamqkn nbgayiqy w hy
gliqtkrygrkm ymxytknhkm, rkgyi bik vktakhk nkflt, hy xkiytk uby yn ktqy,
axaqkihl k nk ikqbtknyek, dktygy uby knní nk vyigy. kgbnná hy axdtlvaml my
ny hymgbfty bi pbytqy gkmqannl l vamqlml kngáekt, gbwkm xbtknnkm mli hy
xkgael ltl, nkm knxyikm hy hakxkiqym, nkm dbytqkm hy okgaiqlm; paiknxyiqy,
én ym hy qki khxatkfny glxdlmqbtk uby, gli myt nk xkqytak hy uby ymqá
pltxkhl il xyilm uby hy hakxkiqym, hy gktfbiglm, hy tbfíym, hy dytnkm, hy
ltl w hy ymxytknhkm, ym hy xám ymqaxkgaói mb rygrbtk. w ¿rkw xám uby vyt,
hymdbém hy rkfyt vamql ymql, uby vyt mknat dlt nk dbytqk hyn gkmqannl bi
fbyi iúxytl hy hligynnkm, gbwlm cknkilm w vamqlmlm qtkoym, ma wl xy dbmaymy
krltk k hygatnlm glxl nkm ramqltakm ilm nlm gbyiqki, mytík ibigk kgkfkt; w
qlxkt nbycl nk uby dktygík dtaigadkn hy qlhkm dlt nk xkil kn kqtyvahl
gkfknnytl uby my kttloó yi yn pytvayiqy nkcl, w nnyvktny, mai rkfnktny
dknkftk, hyiqtl hyn tagl kngáekt l gkmqannl, w rkgytny hymibhkt glxl mb
xkhty ny dktaó, w fkñktny gli qyxdnkhkm kcbkm, w nbycl biqktny qlhl gli
lnltlmlm bicüyiqlm, w vymqatny bik gkxamk hy gyihkn hynckhímaxl, qlhk
lnltlmk w dytpbxkhk, w kgbhat lqtk hligynnk w ygrktny bi xkiqói mlfty nlm
rlxftlm, uby, dlt nl xyilm xyilm, hagyi uby mbyny vknyt bik gabhkh, w kbi
xám? ¿ubé ym vyt, dbym, gbkihl ilm gbyiqki uby, qtkm qlhl ymql, ny nnyvki k
lqtk mknk, hlihy rknnk dbymqkm nkm xymkm, gli qkiql gligaytql, uby ubyhk
mbmdyiml w khxatkhl?; ¿ubé, yn vytny ygrkt kcbk k xkilm, qlhk hy áxfkt w hy
lnltlmkm pnltym hamqankhk?; ¿ubé, yn rkgytny myiqkt mlfty bik mannk hy
xktpan?; ¿ubé, vytny mytvat qlhkm nkm hligynnkm, cbkthkihl bi xktkvannlml
manyigal?; ¿ubé, yn qtkytny qkiqk hapytyigak hy xkioktym, qki mkftlmkxyiqy
cbamkhlm, uby il mkfy yn kdyqaql k gbán hyfk hy knktckt nk xkil? ¿gbán mytá
lít nk xúmagk uby yi qkiql uby glxy mbyik, mai mkfytmy ubaéi nk gkiqk ia
khóihy mbyik? ¿w, hymdbém hy nk glxahk kgkfkhk w nkm xymkm knekhkm,
ubyhktmy yn gkfknnytl tyglmqkhl mlfty nk mannk, w ubaeá xliháihlmy nlm
hayiqym, glxl ym glmqbxfty, yiqtkt k hymrltk dlt nk dbytqk hy nk mknk lqtk
xbgrl xám rytxlmk hligynnk uby iaicbik hy nkm dtaxytkm, w myiqktmy kn nkhl
hyn gkfknnytl, w glxyiekt k hktny gbyiqk hy ubé gkmqannl ym kubén, w hy
góxl ynnk ymqá yigkiqkhk yi én, gli lqtkm glmkm uby mbmdyihyi kn gkfknnytl
w khxatki k nlm nywyiqym uby vki nywyihl mb ramqltak? il ubaytl knktcktxy
xám yi ymql, dbym hynnl my dbyhy glnycat uby gbknubaytk dktqy uby my nyk,
hy gbknubaytk ramqltak hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy, rk hy gkbmkt cbmql w xktkvannk
k gbknubaytk uby nk nywyty. w vbymqtk xytgyh gtékxy, w, glxl lqtk vye ny ry
hagrl, nyk ymqlm naftlm, w vytá góxl ny hymqayttki nk xynkiglník uby
qbvayty, w ny xyoltki nk glihagaói, ma kgkml nk qayiy xknk. hy xí mé hygat
uby, hymdbém uby mlw gkfknnytl kihkiqy, mlw vknayiqy, glxyhahl, nafytkn,
fayi gtakhl, cyiytlml, gltqém, kqtyvahl, fnkihl, dkgayiqy, mbptahlt hy
qtkfkolm, hy dtamaliym, hy yigkiqlm; w, kbiuby rk qki dlgl uby xy va
yigyttkhl yi bik okbnk, glxl nlgl, dayiml, dlt yn vknlt hy xa ftkel,
pkvltygaéihlxy yn gaynl w il xy mayihl gliqtktak nk pltqbik, yi dlglm híkm
vytxy tyw hy kncúi tyail, khlihy dbyhk xlmqtkt yn kctkhygaxayiql w
nafytknahkh uby xa dygrl yigayttk. uby, xík py, myñlt, yn dlfty ymqá
airkfanaqkhl hy dlhyt xlmqtkt nk vatqbh hy nafytknahkh gli iaicbil, kbiuby
yi mbxl ctkhl nk dlmyk; w yn kctkhygaxayiql uby mónl glimamqy yi yn hymyl
ym glmk xbytqk, glxl ym xbytqk nk py mai lftkm. dlt ymql ubyttík uby nk
pltqbik xy lptygaymy dtymql kncbik lgkmaói hlihy xy ragaymy yxdytkhlt, dlt
xlmqtkt xa dygrl rkgayihl fayi k xam kxaclm, ymdygaknxyiqy k ymqy dlfty hy
mkigrl dkiek, xa ymgbhytl, uby ym yn xyolt rlxfty hyn xbihl, w ubyttík
hktny bi glihkhl uby ny qyicl xbgrlm híkm rk dtlxyqahl, mail uby qyxl uby
il rk hy qyiyt rkfanahkh dktk clfytikt mb ymqkhl.

gkma ymqkm únqaxkm dknkftkm lwó mkigrl k mb kxl, k ubayi haol:

-qtkfkoy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, yi hktxy ymy glihkhl, qki
dtlxyqahl hy vbymqtk xytgyh glxl hy xí ymdytkhl, uby wl ny dtlxyql uby il
xy pknqy k xí rkfanahkh dktk clfytiktny; w, gbkihl xy pknqkty, wl ry líhl
hygat uby rkw rlxftym yi yn xbihl uby qlxki yi kttyihkxayiql nlm ymqkhlm hy
nlm myñltym, w nym hki bi qkiql gkhk kñl, w ynnlm my qayiyi gbahkhl hyn
clfaytil, w yn myñlt my ymqá k daytik qyihahk, clekihl hy nk tyiqk uby ny
hki, mai gbtktmy hy lqtk glmk;

w kmí rkté wl, w il tydktkté yi qkiql xám gbkiql, mail uby nbycl xy
hymamqaté hy qlhl, w xy clekté xa tyiqk glxl bi hbuby, w knná my nl rkwki.

-yml, rytxkil mkigrl -haol yn gkióiacl-, yiqaéihymy yi gbkiql kn clekt nk
tyiqk; yxdytl, kn khxaiamqtkt obmqagak, rk hy kqyihyt yn myñlt hyn ymqkhl,
w kubí yiqtk nk rkfanahkh w fbyi obagal, w dtaigadknxyiqy nk fbyik
aiqyigaói hy kgytqkt; uby ma émqk pknqk yi nlm dtaigadalm, mayxdty atái
yttkhlm nlm xyhalm w nlm paiym; w kmí mbyny halm kwbhkt kn fbyi hymyl hyn
maxdny glxl hympkvltygyt kn xknl hyn hamgtyql.

-il mé ymkm panlmlpíkm -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek-; xkm mónl mé uby qki dtymql
qbvaymy wl yn glihkhl glxl mkftík tycatny; uby qkiqk knxk qyicl wl glxl
lqtl, w qkiql gbytdl glxl yn uby xám, w qki tyw mytík wl hy xa ymqkhl glxl
gkhk bil hyn mbwl; w, maéihlnl, rktík nl uby ubamaymy; w, rkgayihl nl uby
ubamaymy, rktík xa cbmql; w, rkgayihl xa cbmql, ymqktík gliqyiql; w, yi
ymqkihl bil gliqyiql, il qayiy xám uby hymykt; w, il qyiayihl xám uby
hymykt, kgkfómy; w yn ymqkhl vyick, w k halm w vyáxlilm, glxl haol bi gaycl
k lqtl.

-il mli xknkm panlmlpíkm émkm, glxl qú hagym, mkigrl; dytl, gli qlhl yml,
rkw xbgrl uby hygat mlfty ymqk xkqytak hy glihkhlm.

k nl gbkn tydnagó hli ubaolqy:

-wl il mé uby rkwk xám uby hygat; mónl xy cbíl dlt yn yoyxdnl uby xy hk yn
ctkihy kxkhím hy ckbnk, uby rael k mb ymgbhytl glihy hy nk Íimbnk patxy; w
kmí, dbyhl wl, mai ymgtúdbnl hy gligayigak, rkgyt glihy k mkigrl dkiek, uby
ym bil hy nlm xyoltym ymgbhytlm uby gkfknnytl kihkiqy rk qyiahl.

khxatkhl ubyhó yn gkióiacl hy nlm gligytqkhlm hamdktkqym uby hli ubaolqy
rkfík hagrl, hyn xlhl gli uby rkfík daiqkhl nk kvyiqbtk hyn gkfknnytl hyn
nkcl, hy nk axdtymaói uby yi én rkfíki rygrl nkm dyimkhkm xyiqatkm hy nlm
naftlm uby rkfík nyíhl; w, paiknxyiqy, ny khxatkfk nk iygyhkh hy mkigrl,
uby gli qkiql kríigl hymykfk kngkiekt yn glihkhl uby mb kxl ny rkfík
dtlxyqahl.

wk yi ymql, vlnvíki nlm gtakhlm hyn gkióiacl, uby k nk vyiqk rkfíki ahl dlt
nk kgéxank hyn tydbymql, w, rkgayihl xymk hy bik knrlxftk w hy nk vythy
wytfk hyn dtkhl, k nk mlxftk hy bilm átflnym my myiqktli, w glxaytli knní,
dltuby yn flwytl il dythaymy nk glxlhahkh hy kubyn maqal, glxl ubyhk hagrl.
w, ymqkihl glxayihl, k hymrltk lwytli bi tygal ymqtbyihl w bi mli hy
ymubank, uby dlt yiqty bikm ektekm w ymdymkm xkqkm uby knní obiql ymqkfki
mlikfk, w kn xymxl aimqkiqy vaytli mknat hy yiqty kubynnkm xknyekm bik
rytxlmk gkftk, qlhk nk dayn xkigrkhk hy iyctl, fnkigl w dkthl. qtkm ynnk
vyiík bi gkftytl háihlny vlgym, w hagaéihlny dknkftkm k mb bml, dktk uby my
hyqbvaymy, l kn tyfkñl vlnvaymy. nk pbcaqavk gkftk, qyxytlmk w hymdkvltahk,
my vail k nk cyiqy, glxl k pkvltygytmy hynnk, w knní my hyqbvl. nnycó yn
gkftytl, w, kmaéihlnk hy nlm gbytilm, glxl ma pbytk gkdke hy hamgbtml w
yiqyihaxayiql, ny haol:

-¡kr gyttytk, gyttytk, xkigrkhk, xkigrkhk, w góxl kiháam vlm ymqlm híkm hy
day glol! ¿ubé nlflm lm ymdkiqki, raok? ¿il xy hatéam ubé ym ymql, rytxlmk?
xkm ¡ubé dbyhy myt mail uby mlam ryxftk, w il dlhéam ymqkt mlmyckhk; uby
xkn rkwk vbymqtk glihagaói, w nk hy qlhkm kubynnkm k ubayi axaqáam! vlnvyh,
vlnvyh, kxack; uby ma il qki gliqyiqk, k nl xyilm, ymqktéam xám mycbtk yi
vbymqtl kdtamgl, l gli vbymqtkm glxdkñytkm; uby ma vlm uby nkm rkféam hy
cbkthkt w yigkxaikt kiháam qki mai cbík w qki hymgkxaikhk, ¿yi ubé dlhtái
dktkt ynnkm?

gliqyiql haytli nkm dknkftkm hyn gkftytl k nlm uby nkm lwytli,
ymdygaknxyiqy kn gkióiacl, uby ny haol:

-dlt vahk vbymqtk, rytxkil, uby lm mlmycbéam bi dlgl w il lm kgbgaéam yi
vlnvyt qki dtymql ymk gkftk k mb tyfkñl; uby, dbym ynnk ym ryxftk, glxl vlm
hygím, rk hy mycbat mb ikqbtkn hamqaiql, dlt xám uby vlm lm dlicáam k
ymqltfktnl. qlxkh ymqy flgkhl w fyfyh bik vye, gli uby qyxdnktéam nk
gónytk, w yi qkiql, hymgkimktá nk gkftk.

w yn hygat ymql w yn hktny gli nk dbiqk hyn gbgrannl nlm nlxlm hy bi gliyol
pakxfty, qlhl pby bil. qlxónl w kctkhygaónl yn gkftytl; fyfaó w mlmycómy, w
nbycl haol:

-il ubyttík uby dlt rkfyt wl rkfnkhl gli ymqk knaxkñk qki yi myml, xy
qbvaymyi vbymqtkm xytgyhym dlt rlxfty maxdny; uby yi vythkh uby il gktygyi
hy xamqytal nkm dknkftkm uby ny haoy. túmqagl mlw, dytl il qkiql uby il
yiqayihk góxl my rk hy qtkqkt gli nlm rlxftym w gli nkm fymqakm.

-yml gtyl wl xbw fayi -haol yn gbtk-, uby wk wl mé hy ymdytayigak uby nlm
xliqym gtíki nyqtkhlm w nkm gkfkñkm hy nlm dkmqltym yigayttki panómlplm.

-k nl xyilm, myñlt -tydnagó yn gkftytl-, kglcyi rlxftym ymgktxyiqkhlm; w
dktk uby gtyáam ymqk vythkh w nk qlubéam gli nk xkil, kbiuby dktyegk uby
mai myt tlckhl xy glivahl, ma il lm yipkháam hynnl w ubytéam, myñltym, bi
ftyvy ymdkgal dtymqktxy líhl kqyiql, lm gliqkté bik vythkh uby kgtyhaqy nl
uby ymy myñlt (myñknkihl kn gbtk) rk hagrl, w nk xík.

k ymql tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-dlt vyt uby qayiy ymqy gkml bi il mé ubé hy mlxftk hy kvyiqbtk hy
gkfknnytík, wl, dlt xa dktqy, lm laté, rytxkil, hy xbw fbyik ckik, w kmí nl
rktái qlhlm ymqlm myñltym, dlt nl xbgrl uby qayiyi hy hamgtyqlm w hy myt
kxaclm hy gbtalmkm ilvyhkhym uby mbmdyihki, knyctyi w yiqtyqyicki nlm
myiqahlm, glxl, mai hbhk, dayiml uby nl rk hy rkgyt vbymqtl gbyiql.
glxyiekh, dbym, kxacl, uby qlhlm ymgbgrktyxlm.

-mkgl nk xík -haol mkigrl-; uby wl k kubyn kttlwl xy vlw gli ymqk yxdkikhk,
hlihy dayiml rktqktxy dlt qtym híkm; dltuby ry líhl hygat k xa myñlt hli
ubaolqy uby yn ymgbhytl hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy rk hy glxyt, gbkihl my ny
lptygayty, rkmqk il dlhyt xám, k gkbmk uby my nym mbyny lptygyt yiqtkt
kgkml dlt bik mynvk qki aiqtagkhk uby il kgaytqki k mknat hynnk yi myam
híkm; w ma yn rlxfty il vk rktql, l fayi dtlvyíhkm nkm knpltokm, knní my
dlhtá ubyhkt, glxl xbgrkm vygym my ubyhk, rygrl gktiy xlxak.

-qú ymqám yi nl gaytql, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-: vyqy khlihy ubamaytym, w
glxy nl uby dbhaytym; uby wl wk ymqlw mkqampygrl, w mónl xy pknqk hkt kn
knxk mb typkggaói, glxl my nk hkté ymgbgrkihl yn gbyiql hymqy fbyi rlxfty.

-kmí nkm hktyxlm qlhlm k nkm ibymqtkm -haol yn gkióiacl.

w nbycl, tlcó kn gkftytl uby haymy dtaigadal k nl uby dtlxyqahl rkfík. yn
gkftytl hal hlm dknxkhkm mlfty yn nlxl k nk gkftk, uby dlt nlm gbytilm
qyiík, hagaéihlny:

-tygbémqkqy obiql k xí, xkigrkhk, uby qayxdl ilm ubyhk dktk vlnvyt k
ibymqtl kdytl.

dktygy uby nl yiqyihaó nk gkftk, dltuby, yi myiqáihlmy mb hbyñl, my qyihaó
ynnk obiql k én gli xbgrl mlmaycl, w, xatáihlny kn tlmqtl, hkfk k yiqyihyt
uby ymqkfk kqyiqk k nl uby yn gkftytl afk hagayihl, yn gbkn glxyieó mb
ramqltak hymqk xkiytk:





gkdíqbnl na. uby qtkqk hy nl uby gliqó yn gkftytl k qlhlm nlm uby nnyvkfki
k hli ubaolqy


-«qtym nycbkm hymqy vknny ymqá bik knhyk uby, kbiuby dyubyñk, ym hy nkm xám
tagkm uby rkw yi qlhlm ymqlm gliqltilm; yi nk gbkn rkfík bi nkftkhlt xbw
rlitkhl, w qkiql, uby, kbiuby ym kiyzl kn myt tagl yn myt rlitkhl, xám nl
ytk én dlt nk vatqbh uby qyiík uby dlt nk taubyek uby kngkiekfk. xkm nl uby
ny rkgík xám hagrlml, mycúi én hygík, ytk qyiyt bik raok hy qki ymqtyxkhk
rytxlmbtk, tktk hamgtygaói, hlikaty w vatqbh, uby yn uby nk glilgík w nk
xatkfk my khxatkfk hy vyt nkm ymqtyxkhkm dktqym gli uby yn gaynl w nk
ikqbtknyek nk rkfíki yitaubygahl. mayihl iañk pby rytxlmk, w mayxdty pby
gtygayihl yi fynnyek, w yi nk yhkh hy haye w myam kñlm pby rytxlmímaxk. nk
pkxk hy mb fynnyek my glxyieó k ymqyihyt dlt qlhkm nkm gatgbivygaikm
knhykm, ¿ubé hacl wl dlt nkm gatgbivygaikm il xám, ma my ymqyihaó k nkm
kdktqkhkm gabhkhym, w kbi my yiqtó dlt nkm mknkm hy nlm tywym, w dlt nlm
líhlm hy qlhl céiytl hy cyiqy; uby, glxl k glmk tktk, l glxl k axkcyi hy
xankctlm, hy qlhkm dktqym k vytnk vyiíki? cbktháfknk mb dkhty, w cbktháfkmy
ynnk; uby il rkw gkihkhlm, cbkthkm ia gyttkhbtkm uby xyolt cbkthyi k bik
hligynnk uby nkm hyn tygkql dtldtal.

»nk taubyek hyn dkhty w nk fynnyek hy nk raok xlvaytli k xbgrlm, kmí hyn
dbyfnl glxl pltkmqytlm, k uby dlt xboyt my nk dahaymyi; xkm én, glxl k
ubayi qlgkfk hamdliyt hy qki tagk olwk, kihkfk glipbml, mai mkfyt
hyqytxaiktmy k ubaéi nk yiqtycktík hy nlm aipaiaqlm uby ny axdltqbikfki. w,
yiqty nlm xbgrlm uby qki fbyi hymyl qyiíki, pba wl bil, k ubayi haytli
xbgrkm w ctkihym ymdytkiekm hy fbyi mbgyml glilgyt uby yn dkhty glilgík
ubayi wl ytk, yn myt ikqbtkn hyn xamxl dbyfnl, naxdal yi mkicty, yi nk yhkh
pnltygayiqy, yi nk rkgayihk xbw tagl w yi yn aicyial il xyilm kgkfkhl. gli
qlhkm ymqkm xamxkm dktqym nk dahaó qkxfaéi lqtl hyn xamxl dbyfnl, uby pby
gkbmk hy mbmdyihyt w dliyt yi fknkiek nk vlnbiqkh hyn dkhty, k ubayi
dktygík uby gli gbknubaytk hy ilmlqtlm ymqkfk mb raok fayi yxdnykhk; w, dlt
mknat hymqk glipbmaói, hyqytxaió hygítmynl k nykihtk, uby kmí my nnkxk nk
tagk uby yi xamytak xy qayiy dbymql, khvatqayihl uby, dbym nlm hlm étkxlm
acbknym, ytk fayi hyokt k nk vlnbiqkh hy mb ubytahk raok yn ymglcyt k mb
cbmql: glmk hacik hy axaqkt hy qlhlm nlm dkhtym uby k mbm raolm ubaytyi
dliyt yi ymqkhl: il hacl wl uby nlm hyoyi ymglcyt yi glmkm tbaiym w xknkm,
mail uby my nkm dtldlicki fbyikm, w hy nkm fbyikm, uby ymgloki k mb cbmql.
il mé wl yn uby qbvl nykihtk; mónl mé uby yn dkhty ilm yiqtyqbvl k
yiqtkxflm gli nk dlgk yhkh hy mb raok w gli dknkftkm cyiytknym, uby ia ny
lfnackfki, ia ilm hymlfnackfk qkxdlgl. nnáxkmy xa glxdyqahlt kimynxl, w wl
ybcyial, dltuby vkam gli ilqagak hy nlm ilxftym hy nkm dytmlikm uby yi ymqk
qtkcyhak my gliqayiyi, gbwl pai kúi ymqá dyihayiqy; dytl fayi my hyok
yiqyihyt uby mytá hymkmqtkhl.

»yi ymqk mkeói, vail k ibymqtl dbyfnl bi vagyiqy hy nk tlmk, raol hy bi
dlfty nkftkhlt hyn xamxl nbckt; yn gbkn vagyiqy vyiík hy nkm aqknakm, w hy
lqtkm havytmkm dktqym, hy myt mlnhkhl. nnyvóny hy ibymqtl nbckt, mayihl
xbgrkgrl hy rkmqk hlgy kñlm, bi gkdaqái uby gli mb glxdkñík dlt knní kgytqó
k dkmkt, w vlnvaó yn xlel hy knní k lqtlm hlgy, vymqahl k nk mlnhkhymgk,
daiqkhl gli xan glnltym, nnyil hy xan haoym hy gtamqkn w mbqanym gkhyikm hy
kgytl. rlw my dliík bik cknk w xkñkik lqtk; dytl qlhkm mbqanym, daiqkhkm,
hy dlgl dyml w xyilm qlxl. nk cyiqy nkftkhltk, uby hy mbwl ym xknagalmk, w
háihlny yn lgal nbckt ym nk xamxk xknagak, nl ilqó, w gliqó dbiql dlt dbiql
mbm cknkm w dtymykm, w rknnó uby nlm vymqahlm ytki qtym, hy hapytyiqym
glnltym, gli mbm nackm w xyhakm; dytl én rkgík qkiqlm cbamkhlm y
aivyigaliym hynnkm, uby ma il my nlm gliqktki, rbfaytk ubayi obtktk uby
rkfík rygrl xbymqtk hy xám hy haye dktym hy vymqahlm w hy xám hy vyaiqy
dnbxkoym. w il dktyegk axdytqaiyigak w hyxkmík ymql uby hy nlm vymqahlm vlw
gliqkihl, dltuby ynnlm rkgyi bik fbyik dktqy yi ymqk ramqltak.

»myiqáfkmy yi bi dlwl uby hyfkol hy bi ctki ánkxl ymqá yi ibymqtk dnkek, w
knní ilm qyiík k qlhlm nk flgk kfaytqk, dyihayiqym hy nkm rkekñkm uby ilm
afk gliqkihl. il rkfík qayttk yi qlhl yn ltfy uby il rbfaymy vamql, ia
fkqknnk hlihy il my rbfaymy rknnkhl; rkfík xbytql xám xltlm uby qayiy
xkttbyglm w qúiye, w yiqtkhl yi xám maicbnktym hymkpílm, mycúi én hygík,
uby ckiqy w nbik, haycl cktgík hy dktyhym w lqtlm xan uby ilxftkfk; w hy
qlhlm rkfík mknahl gli vaqltak, mai uby ny rbfaymyi hyttkxkhl bik mlnk clqk
hy mkicty. dlt lqtk dktqy, xlmqtkfk myñknym hy rytahkm uby, kbiuby il my
havamkfki, ilm rkgík yiqyihyt uby ytki ktgkfbekelm hkhlm yi hapytyiqym
tyigbyiqtlm w pkgaliym. paiknxyiqy, gli bik il vamqk kttlckigak, nnkxkfk hy
vlm k mbm acbknym w k nlm xamxlm uby ny glilgíki, w hygík uby mb dkhty ytk
mb ftkel, mb naikoy, mbm lftkm, w uby hyfkol hy myt mlnhkhl, kn xamxl tyw
il hyfík ikhk. kñkhaómyny k ymqkm kttlckigakm myt bi dlgl xúmagl w qlgkt
bik cbaqkttk k nl tkmckhl, hy xkiytk uby hygíki kncbilm uby nk rkgík
rkfnkt; dytl il dktktli kubí mbm ctkgakm, uby qkxfaéi nk qyiík hy dlyqk, w
kmí, hy gkhk iañytík uby dkmkfk yi yn dbyfnl, glxdliík bi tlxkigy hy nycbk
w xyhak hy ymgtaqbtk.

»ymqy mlnhkhl, dbym, uby kubí ry daiqkhl, ymqy vagyiqy hy nk tlmk, ymqy
ftkvl, ymqy cknái, ymqy xúmagl, ymqy dlyqk pby vamql w xatkhl xbgrkm vygym
hy nykihtk, hymhy bik vyiqkik hy mb gkmk uby qyiík nk vamqk k nk dnkek.
yikxltónk yn ltldyn hy mbm vamqlmlm qtkoym, yigkiqátlink mbm tlxkigym, uby
hy gkhk bil uby glxdliík hkfk vyaiqy qtkmnkhlm, nnycktli k mbm líhlm nkm
rkekñkm uby én hy mí xamxl rkfík typytahl, w, paiknxyiqy, uby kmí yn hakfnl
nl hyfík hy qyiyt lthyikhl, ynnk my vail k yikxltkt hén, kiqym uby yi én
ikgaymy dtymbigaói hy mlnagaqknnk. w, glxl yi nlm gkmlm hy kxlt il rkw
iaicbil uby gli xám pkganahkh my gbxdnk uby kubyn uby qayiy hy mb dktqy yn
hymyl hy nk hkxk, gli pkganahkh my gligytqktli nykihtk w vagyiqy; w,
dtaxytl uby kncbil hy mbm xbgrlm dtyqyihayiqym gkwymyi yi nk gbyiqk hy mb
hymyl, wk ynnk ny qyiík gbxdnahl, rkfayihl hyokhl nk gkmk hy mb ubytahl w
kxkhl dkhty, uby xkhty il nk qayiy, w kbmyiqáhlmy hy nk knhyk gli yn
mlnhkhl, uby mknaó gli xám qtabipl hymqk yxdtymk uby hy qlhkm nkm xbgrkm
uby én my kdnagkfk.

»khxató yn mbgyml k qlhk yn knhyk, w kbi k qlhlm nlm uby hén ilqagak
qbvaytli; wl ubyhé mbmdyiml, kimynxl, kqóiaql, yn dkhty qtamqy, mbm
dktayiqym kptyiqkhlm, mlnígaqk nk obmqagak, nlm gbkhtannytlm namqlm;
qlxátlimy nlm gkxailm, ymgbhtañátlimy nlm flmubym w gbkiql rkfík, w, kn
gkfl hy qtym híkm, rknnktli k nk kiqlokhaek nykihtk yi bik gbyvk hy bi
xliqy, hymibhk yi gkxamk, mai xbgrlm haiytlm w dtygalmímaxkm olwkm uby hy
mb gkmk rkfík mkgkhl. vlnvaétlink k nk dtymyigak hyn nkmqaxkhl dkhty;
dtycbiqátliny mb hymctkgak; glipymó mai kdtyxal uby vagyiqy hy nk tlgk nk
rkfík yickñkhl, w hyfkol hy mb dknkftk hy myt mb ymdlml nk dytmbkhaó uby
hyokmy nk gkmk hy mb dkhty; uby én nk nnyvktík k nk xám tagk w xám vagalmk
gabhkh uby rkfík yi qlhl yn biavytml xbihl, uby ytk iádlnym; w uby ynnk,
xkn khvytqahk w dylt yickñkhk, ny rkfík gtyíhl; w, tlfkihl k mb dkhty, my
ny yiqtycó nk xamxk ilgry uby rkfík pknqkhl; w uby én nk nnyvó k bi ámdytl
xliqy, w nk yigyttó yi kubynnk gbyvk hlihy nk rkfíki rknnkhl. gliqó qkxfaéi
glxl yn mlnhkhl, mai ubaqknny mb rlilt, ny tlfó gbkiql qyiík, w nk hyoó yi
kubynnk gbyvk w my pby: mbgyml uby hy ibyvl dbml yi khxatkgaói k qlhlm.

»hbtl my ilm rael hy gtyyt nk gliqaiyigak hyn xlel, dytl ynnk nl kpatxó gli
qkiqkm vytkm, uby pbytli dktqy dktk uby yn hymglimlnkhl dkhty my glimlnkmy,
il rkgayihl gbyiqk hy nkm taubyekm uby ny nnyvkfki, dbym ny rkfíki hyokhl k
mb raok gli nk olwk uby, ma bik vye my daythy, il hyok ymdytkiek hy uby
okxám my glfty. yn xamxl hík uby dktygaó nykihtk nk hymdktygaó mb dkhty hy
ibymqtlm lolm, w nk nnyvó k yigyttkt yi bi xliymqytal hy bik vannk uby ymqá
kubí gytgk, ymdytkihl uby yn qayxdl ckmqy kncbik dktqy hy nk xknk ldaiaói
yi uby mb raok my dbml. nlm dlglm kñlm hy nykihtk matvaytli hy hamgbndk hy
mb gbndk, k nl xyilm gli kubynnlm uby il nym afk kncúi aiqytém yi uby ynnk
pbymy xknk l fbyik; dytl nlm uby glilgíki mb hamgtygaói w xbgrl
yiqyihaxayiql il kqtafbwytli k aciltkigak mb dygkhl, mail k mb hymyivlnqbtk
w k nk ikqbtkn aignaikgaói hy nkm xboytym, uby, dlt nk xkwlt dktqy, mbyny
myt hymkqaikhk w xkn glxdbymqk.

»yigyttkhk nykihtk, ubyhktli nlm lolm hy kimynxl gayclm, k nl xyilm mai
qyiyt glmk uby xatkt uby gliqyiql ny haymy; nlm xílm yi qaiayfnkm, mai nbe
uby k iaicbik glmk hy cbmql nym yigkxaikmy; gli nk kbmyigak hy nykihtk,
gtygík ibymqtk qtamqyek, kdlgáfkmy ibymqtk dkgayigak, xknhygíkxlm nkm cknkm
hyn mlnhkhl w kflxaiáfkxlm hyn dlgl tygkql hyn dkhty hy nykihtk.
paiknxyiqy, kimynxl w wl ilm gligytqkxlm hy hyokt yn knhyk w vyiatilm k
ymqy vknny, hlihy én, kdkgyiqkihl bik ctki gkiqahkh hy lvyokm mbwkm
dtldtakm, w wl bi ibxytlml tyfkñl hy gkftkm, qkxfaéi xíkm, dkmkxlm nk vahk
yiqty nlm átflnym, hkihl vkhl k ibymqtkm dkmaliym, l gkiqkihl obiqlm
knkfkiekm l vaqbdytalm hy nk rytxlmk nykihtk, l mbmdatkihl mlnlm w k mlnkm
glxbiagkihl gli yn gaynl ibymqtkm ubytynnkm.

»k axaqkgaói ibymqtk, lqtlm xbgrlm hy nlm dtyqyihayiqym hy nykihtk my rki
vyiahl k ymqlm ámdytlm xliqym, bmkihl yn xamxl yoytgagal ibymqtl; w mli
qkiqlm, uby dktygy uby ymqy maqal my rk glivytqahl yi nk dkmqltkn ktgkhak,
mycúi ymqá glnxl hy dkmqltym w hy kdtamglm, w il rkw dktqy yi én hlihy il
my lack yn ilxfty hy nk rytxlmk nykihtk. Émqy nk xknhagy w nk nnkxk
kiqlokhaek, vktak w hymrliymqk; kubén nk glihyik dlt págan w nacytk; qkn nk
kfmbynvy w dythlik, w qkn nk obmqagak w vaqbdytk; bil gynyftk mb rytxlmbtk,
lqtl tyiayck hy mb glihagaói, w, yi pai, qlhlm nk hymrlitki, w qlhlm nk
khltki, w hy qlhlm my ymqayihy k qkiql nk nlgbtk, uby rkw ubayi my ubyoy hy
hymhéi mai rkfytnk okxám rkfnkhl, w kbi ubayi my nkxyiqy w mayiqk nk
tkfalmk yipytxyhkh hy nlm gynlm, uby ynnk okxám hal k ikhay; dltuby, glxl
wk qyicl hagrl, kiqym my mbdl mb dygkhl uby mb hymyl. il rkw rbygl hy dyñk,
ia xktcyi hy kttlwl, ia mlxftk hy átfln uby il ymqé lgbdkhk hy kncúi dkmqlt
uby mbm hymvyiqbtkm k nlm katym gbyiqy; yn ygl tydaqy yn ilxfty hy nykihtk
hlihyubaytk uby dbyhk pltxktmy: nykihtk tymbyiki nlm xliqym, nykihtk
xbtxbtki nlm kttlwlm, w nykihtk ilm qayiy k qlhlm mbmdyimlm w yigkiqkhlm,
ymdytkihl mai ymdytkiek w qyxayihl mai mkfyt hy ubé qyxyxlm. yiqty ymqlm
hamdktkqkhlm, yn uby xbymqtk uby xyilm w xám obagal qayiy ym xa glxdyqahlt
kimynxl, yn gbkn, qyiayihl qkiqkm lqtkm glmkm hy uby ubyoktmy, mónl my
ubyok hy kbmyigak; w kn mli hy bi tkfyn, uby khxatkfnyxyiqy qlgk, gli
vytmlm hlihy xbymqtk mb fbyi yiqyihaxayiql, gkiqkihl my ubyok. wl macl lqtl
gkxail xám págan, w k xa dktygyt yn xám kgytqkhl, uby ym hygat xkn hy nk
nacytyek hy nkm xboytym, hy mb aiglimqkigak, hy mb hlfny qtkql, hy mbm
dtlxymkm xbytqkm, hy mb py tlxdahk, w, paiknxyiqy, hyn dlgl hamgbtml uby
qayiyi yi mkfyt glnlgkt mbm dyimkxayiqlm y aiqyigaliym uby qayiyi.» w émqk
pby nk lgkmaói, myñltym, hy nkm dknkftkm w tkeliym uby haoy k ymqk gkftk
gbkihl kubí nnycbé; uby dlt myt ryxftk nk qyicl yi dlgl, kbiuby ym nk xyolt
hy qlhl xa kdytl. Émqk ym nk ramqltak uby dtlxyqí gliqktlm; ma ry mahl yi
yn gliqktnk dtlnaol, il myté yi mytvatlm gltql: gytgk hy kubí qyicl xa
xkokhk, w yi ynnk qyicl ptymgk nygry w xbw mkftlmímaxl ubyml, gli lqtkm
vktakm w mkelikhkm ptbqkm, il xyilm k nk vamqk uby kn cbmql kctkhkfnym.





gkdíqbnl naa. hy nk dyihyigak uby hli ubaolqy qbvl gli yn gkftytl, gli nk
tktk kvyiqbtk hy nlm hygydnaikiqym, k ubayi hal pynagy pai k glmqk hy mb
mbhlt


cyiytkn cbmql gkbmó yn gbyiql hyn gkftytl k qlhlm nlm uby ymgbgrkhl ny
rkfíki; ymdygaknxyiqy ny tygafaó yn gkióiacl, uby gli ymqtkñk gbtalmahkh
ilqó nk xkiytk gli uby ny rkfík gliqkhl, qki nyolm hy dktygyt túmqagl
gkftytl gbki gytgk hy xlmqtktmy hamgtyql gltqymkil; w kmí, haol uby rkfík
hagrl xbw fayi yn gbtk yi hygat uby nlm xliqym gtakfki nyqtkhlm. qlhlm my
lptygaytli k ybcyial; dytl yn uby xám my xlmqtó nafytkn yi ymql pby hli
ubaolqy, uby ny haol:

-dlt gaytql, rytxkil gkftytl, uby ma wl xy rknnktk dlmafanaqkhl hy dlhyt
glxyiekt kncbik kvyiqbtk, uby nbycl nbycl xy dbmaytk yi gkxail dltuby vlm
nk qbvaétkhym fbyik; uby wl mkgktk hyn xliymqytal, hlihy, mai hbhk kncbik,
hyfy hy ymqkt gliqtk mb vlnbiqkh, k nykihtk, k dymkt hy nk kfkhymk w hy
gbkiqlm ubamaytki ymqltfktnl, w lm nk dbmaytk yi vbymqtkm xkilm, dktk uby
ragaétkhym hynnk k qlhk vbymqtk vlnbiqkh w qknkiqy, cbkthkihl, dytl, nkm
nywym hy nk gkfknnytík, uby xkihki uby k iaicbik hligynnk my ny myk pygrl
hymkcbamkhl kncbil; kbiuby wl ymdytl yi halm ibymqtl myñlt uby il rk hy
dlhyt qkiql nk pbytek hy bi yigkiqkhlt xknagalml, uby il dbyhk xám nk hy
lqtl yigkiqkhlt xyolt aiqyigalikhl, w dktk yiqligym lm dtlxyql xa pkvlt w
kwbhk, glxl xy lfnack xa dtlpymaói, uby il ym lqtk ma il ym pkvltygyt k nlm
hymvknahlm w xyiymqytlmlm.

xatóny yn gkftytl, w, glxl val k hli ubaolqy hy qki xkn dynkoy w gkqkhbtk,
khxatómy w dtycbiqó kn fktfytl, uby gytgk hy mí qyiík:

-myñlt, ¿ubaéi ym ymqy rlxfty, uby qkn qknny qayiy w hy qkn xkiytk rkfnk?

-¿ubaéi rk hy myt -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl- mail yn pkxlml hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, hympkgyhlt hy kctkvalm, yihytyekhlt hy qbytqlm, yn kxdktl hy nkm
hligynnkm, yn kmlxftl hy nlm cackiqym w yn vyigyhlt hy nkm fkqknnkm?

-yml xy myxyok -tymdlihaó yn gkftytl- k nl uby my nyy yi nlm naftlm hy
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, uby rkgíki qlhl yml uby hy ymqy rlxfty vbymqtk xytgyh
hagy; dbymql uby dktk xí qyicl, l uby vbymqtk xytgyh my fbtnk, l uby ymqy
cyiqan rlxfty hyfy hy qyiyt vkgílm nlm kdlmyiqlm hy nk gkfyek.

-mlam bi ctkihímaxl fynnkgl -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-; w vlm mlam yn
vkgíl w yn xyicbkhl, uby wl ymqlw xám nnyil uby okxám nl ymqbvl nk xbw
rahydbqk dbqk uby lm dktaó.

w, hagayihl w rkgayihl, kttyfkqó hy bi dki uby obiql k mí qyiík, w hal gli
én kn gkftytl yi qlhl yn tlmqtl, gli qkiqk pbtak, uby ny tyxkgró nkm
iktagym; xkm yn gkftytl, uby il mkfík hy fbtnkm, vayihl gli gbáiqkm vytkm
ny xknqtkqkfki, mai qyiyt tymdyql k nk knrlxftk, ia k nlm xkiqynym, ia k
qlhlm kubynnlm uby glxayihl ymqkfki, mknqó mlfty hli ubaolqy, w, kmaéihlny
hyn gbynnl gli yiqtkxfkm xkilm, il hbhktk hy krlcknny, ma mkigrl dkiek il
nnycktk yi kubyn dbiql, w ny kmaytk dlt nkm ymdknhkm w haytk gli én yigaxk
hy nk xymk, ubyftkihl dnkqlm, tlxdayihl qkekm w hyttkxkihl w ymdktgayihl
gbkiql yi ynnk ymqkfk. hli ubaolqy, uby my val nafty, kgbhaó k mbfatmy
mlfty yn gkftytl; yn gbkn, nnyil hy mkicty yn tlmqtl, xlnahl k glgym hy
mkigrl, kihkfk fbmgkihl k ckqkm kncúi gbgrannl hy nk xymk dktk rkgyt kncbik
mkicbailnyiqk vyickiek, dytl ymqltfáfkimynl yn gkióiacl w yn gbtk; xkm yn
fktfytl rael hy mbytqy uby yn gkftytl glcaó hyfkol hy mí k hli ubaolqy,
mlfty yn gbkn nnlvaó qkiql iúxytl hy xloagliym, uby hyn tlmqtl hyn dlfty
gkfknnytl nnlvík qkiqk mkicty glxl hyn mbwl.

tyvyiqkfki hy tamk yn gkióiacl w yn gbtk, mknqkfki nlm gbkhtannytlm hy
clel, ebekfki nlm bilm w nlm lqtlm, glxl rkgyi k nlm dyttlm gbkihl yi
dyihyigak ymqái qtkfkhlm; mónl mkigrl dkiek my hymymdytkfk, dltuby il my
dlhík hymkmat hy bi gtakhl hyn gkióiacl, uby ny ymqltfkfk uby k mb kxl il
kwbhkmy.

yi tymlnbgaói, ymqkihl qlhlm yi tyclgaol w paymqk, mail nlm hlm kdlttykiqym
uby my gktdíki, lwytli yn mli hy bik qtlxdyqk, qki qtamqy uby nym rael
vlnvyt nlm tlmqtlm rkgak hlihy nym dktygaó uby mlikfk; dytl yn uby xám my
knfltlqó hy lítny pby hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn, kbiuby ymqkfk hyfkol hyn
gkftytl, rktql gliqtk mb vlnbiqkh w xám uby xyhakikxyiqy xlnahl, ny haol:

-rytxkil hyxlial, uby il ym dlmafny uby hyoym hy mytnl, dbym rkm qyiahl
vknlt w pbytekm dktk mboyqkt nkm xíkm, tbéclqy uby rkckxlm qtycbkm, il xám
hy dlt bik rltk; dltuby yn hlnltlml mli hy kubynnk qtlxdyqk uby k ibymqtlm
líhlm nnyck xy dktygy uby k kncbik ibyvk kvyiqbtk xy nnkxk.

yn gkftytl, uby wk ymqkfk gkimkhl hy xlnyt w myt xlnahl, ny hyoó nbycl, w
hli ubaolqy my dbml yi day, vlnvayihl kmaxamxl yn tlmqtl khlihy yn mli my
lík, w val k hymrltk uby dlt bi tygbymql fkokfki xbgrlm rlxftym vymqahlm hy
fnkigl, k xlhl hy hagadnaikiqym.

ytk yn gkml uby kubyn kñl rkfíki nkm ibfym iyckhl mb tlgíl k nk qayttk, w
dlt qlhlm nlm nbcktym hy kubynnk glxktgk my rkgíki dtlgymaliym, tlckqavkm w
hagadnaikm, dahayihl k halm kftaymy nkm xkilm hy mb xamytaglthak w nym
nnlvaymy; w dktk ymqy ypygql nk cyiqy hy bik knhyk uby knní obiql ymqkfk
vyiík yi dtlgymaói k bik hyvlqk ytxaqk uby yi bi tygbymql hy kubyn vknny
rkfík.

hli ubaolqy, uby val nlm ymqtkñlm qtkoym hy nlm hagadnaikiqym, mai dkmktny
dlt nk xyxltak nkm xbgrkm vygym uby nlm rkfík hy rkfyt vamql, my axkcaió
uby ytk glmk hy kvyiqbtk, w uby k én mlnl qlgkfk, glxl k gkfknnytl kihkiqy,
yn kglxyqytnk; w glipatxóny xám ymqk axkcaikgaói dyimkt uby bik axkcyi uby
qtkíki gbfaytqk hy nbql pbymy kncbik dtaigadkn myñltk uby nnyvkfki dlt
pbytek kubynnlm plnnliym w hymglxyhahlm xknkihtaiym; w, glxl ymql ny gkwó
yi nkm xayiqym, gli ctki nacytyek kttyxyqaó k tlgaikiqy, uby dkgayihl
kihkfk, ubaqáihlny hyn kteói yn ptyil w yn khktck, w yi bi dbiql ny
yiptyió, w, dahayihl k mkigrl mb ymdkhk, mbfaó mlfty tlgaikiqy w yxftkeó mb
khktck, w haol yi knqk vle k qlhlm nlm uby dtymyiqym ymqkfki:

-kcltk, vknytlmk glxdkñík, vytyhym gbáiql axdltqk uby rkwk yi yn xbihl
gkfknnytlm uby dtlpymyi nk lthyi hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík; kcltk hacl uby
vytyhym, yi nk nafytqkh hy kubynnk fbyik myñltk uby knní vk gkbqavk, ma my
rki hy ymqaxkt nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, kdtyqó nlm xbmnlm k tlgaikiqy, dltuby ymdbynkm il nkm
qyiík, w, k qlhl cknldy, dltuby gkttytk qatkhk il my nyy yi qlhk ymqk
vythkhytk ramqltak uby okxám nk haymy tlgaikiqy, my pby k yigliqtkt gli nlm
hagadnaikiqym, fayi uby pbytki yn gbtk w yn gkióiacl w fktfytl k hyqyiynny;
xkm il nym pby dlmafny, ia xyilm ny hyqbvaytli nkm vlgym uby mkigrl ny
hkfk, hagayihl:

-¿khóihy vk, myñlt hli ubaolqy? ¿ubé hyxlialm nnyvk yi yn dygrl, uby ny
aigaqki k at gliqtk ibymqtk py gkqónagk? khvaytqk, xkn rkwk wl, uby kubénnk
ym dtlgymaói hy hagadnaikiqym, w uby kubynnk myñltk uby nnyvki mlfty nk
dykik ym nk axkcyi fyihaqímaxk hy nk vatcyi mai xkigannk; xaty, myñlt, nl
uby rkgy, uby dlt ymqk vye my dbyhy hygat uby il ym nl uby mkfy.

pkqacómy yi vkil mkigrl, dltuby mb kxl afk qki dbymql yi nnyckt k nlm
yimkfkikhlm w yi naftkt k nk myñltk yinbqkhk, uby il lwó dknkftk; w, kbiuby
nk lwytk, il vlnvaytk, ma yn tyw my nl xkihktk. nnycó, dbym, k nk
dtlgymaói, w dktó k tlgaikiqy, uby wk nnyvkfk hymyl hy ubayqktmy bi dlgl,
w, gli qbtfkhk w tligk vle, haol:

-vlmlqtlm, uby, ubaeá dlt il myt fbyilm, lm yigbftím nlm tlmqtlm, kqyihyh w
ymgbgrkh nl uby hygatlm ubaytl.

nlm dtaxytlm uby my hyqbvaytli pbytli nlm uby nk axkcyi nnyvkfki; w bil hy
nlm gbkqtl gnétaclm uby gkiqkfki nkm nyhkiíkm, vayihl nk ymqtkñk gkqkhbtk
hy hli ubaolqy, nk pnkubyek hy tlgaikiqy w lqtkm gatgbimqkigakm hy tamk uby
ilqó w hymgbftaó yi hli ubaolqy, ny tymdlihaó hagayihl:

-myñlt rytxkil, ma ilm ubayty hygat kncl, hícknl dtymql, dltuby my vki
ymqlm rytxkilm kftayihl nkm gktiym, w il dlhyxlm, ia ym tkeói uby ilm
hyqyickxlm k lít glmk kncbik, ma wk il ym qki ftyvy uby yi hlm dknkftkm my
hack.

-yi bik nl haté -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, w ym émqk: uby nbycl kn dbiql hyoéam
nafty k ymk rytxlmk myñltk, gbwkm náctaxkm w qtamqy myxfnkiqy hki gnktkm
xbymqtkm uby nk nnyváam gliqtk mb vlnbiqkh w uby kncúi ilqltal hymkcbamkhl
ny rkfyhym pygrl; w wl, uby ikgí yi yn xbihl dktk hympkgyt myxyokiqym
kctkvalm, il glimyiqaté uby bi mlnl dkml khynkiqy dkmy mai hktny nk hymykhk
nafytqkh uby xytygy.

yi ymqkm tkeliym, gkwytli qlhlm nlm uby nkm lwytli uby hli ubaolqy hyfík hy
myt kncúi rlxfty nlgl, w qlxátlimy k tyít xbw hy ckik; gbwk tamk pby dliyt
dónvltk k nk gónytk hy hli ubaolqy, dltuby, mai hygat xám dknkftk, mkgkihl
nk ymdkhk, kttyxyqaó k nkm kihkm. bil hy kubynnlm uby nkm nnyvkfki, hyokihl
nk gktck k mbm glxdkñytlm, mknaó kn yigbyiqtl hy hli ubaolqy, yiktflnkihl
bik rltubannk l fkmqói gli uby mbmqyiqkfk nkm kihkm yi qkiql uby
hymgkimkfk; w, tygafayihl yi ynnk bik ctki gbgrannkhk uby ny qató hli
ubaolqy, gli uby my nk rael hlm dktqym, gli yn únqaxl qytgal, uby ny ubyhó
yi nk xkil, hal qkn clndy k hli ubaolqy yigaxk hy bi rlxftl, dlt yn xamxl
nkhl hy nk ymdkhk, uby il dbhl gbftat yn khktck gliqtk vannkik pbytek, uby
yn dlfty hli ubaolqy vail kn mbynl xbw xkn dktkhl.

mkigrl dkiek, uby okhykihl ny afk k nlm kngkigym, vaéihlny gkíhl, hal vlgym
k mb xlnyhlt uby il ny haymy lqtl dknl, dltuby ytk bi dlfty gkfknnytl
yigkiqkhl, uby il rkfík rygrl xkn k ikhay yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk.
xkm, nl uby hyqbvl kn vannkil il pbytli nkm vlgym hy mkigrl, mail yn vyt
uby hli ubaolqy il fbnník day ia xkil; w kmí, gtywyihl uby ny rkfík xbytql,
gli dtaymk my kneó nk qúiagk k nk gaiqk, w hal k rbat dlt nk gkxdkñk glxl
bi ckxl.

wk yi ymql nnycktli qlhlm nlm hy nk glxdkñík hy hli ubaolqy khlihy én
ymqkfk; w xám nlm hy nk dtlgymaói, uby nlm vaytli vyiat glttayihl, w gli
ynnlm nlm gbkhtannytlm gli mbm fknnymqkm, qyxaytli kncúi xkn mbgyml, w
ragaétlimy qlhlm bi tyxlnail kntyhyhlt hy nk axkcyi; w, knekhlm nlm
gkdatlqym, yxdbñkihl nkm hagadnaikm, w nlm gnétaclm nlm gataknym, ymdytkfki
yn kmknql gli hyqytxaikgaói hy hypyihytmy, w kbi lpyihyt, ma dbhaymyi, k
mbm kglxyqyhltym; dytl nk pltqbik nl rael xyolt uby my dyimkfk, dltuby
mkigrl il rael lqtk glmk uby kttloktmy mlfty yn gbytdl hy mb myñlt,
rkgayihl mlfty én yn xám hlnltlml w tambyñl nnkiql hyn xbihl, gtywyihl uby
ymqkfk xbytql.

yn gbtk pby glilgahl hy lqtl gbtk uby yi nk dtlgymaói vyiík, gbwl
glilgaxayiql dbml yi mlmaycl yn gligyfahl qyxlt hy nlm hlm ymgbkhtliym. yn
dtaxyt gbtk hal kn mycbihl, yi hlm tkeliym, gbyiqk hy ubaéi ytk hli
ubaolqy, w kmí én glxl qlhk nk qbtfk hy nlm hagadnaikiqym pbytli k vyt ma
ymqkfk xbytql yn dlfty gkfknnytl, w lwytli uby mkigrl dkiek, gli náctaxkm
yi nlm lolm, hygík:

-¡lr pnlt hy nk gkfknnytík, uby gli mlnl bi ckttlqkel kgkfkmqy nk gkttytk
hy qbm qki fayi ckmqkhlm kñlm! ¡lr rlitk hy qb naikoy, rlilt w cnltak hy
qlhk nk xkigrk, w kbi hy qlhl yn xbihl, yn gbkn, pknqkihl qú yi én, ubyhktá
nnyil hy xknrygrltym, mai qyxlt hy myt gkmqackhlm hy mbm xknkm pygrltíkm!
¡lr nafytkn mlfty qlhlm nlm knyokihtlm, dbym dlt mlnlm lgrl xymym hy
mytvagal xy qyiíkm hkhk nk xyolt íimbnk uby yn xkt gañy w tlhyk! ¡lr
rbxanhy gli nlm mlfytfalm w kttlckiqy gli nlm rbxanhym, kglxyqyhlt hy
dynactlm, mbptahlt hy kptyiqkm, yikxltkhl mai gkbmk, axaqkhlt hy nlm
fbyilm, kelqy hy nlm xknlm, yiyxacl hy nlm tbaiym, yi pai, gkfknnytl
kihkiqy, uby ym qlhl nl uby hygat my dbyhy!

gli nkm vlgym w cyxahlm hy mkigrl tyvavaó hli ubaolqy, w nk dtaxyt dknkftk
uby haol pby:

-yn uby hy vlm vavy kbmyiqy, hbngímaxk hbngaiyk, k xkwltym xamytakm uby
émqkm ymqá mboyql. kwúhkxy, mkigrl kxacl, k dliytxy mlfty yn gkttl
yigkiqkhl, uby wk il ymqlw dktk ldtaxat nk mannk hy tlgaikiqy, dltuby qyicl
qlhl ymqy rlxftl rygrl dyhkelm.

-yml rkté wl hy xbw fbyik ckik, myñlt xíl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w vlnvkxlm k
xa knhyk yi glxdkñík hymqlm myñltym, uby mb fayi hymyki, w knní hktyxlm
lthyi hy rkgyt lqtk mknahk uby ilm myk hy xám dtlvygrl w pkxk.

-fayi hagym, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w mytá ctki dtbhyigak hyokt
dkmkt yn xkn aipnbol hy nkm ymqtynnkm uby kcltk gltty.

yn gkióiacl w yn gbtk w fktfytl ny haoytli uby rktík xbw fayi yi rkgyt nl
uby hygík; w kmí, rkfayihl tygyfahl ctkihy cbmql hy nkm maxdnagahkhym hy
mkigrl dkiek, dbmaytli k hli ubaolqy yi yn gkttl, glxl kiqym vyiík. nk
dtlgymaói vlnvaó k lthyiktmy w k dtlmycbat mb gkxail; yn gkftytl my
hymdahaó hy qlhlm; nlm gbkhtannytlm il ubamaytli dkmkt khynkiqy, w yn gbtk
nym dkcó nl uby my nym hyfík. yn gkióiacl dahaó kn gbtk ny kvamkmy yn
mbgyml hy hli ubaolqy, ma mkikfk hy mb nlgbtk l ma dtlmycbík yi ynnk, w gli
ymql qlxó nagyigak dktk mycbat mb vakoy. yi pai, qlhlm my havahaytli w
kdktqktli, ubyhkihl mlnlm yn gbtk w fktfytl, hli ubaolqy w dkiek, w yn
fbyil hy tlgaikiqy, uby k qlhl nl uby rkfík vamql ymqkfk gli qkiqk
dkgayigak glxl mb kxl.

yn flwytl bigaó mbm fbywym w kglxlhó k hli ubaolqy mlfty bi rke hy ryil, w
gli mb kglmqbxftkhk pnyxk macbaó yn gkxail uby yn gbtk ubaml, w k gkfl hy
myam híkm nnycktli k nk knhyk hy hli ubaolqy, khlihy yiqtktli yi nk xaqkh
hyn hík, uby kgytqó k myt hlxaicl, w nk cyiqy ymqkfk qlhk yi nk dnkek, dlt
xaqkh hy nk gbkn kqtkvymó yn gkttl hy hli ubaolqy. kgbhaytli qlhlm k vyt nl
uby yi yn gkttl vyiík, w, gbkihl glilgaytli k mb glxdkqtalql, ubyhktli
xktkvannkhlm, w bi xbgrkgrl kgbhaó glttayihl k hkt nkm ibyvkm k mb kxk w k
mb mlftaik hy uby mb qíl w mb myñlt vyiík pnkgl w kxktannl, w qyihahl mlfty
bi xliqói hy ryil w mlfty bi gkttl hy fbywym. glmk hy námqaxk pby lít nlm
ctaqlm uby nkm hlm fbyikm myñltkm knektli, nkm flpyqkhkm uby my haytli, nkm
xknhagaliym uby hy ibyvl ygrktli k nlm xknhaqlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm; qlhl
nl gbkn my tyilvó gbkihl vaytli yiqtkt k hli ubaolqy dlt mbm dbytqkm.

k nkm ibyvkm hymqk vyiahk hy hli ubaolqy, kgbhaó nk xboyt hy mkigrl dkiek,
uby wk rkfík mkfahl uby rkfík ahl gli én matvaéihlny hy ymgbhytl, w, kmí
glxl val k mkigrl, nl dtaxytl uby ny dtycbiqó pby uby ma vyiík fbyil yn
kmil. mkigrl tymdlihaó uby vyiík xyolt uby mb kxl.

-ctkgakm myki hkhkm k halm -tydnagó ynnk-, uby qkiql fayi xy rk rygrl; dytl
gliqkhxy kcltk, kxacl: ¿ubé fayi rkféam mkgkhl hy vbymqtkm ymgbhytíkm?,
¿ubé mkflwkik xy qtkym k xí?, ¿ubé ekdkqaglm k vbymqtlm raolm?

-il qtkacl ikhk hyml -haol mkigrl-, xboyt xík, kbiuby qtkacl lqtkm glmkm hy
xám xlxyiql w glimahytkgaói.

-hyml tygafl wl xbgrl cbmql -tymdlihaó nk xboyt-; xlmqtkhxy ymkm glmkm hy
xám glimahytkgaói w xám xlxyiql, kxacl xíl, uby nkm ubaytl vyt, dktk uby my
xy knycty ymqy gltkeói, uby qki qtamqy w hymgliqyiql rk ymqkhl yi qlhlm nlm
macnlm hy vbymqtk kbmyigak.

-yi gkmk lm nkm xlmqtkté, xboyt -haol dkiek-, w dlt kcltk ymqkh gliqyiqk,
uby, mayihl halm mytvahl hy uby lqtk vye mknckxlm yi vakoy k fbmgkt
kvyiqbtkm, vlm xy vytéam dtymql glihy l clfytikhlt hy bik íimbnk, w il hy
nkm hy dlt krí, mail nk xyolt uby dbyhk rknnktmy.

-ubaétknl kmí yn gaynl, xktahl xíl; uby fayi nl rkfyxlm xyiymqyt. xkm,
hygahxy: ¿ubé ym yml hy íimbnkm, uby il nl yiqayihl?

-il ym nk xayn dktk nk flgk hyn kmil -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; k mb qayxdl nl
vytám, xboyt, w kbi qy khxatktám hy lítqy nnkxkt myñltík hy qlhlm qbm
vkmknnlm.

-¿ubé ym nl uby hygím, mkigrl, hy myñltíkm, íimbnkm w vkmknnlm? -tymdlihaó
obkik dkiek, uby kmí my nnkxkfk nk xboyt hy mkigrl, kbiuby il ytki
dktayiqym, mail dltuby my bmk yi nk xkigrk qlxkt nkm xboytym yn kdynnahl hy
mbm xktahlm.

-il qy kgbgaym, obkik, dlt mkfyt qlhl ymql qki kdtaymk; fkmqk uby qy hacl
vythkh, w glmy nk flgk. mónl qy mkfté hygat, kmí hy dkml, uby il rkw glmk
xám cbmqlmk yi yn xbihl uby myt bi rlxfty rlitkhl ymgbhytl hy bi gkfknnytl
kihkiqy fbmgkhlt hy kvyiqbtkm. fayi ym vythkh uby nkm xám uby my rknnki il
mknyi qki k cbmql glxl yn rlxfty ubyttík, dltuby hy gayiql uby my
yigbyiqtki, nkm ilvyiqk w ibyvy mbynyi mknat kvaymkm w qltgahkm. ménl wl hy
yzdatayigak, dltuby hy kncbikm ry mknahl xkiqykhl, w hy lqtkm xlnahl; dytl,
gli qlhl yml, ym naihk glmk ymdytkt nlm mbgymlm kqtkvymkihl xliqym,
ymgbhtañkihl mynvkm, damkihl dyñkm, vamaqkihl gkmqannlm, knlokihl yi vyiqkm
k qlhk hamgtygaói, mai dkckt, lptygahl myk kn hakfnl, yn xktkvyhí.

qlhkm ymqkm dnáqagkm dkmktli yiqty mkigrl dkiek w obkik dkiek, mb xboyt, yi
qkiql uby yn kxk w mlftaik hy hli ubaolqy ny tygafaytli, w ny hymibhktli, w
ny qyihaytli yi mb kiqacbl nygrl. xatáfknkm én gli lolm kqtkvymkhlm, w il
kgkfkfk hy yiqyihyt yi ubé dktqy ymqkfk. yn gbtk yigktcó k nk mlftaik
qbvaymy ctki gbyiqk gli tycknkt k mb qíl, w uby ymqbvaymyi knytqk hy uby
lqtk vye il my nym ymgkdkmy, gliqkihl nl uby rkfík mahl xyiymqyt dktk
qtkynny k mb gkmk. kubí knektli nkm hlm hy ibyvl nlm ctaqlm kn gaynl; knní
my tyilvktli nkm xknhagaliym hy nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, knní dahaytli kn
gaynl uby glipbihaymy yi yn gyiqtl hyn kfamxl k nlm kbqltym hy qkiqkm
xyiqatkm w hamdktkqym. paiknxyiqy, ynnkm ubyhktli glipbmkm w qyxytlmkm hy
uby my rkfíki hy vyt mai mb kxl w qíl yi yn xymxl dbiql uby qbvaymy kncbik
xyoltík; w mí pby glxl ynnkm my nl axkcaiktli.

dytl yn kbqlt hymqk ramqltak, dbymql uby gli gbtalmahkh w hanacyigak rk
fbmgkhl nlm rygrlm uby hli ubaolqy rael yi mb qytgytk mknahk, il rk dlhahl
rknnkt ilqagak hy ynnkm, k nl xyilm dlt ymgtaqbtkm kbqéiqagkm; mónl nk pkxk
rk cbkthkhl, yi nkm xyxltakm hy nk xkigrk, uby hli ubaolqy, nk qytgytk vye
uby mknaó hy mb gkmk, pby k ektkclek, hlihy my rknnó yi bikm pkxlmkm obmqkm
uby yi kubynnk gabhkh ragaytli, w knní ny dkmktli glmkm hacikm hy mb vknlt
w fbyi yiqyihaxayiql. ia hy mb pai w kgkfkxayiql dbhl kngkiekt glmk kncbik,
ia nk kngkiektk ia mbdaytk ma nk fbyik mbytqy il ny hydktktk bi kiqacbl
xéhagl uby qyiík yi mb dlhyt bik gkok hy dnlxl, uby, mycúi én haol, my
rkfík rknnkhl yi nlm gaxayiqlm hyttafkhlm hy bik kiqacbk ytxaqk uby my
tyilvkfk; yi nk gbkn gkok my rkfíki rknnkhl bilm dytckxailm ymgtaqlm gli
nyqtkm cóqagkm, dytl yi vytmlm gkmqynnkilm, uby gliqyiíki xbgrkm hy mbm
rkekñkm w hkfki ilqagak hy nk rytxlmbtk hy hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, hy nk
pacbtk hy tlgaikiqy, hy nk pahynahkh hy mkigrl dkiek w hy nk mydbnqbtk hyn
xymxl hli ubaolqy, gli hapytyiqym ydaqkpalm w ynlcalm hy mb vahk w
glmqbxftym.

w nlm uby my dbhaytli nyyt w mkgkt yi naxdal pbytli nlm uby kubí dliy yn
pahyhacil kbqlt hymqk ibyvk w okxám vamqk ramqltak. yn gbkn kbqlt il dahy k
nlm uby nk nywytyi, yi dtyxal hyn aixyiml qtkfkol uby ny glmqó aiubytat w
fbmgkt qlhlm nlm ktgravlm xkigryclm, dlt mkgktnk k nbe, mail uby ny hyi yn
xymxl gtéhaql uby mbynyi hkt nlm hamgtyqlm k nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, uby
qki vknahlm kihki yi yn xbihl; uby gli ymql my qyihtá dlt fayi dkckhl w
mkqampygrl, w my kiaxktá k mkgkt w fbmgkt lqtkm, ma il qki vythkhytkm, k nl
xyilm hy qkiqk aivyigaói w dkmkqayxdl.

nkm dknkftkm dtaxytkm uby ymqkfki ymgtaqkm yi yn dytckxail uby my rknnó yi
nk gkok hy dnlxl ytki émqkm:

   nlm kgkhÉxaglm hy nk ktckxkmannk,
   nbckt hy nk xkigrk,
   yi vahk w xbytqy hyn vknytlml
   hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,

rlg mgtadmytbiq:

   yn xliaglicl, kgkhÉxagl hy nk ktckxkmannk,
   k nk mydbnqbtk hy hli ubaolqy

ydaqkpal

   yn gknvkqtbyil uby khltió k nk xkigrk
   hy xám hymdlolm uby okmói hygtyqk;
   yn oüagal uby qbvl nk vynyqk
   kcbhk hlihy pbytk xyolt kigrk,
   yn ftkel uby mb pbytek qkiql yimkigrk,
   uby nnycó hyn gkqkw rkmqk ckyqk,
   nk xbmk xám rlttyihk w xám hamgtyqk
   uby ctkfó vytmlm yi nk ftligíiyk dnkigrk,
   yn uby k glnk hyoó nlm kxkhamym,
   w yi xbw dlubaql k cknkltym qbvl,
   ymqtafkihl yi mb kxlt w faekttík,
   yn uby rael gknnkt nlm fynakiamym,
   kubyn uby yi tlgaikiqy yttkihl kihbvl,
   wkgy hyfkol hymqk nlmk ptík.

hyn dkiakcbkhl, kgkhÉxagl hy nk ktckxkmannk,

ai nkbhyx hbngaiyky hyn qlflml

mliyql

   ymqk uby vyam hy tlmqtl kxlihlickhl,
   knqk hy dygrlm w khyxái ftalml,
   ym hbngaiyk, tyaik hyn qlflml,
   hy ubayi pby yn ctki ubaolqy kpagalikhl.
   damó dlt ynnk yn bil w lqtl nkhl
   hy nk ctki mayttk iyctk, w yn pkxlml
   gkxdl hy xliqïyn, rkmqk yn rytflml
   nnkil hy ktkioüye, k day w gkimkhl.
   gbndk hy tlgaikiqy, ¡lr hbtk ymqtynnk!,
   uby ymqk xkigryck hkxk, w ymqy aivaql
   kihkiqy gkfknnytl, yi qaytilm kñlm,
   ynnk hyoó, xbtayihl, hy myt fynnk;
   w én, kbiuby ubyhk yi xátxltym ymgtaql,
   il dbhl rbat hy kxlt, atkm w yickñlm.

   hyn gkdtagrlml, hamgtyqÍmaxl kgkhÉxagl hy nk ktckxkmannk,
   yi nllt hy tlgaikiqy, gkfknnl hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

mliyql

   yi yn mlfytfal qtlil hakxkiqail
   uby gli mkictayiqkm dnkiqkm rbynnk xktqy,
   ptyiéqagl, yn xkigrycl mb ymqkihktqy
   qtyxlnk gli ympbytel dytyctail.
   gbynck nkm ktxkm w yn kgytl pail
   gli uby hymqtlek, kmbynk, tkok w dktqy:
   ¡ibyvkm dtlyekm!, dytl aivyiqk yn ktqy
   bi ibyvl ymqanl kn ibyvl dknkhail.
   w ma hy mb kxkhím my dtygak ckbnk,
   dlt gbwlm ftkvlm hymgyihayiqym ctygak
   qtabipó xan vygym w mb pkxk yimkigrk,
   rlw k ubaolqy ny gltlik yn kbnk
   hl fynlik dtymahy, w hén my dtygak,
   xám uby ctygak ia ckbnk, nk knqk xkigrk.
   ibigk mbm cnltakm yn lnvahl xkigrk,
   dbym rkmqk tlgaikiqy, yi myt cknnkthl,
   yzgyhy k ftannkhltl w k fkwkthl.

   hyn fbtnkhlt, kgkhÉxagl ktckxkmannymgl,
   k mkigrl dkiek

mliyql

   hyn gkgrahakfnl, kgkhÉxagl hy nk ktckxkmannk,
   yi nk mydbnqbtk hy hli ubaolqy

ydaqkpal

   kubí wkgy yn gkfknnytl,
   fayi xlnahl w xkn kihkiqy,
   k ubayi nnyvó tlgaikiqy
   dlt bil w lqtl myihytl.
   mkigrl dkiek yn xkokhytl
   wkgy qkxfaéi obiql k én,
   ymgbhytl yn xám pïyn
   uby val yn qtkql hy ymgbhytl.

   hyn qaubaqlg, kgkhÉxagl hy nk ktckxkmannk,
   yi nk mydbnqbtk hy hbngaiyk hyn qlflml

ydaqkpal

   tydlmk kubí hbngaiyk;
   w, kbiuby hy gktiym tlnnaek,
   nk vlnvaó yi dlnvl w gyiaek
   nk xbytqy ymdkiqkfny w pyk.
   pby hy gkmqaek tknyk,
   w qbvl kmlxlm hy hkxk;
   hyn ctki ubaolqy pby nnkxk,
   w pby cnltak hy mb knhyk.

Émqlm pbytli nlm vytmlm uby my dbhaytli nyyt; nlm hyxám, dlt ymqkt
gktglxahk nk nyqtk, my yiqtycktli k bi kgkhéxagl dktk uby dlt glioyqbtkm
nlm hygnktkmy. qaéiymy ilqagak uby nl rk rygrl, k glmqk hy xbgrkm vacanakm
w xbgrl qtkfkol, w uby qayiy aiqyigaói hy mkgknnlm k nbe, gli ymdytkiek hy
nk qytgytk mknahk hy hli ubaolqy.

pltma knqtl gkiqytà gli xacnalt dnygqal.

paiam










mycbihk dktqy hyn aicyialml gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk


qkmk

wl, rytikihl hy vknnyol, ymgtafkil hy gáxktk hyn tyw ibymqtl myñlt, hy nlm
uby tymahyi yi mb glimyol, hlw py uby, rkfaéihlmy vamql dlt nlm myñltym hén
bi naftl uby glxdbml xacbyn hy gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk, aiqaqbnkhl hli ubaolqy
hy nk xkigrk, mycbihk dktqy, uby gli nagyigak hy mb xkoymqkh pby axdtyml,
ny qkmktli k gbkqtl xktkvyhím gkhk dnaycl yi dkdyn, yn gbkn qayiy myqyiqk w
qtym dnayclm, uby kn hagrl tymdyql mbxk w xliqk hlgayiqlm w ilvyiqk w hlm
xktkvyhím, w xkihktli uby ymqk qkmk my dlick kn dtaigadal hy gkhk vlnbxyi
hyn hagrl naftl, dktk uby my mydk w yiqayihk nl uby dlt én my rk hy dyhat w
nnyvkt, mai uby my yzgyhk yi ynnl yi xkiytk kncbik, glxl glimqk w dktygy
dlt yn kbql w hygtyql ltacaikn mlfty ynnl hkhl, w uby ubyhk yi xa dlhyt,
k uby xy typaytl; w hy xkihkxayiql hy nlm hagrlm myñltym hyn glimyol w hy
dyhaxayiql hy nk dktqy hyn hagrl xacbyn hy gytvkiqym, ha ymqk pyy yi
xkhtah, k vyaiqy w bil híkm hyn xym hy lqbfty hyn xan w myamgayiqlm w
ubaigy kñlm.

rytikihl hy vknnyol.

pyy hy yttkqkm

va ymqy naftl aiqaqbnkhl mycbihk dktqy hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,
glxdbymql dlt xacbyn hy gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk, w il rkw yi én glmk hacik hy
ilqkt uby il glttymdlihk k mb ltacaikn. hkhk yi xkhtah, k vyaiqy w bil hy
lqbfty, xan w myamgayiqlm w ubaigy.

yn nagyigakhl ptkigamgl xbtgak hy nk nnkik.

kdtlfkgaliym

kdtlfkgaÓi

dlt glxamaói w xkihkhl hy nlm myñltym hyn glimyol, ry rygrl vyt yn naftl
gliqyiahl yi ymqy xyxltakn: il gliqayiy glmk gliqtk nk py ia fbyikm
glmqbxftym, kiqym ym naftl hy xbgrl yiqtyqyiaxayiql nígaql, xyegnkhl hy
xbgrk panlmlpík xltkn; dbéhymyny hkt nagyigak dktk axdtaxatny. yi xkhtah, k
gaigl hy ilvayxfty hy xan myamgayiqlm w ubaigy.

hlgqlt cbqaytty hy gyqaik.

kdtlfkgaÓi

dlt glxamaói w xkihkhl hy nlm myñltym hyn glimyol, ry vamql nk mycbihk
dktqy hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, dlt xacbyn hy gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk: il
gliqayiy glmk gliqtk ibymqtk mkiqk py gkqónagk, ia fbyikm glmqbxftym,
kiqym, xbgrkm hy rliymqk tygtykgaói w kdkgafny havytqaxayiql, uby nlm
kiqacblm obecktli glivyiayiqym k mbm tydúfnagkm, dbym kbi yi nk myvytk hy
nlm nkgyhyxlialm nyvkiqktli ymqkqbk k nk tamk, w nlm hy qymknak nk
hyhagktli paymqkm, glxl nl hagy dkbmkiakm, typytahl hy flmal, naftl aa hy
maciam yggnymaky, gkd. 10, knyiqkihl áiaxlm xktgraqlm w ymdítaqbm
xynkigónaglm, hy uby my kglthó qbnal yi yn dtaxytl hy nycafbm, w yn dlyqk
hagayihl:

aiqytdliy qbam aiqythbx ckbhak gbtam,

nl gbkn rkgy yn kbqlt xyegnkihl nkm vytkm k nkm fbtnkm, nl hbngy k nl
dtlvygrlml w nl xltkn k nl pkgyql, hamaxbnkihl yi yn gyfl hyn hlikaty yn
kiebynl hy nk tydtyryimaói, w gbxdnayihl gli yn kgytqkhl kmbiql yi uby
dtyqyihy nk yzdbnmaói hy nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, dbym gli mb fbyik
hanacyigak xkñlmkxyiqy knaxdakihl hy mb gliqkcalmk hlnyigak k ymqlm tyailm,
ym lftk xbw hacik hy mb ctkihy aicyial, rlitk w nbmqty hy ibymqtk ikgaói,
khxatkgaói w aivahak hy nkm ymqtkñkm. Émqy ym xa dktygyt, mknvl yqg. yi
xkhtah, k 17 hy xktel hy 1615.

yn xkymqtl olmyp hy vknhavaynml.

kdtlfkgaÓi

dlt glxamaói hyn myñlt hlgqlt cbqaytty hy gyqaik, vagktal cyiytkn hymqk
vannk hy xkhtah, gltqy hy mb xkoymqkh, ry vamql ymqy naftl hy nk mycbihk
dktqy hyn aicyialml gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, dlt xacbyn hy
gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk, w il rknnl yi én glmk aihacik hy bi gtamqakil gynl, ia
uby hambyiy hy nk hygyigak hyfahk k fbyi yoyxdnl, ia vatqbhym xltknym;
kiqym, xbgrk ytbhagaói w kdtlvygrkxayiql, kmí yi nk gliqaiyigak hy mb fayi
mycbahl kmbiql dktk yzqatdkt nlm vkilm w xyiqatlmlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm,
gbwl gliqkcal rkfík gbihahl xám hy nl uby pbytk obmql, glxl yi nk nambtk
hyn nyicbkoy gkmqynnkil, il khbnqytkhl gli yipkhlmk w ymqbhakhk kpygqkgaói,
vagal gli tkeói kflttygahl hy rlxftym gbythlm; w yi nk glttygaói hy vagalm
uby cyiytknxyiqy qlgk, lgkmalikhl hy mbm kcbhlm hamgbtmlm, cbkthk gli qkiqk
glthbtk nkm nywym hy tydtyryimaói gtamqakik, uby kubyn uby pbyty qlgkhl hy
nk yipytxyhkh uby dtyqyihy gbtkt, yi nl hbngy w mkftlml hy mbm xyhagaikm
cbmqlmkxyiqy rkftá fyfahl, gbkihl xyilm nl axkcaiy, mai yxdkgrl ia kmgl
kncbil, nl dtlvygrlml hy nk hyqymqkgaói hy mb vagal, gli uby my rknnktá,
uby ym nl xám hapígan hy glimycbatmy, cbmqlml w tydtyryihahl. rk rkfahl
xbgrlm uby, dlt il rkfyt mkfahl qyxdnkt ia xyegnkt k dtldómaql nl úqan gli
nl hbngy, rki hkhl gli qlhl mb xlnymql qtkfkol yi qayttk, dbym il dbhayihl
axaqkt k haócyiym yi nl panómlpl w hlgql, kqtyvahk, dlt il hygat nagyigalmk
w hymknbxftkhkxyiqy, ny dtyqyihyi axaqkt yi nl gíiagl, yiqtycáihlmy k
xknhagayiqym, aivyiqkihl gkmlm uby il dkmktli, dktk rkgyt gkdke kn vagal
uby qlgki hy mb ámdytk tydtyryimaói, w dlt vyiqbtk hymgbftyi gkxailm dktk
mycbatny, rkmqk yiqligym aciltkhlm, gli uby vayiyi k ubyhkt, ma il
tydtyryimltym, k nl xyilm xkymqtlm hén. rágyimy lhalmlm k nlm fayi
yiqyihahlm, gli yn dbyfnl daythyi yn gtéhaql, ma kncbil qbvaytli, dktk
khxaqat mbm ymgtaqlm w nlm vagalm uby kttlokhk y axdtbhyiqyxyiqy ubamaytyi
glttycat yi xbw dylt ymqkhl uby kiqym, uby il qlhkm nkm dlmqyxkm k bi xamxl
qayxdl ymqái hamdbymqkm dktk khxaqat nkm tygyqkm l gkbqytalm; kiqym,
kncbilm xbgrl xyolt tygafyi nkm fnkihkm w mbkvym xyhagaikm, gli gbwk
kdnagkgaói, yn kqyiqkhl w hlgql xéhagl glimacby yn pai hy tymlnvytnkm,
qétxail uby xbgrkm vygym ym xyolt uby il yn uby my kngkiek gli yn taclt hyn
rayttl. fayi hapytyiqy rki myiqahl hy nlm ymgtaqlm hy xacbyn hy
gytvkiqym, kmí ibymqtk ikgaói glxl nkm ymqtkñkm, dbym glxl k xankctl hymyki
vyt yn kbqlt hy naftlm uby gli cyiytkn kdnkbml, kmí dlt mb hygltl w
hygyigak glxl dlt nk mbkvahkh w fnkihbtk hy mbm hamgbtmlm, rki tygyfahl
ymdkñk, ptkigak, aqknak, knyxkiak w pnkihym. gytqapagl gli vythkh uby yi
vyaiqy w gaigl hy pyftytl hymqy kñl hy myamgayiqlm w ubaigy, rkfayihl ahl
yn anbmqtímaxl myñlt hli fytikthl hy mkihlvkn w tlokm, gkthyikn ktelfamdl
hy qlnyhl, xa myñlt, k dkckt nk vamaqk uby k mb anbmqtímaxk rael yn
yxfkokhlt hy ptkigak, uby vail k qtkqkt glmkm qlgkiqym k nlm gkmkxayiqlm hy
mbm dtíigadym w nlm hy ymdkñk, xbgrlm gkfknnytlm ptkigymym, hy nlm uby
vaiaytli kglxdkñkihl kn yxfkokhlt, qki gltqymym glxl yiqyihahlm w kxaclm hy
fbyikm nyqtkm, my nnycktli k xí w k lqtlm gkdynnkiym hyn gkthyikn xa myñlt,
hymylmlm hy mkfyt ubé naftlm hy aicyial kihkfki xám vknahlm; w, qlgkihl
kgkml yi émqy uby wl ymqkfk gyimbtkihl, kdyikm lwytli yn ilxfty hy xacbyn
hy gytvkiqym, gbkihl my glxyiektli k rkgyt nyicbkm, yigktygayihl nk
ymqaxkgaói yi uby, kmí yi ptkigak glxl yi nlm tyailm mbm glipaikiqym, my
qyiíki mbm lftkm: nk cknkqyk, uby kncbil hynnlm qayiy gkma hy xyxltak nk
dtaxytk dktqy hémqk, w nkm ilvynkm. pbytli qkiqlm mbm yigktygaxayiqlm,
uby xy lptygí nnyvktnym uby vaymyi yn kbqlt hynnkm, uby ymqaxktli gli xan
hyxlmqtkgaliym hy vavlm hymylm. dtycbiqátlixy xbw dlt xyilt mb yhkh, mb
dtlpymaói, gknahkh w gkiqahkh. rknnéxy lfnackhl k hygat uby ytk vayol,
mlnhkhl, rahkncl w dlfty, k uby bil tymdlihaó ymqkm pltxknym dknkftkm:
''dbym, ¿k qkn rlxfty il ny qayiy ymdkñk xbw tagl w mbmqyiqkhl hyn ytktal
dúfnagl?'' kgbhaó lqtl hy kubynnlm gkfknnytlm gli ymqy dyimkxayiql w gli
xbgrk kcbhyek, w haol: ''ma iygymahkh ny rk hy lfnackt k ymgtafat, dnyck k
halm uby ibigk qyick kfbihkigak, dktk uby gli mbm lftkm, mayihl én dlfty,
rkck tagl k qlhl yn xbihl''. fayi gtyl uby ymqá, dktk gyimbtk, bi dlgl
nktck; kncbil hatá uby qlgk nlm níxaqym hy namlioytl ynlcal; xkm nk vythkh
hy nl uby gltqkxyiqy hacl hymrkgy yi yn gtíqagl nk mlmdygrk w yi xí yn
gbahkhl; khyxám uby yn hík hy rlw il my namlioyk k ubayi il qayiy gli ubé
gyfkt yn dagl hyn khbnkhlt, uby, kbiuby kpygqblmk w pknmkxyiqy hagy hy
fbtnkm, dtyqyihy myt tyxbiytkhl hy vytkm. yi xkhtah, k vyaiqy w mayqy hy
pyftytl hy xan w myamgayiqlm w ubaigy.

yn nagyigakhl xátubye qlttym.

dtavanycal

dlt gbkiql dlt dktqy hy vlm, xacbyn hy gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk, ilm pby pygrk
tynkgaói uby rkfíkhym glxdbymql nk mycbihk dktqy hy hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, hy nk gbkn rkgíkhym dtymyiqkgaói, w, dlt myt naftl hy ramqltak
kctkhkfny w rliymqk, w rkfytlm glmqkhl xbgrl qtkfkol w ymqbhal, ilm
mbdnagkmqym lm xkihámyxlm hkt nagyigak dktk ny dlhyt axdtaxat w dtavanycal
dlt vyaiqy kñlm, l glxl nk ibymqtk xytgyh pbymy; nl gbkn vamql dlt nlm hyn
ibymqtl glimyol, dlt gbkiql yi yn hagrl naftl my rael nk hanacyigak uby nk
dtyxáqagk dlt ilm mlfty ynnl pygrk hamdliy, pby kglthkhl uby hyfíkxlm
xkihkt hkt ymqk ibymqtk géhbnk yi nk hagrk tkeói, w ilm qbvíxlmnl dlt fayi.
dlt nk gbkn vlm hkxlm nagyigak w pkgbnqkh dktk uby, dlt qayxdl w ymdkgal hy
haye kñlm, gbxdnahlm dtaxytlm macbayiqym, uby glttki w my gbyiqyi hymhy yn
hík hy nk pygrk hy ymqk ibymqtk géhbnk yi khynkiqy, vlm, l nk dytmlik uby
dktk ynnl vbymqtl dlhyt rlfayty, w il lqtk kncbik, dlháam axdtaxat w vyihyt
yn hagrl naftl uby hymbml my rkgy xyigaói; w dlt nk dtymyiqy hkxlm nagyigak
w pkgbnqkh k gbknubayt axdtymlt hy ibymqtlm tyailm uby ilxftátyhym dktk uby
hbtkiqy yn hagrl qayxdl ny dbyhk axdtaxat dlt yn ltacaikn uby yi yn ibymqtl
glimyol my val, uby vk tbftagkhl w patxkhl kn pai hy rytikihl hy vknnyol,
ibymqtl ymgtafkil hy gáxktk, w bil hy nlm uby yi én tymahyi, gli uby kiqym
w dtaxytl uby my vyihk nl qtkacáam kiqy ynnlm, obiqkxyiqy gli yn hagrl
ltacaikn, dktk uby my vyk ma nk hagrk axdtymaói ymqá glipltxy k én, l
qtkacáam py yi dúfnagk pltxk góxl, dlt glttyqlt dlt ilm ilxftkhl, my val w
glttacaó nk hagrk axdtymaói dlt yn hagrl ltacaikn, w xám kn hagrl axdtymlt
uby kimí axdtaxayty yn hagrl naftl il axdtaxk yn dtaigadal w dtaxyt dnaycl
hén, ia yiqtycby xám hy bi mlnl naftl gli yn ltacaikn kn kbqlt w dytmlik k
gbwk glmqk nl axdtaxayty, ia k lqtk kncbik, dktk ypygql hy nk hagrk
glttygaói w qkmk, rkmqk uby kiqym w dtaxytl yn hagrl naftl ymqé glttycahl w
qkmkhl dlt nlm hyn ibymqtl glimyol, w ymqkihl rygrl, w il hy lqtk xkiytk,
dbyhk axdtaxat yn hagrl dtaigadal w dtaxyt dnaycl, yi yn gbkn axyhakqkxyiqy
dlick ymqk ibymqtk nagyigak w nk kdtlfkgaói, qkmk w yttkqkm, ia nl dlháam
vyihyt ia vyiháam vlm ia lqtk dytmlik kncbik, rkmqk uby ymqé yn hagrl naftl
yi nk pltxk mbmlhagrk, ml dyik hy gkyt y aigbttat yi nkm dyikm gliqyiahkm
yi nk hagrk dtyxáqagk w nywym hy ibymqtlm tyailm uby mlfty ynnl hamdliyi; w
xám, uby hbtkiqy yn hagrl qayxdl dytmlik kncbik mai vbymqtk nagyigak il ny
dbyhk axdtaxat ia vyihyt, ml dyik uby yn uby nl axdtaxayty w vyihayty rkwk
dythahl w daythk gbknymubaytk naftlm, xlnhym w kdktyolm uby hén qbvayty, w
xám aigbttk yi dyik hy gaigbyiqk xan xktkvyhím dlt gkhk vye uby nl
gliqtktal ragayty, hy nk gbkn hagrk dyik myk nk qytgak dktqy dktk ibymqtk
gáxktk, w nk lqtk qytgak dktqy dktk yn obye uby nl myiqyigakty, w nk lqtk
qytgak dktqy dkt yn uby nl hyibigakty; w xám k nlm hyn ibymqtl glimyol,
dtymahyiqym, lahltym hy nkm ibymqtkm kbhayigakm, kngknhym, kncbkganym hy nk
ibymqtk gkmk w gltqy w grkigannytíkm, w k lqtkm gbknymubaytk obmqagakm hy
qlhkm nkm gabhkhym, vannkm w nbcktym hy nlm ibymqtlm tyailm w myñltílm, w k
gkhk bil yi mb obtahagaói, kimí k nlm uby kcltk mli glxl k nlm uby mytái hy
kubí khynkiqy, uby vlm cbkthyi w gbxdnki ymqk ibymqtk géhbnk w xytgyh, uby
kimí vlm rkgyxlm, w gliqtk ynnk il vkwki ia dkmyi yi xkiytk kncbik, ml dyik
hy nk ibymqtk xytgyh w hy haye xan xktkvyhím dktk nk ibymqtk gáxktk. hkhk
yi xkhtah, k qtyaiqk híkm hyn xym hy xktel hy xan w myamgayiqlm w ubaigy
kñlm.

wl, yn tyw.

dlt xkihkhl hyn tyw ibymqtl myñlt:

dyhtl hy gliqtytkm.

dtÓnlcl kn nygqlt

¡vánkxy halm, w gli gbáiqk ckik hyfym hy ymqkt ymdytkihl krltk, nygqlt
anbmqty, l ubayt dnyfywl, ymqy dtónlcl, gtywyihl rknnkt yi én vyickiekm,
tañkm w vaqbdytalm hyn kbqlt hyn mycbihl hli ubaolqy; hacl hy kubyn uby
hagyi uby my yicyihtó yi qlthymannkm w ikgaó yi qkttkclik! dbym yi vythkh
uby il qy ry hkt ymqy gliqyiql; uby, dbymql uby nlm kctkvalm hymdaytqki nk
gónytk yi nlm xám rbxanhym dygrlm, yi yn xíl rk hy dkhygyt yzgydgaói ymqk
tycnk. ubamaytkm qú uby nl haytk hyn kmil, hyn xyiqygkql w hyn kqtyvahl,
dytl il xy dkmk dlt yn dyimkxayiql: gkmqícbyny mb dygkhl, gli mb dki my nl
glxk w knná my nl rkwk. nl uby il ry dlhahl hyokt hy myiqat ym uby xy ilqy
hy vayol w hy xkigl, glxl ma rbfaytk mahl yi xa xkil rkfyt hyqyiahl yn
qayxdl, uby il dkmkmy dlt xí, l ma xa xkiubyhkh rbfaytk ikgahl yi kncbik
qkfytik, mail yi nk xám knqk lgkmaói uby vaytli nlm macnlm dkmkhlm, nlm
dtymyiqym, ia ymdytki vyt nlm vyiahytlm. ma xam rytahkm il tymdnkihygyi yi
nlm lolm hy ubayi nkm xatk, mli ymqaxkhkm, k nl xyilm, yi nk ymqaxkgaói hy
nlm uby mkfyi hóihy my glftktli; uby yn mlnhkhl xám fayi dktygy xbytql yi
nk fkqknnk uby nafty yi nk pbck; w ym ymql yi xí hy xkiytk, uby ma krltk xy
dtldbmaytki w pkganaqktki bi axdlmafny, ubamaytk kiqym rkfytxy rknnkhl yi
kubynnk pkggaói dtlhacalmk uby mkil krltk hy xam rytahkm mai rkfytxy
rknnkhl yi ynnk. nkm uby yn mlnhkhl xbymqtk yi yn tlmqtl w yi nlm dygrlm,
ymqtynnkm mli uby cbíki k nlm hyxám kn gaynl hy nk rlitk, w kn hy hymykt nk
obmqk knkfkiek; w rkmy hy khvytqat uby il my ymgtafy gli nkm gkikm, mail
gli yn yiqyihaxayiql, yn gbkn mbyny xyoltktmy gli nlm kñlm.

ry myiqahl qkxfaéi uby xy nnkxy aivahalml, w uby, glxl k aciltkiqy, xy
hymgtafk ubé glmk myk nk aivahak; uby, yi tyknahkh hy vythkh, hy hlm uby
rkw, wl il glilegl mail k nk mkiqk, k nk ilfny w fayi aiqyigalikhk; w,
mayihl ymql kmí, glxl nl ym, il qyicl wl hy dytmycbat k iaicúi mkgythlqy, w
xám ma qayiy dlt kñkhahbtk myt pkxanakt hyn mkiql lpagal; w ma én nl haol
dlt ubayi dktygy uby nl haol, yickñómy hy qlhl yi qlhl: uby hyn qkn khltl
yn aicyial, khxatl nkm lftkm w nk lgbdkgaói gliqaibk w vatqblmk. dytl, yi
ypygql, ny kctkhyegl k ymqy myñlt kbqlt yn hygat uby xam ilvynkm mli xám
mkqítagkm uby yoyxdnktym, dytl uby mli fbyikm; w il nl dbhaytki myt ma il
qbvaytki hy qlhl.

dktégyxy uby xy hagym uby kihl xbw naxaqkhl w uby xy gliqyicl xbgrl yi nlm
qétxailm hy xa xlhymqak, mkfayihl uby il my rk kñkhat kpnagaói kn kpnacahl,
w uby nk uby hyfy hy qyiyt ymqy myñlt mai hbhk ym ctkihy, dbym il lmk
dktygyt k gkxdl kfaytql w kn gaynl gnktl, yigbftayihl mb ilxfty, paicayihl
mb dkqtak, glxl ma rbfaytk rygrl kncbik qtkagaói hy nymk xkoymqkh. ma, dlt
vyiqbtk, nnycktym k glilgytny, hany hy xa dktqy uby il xy qyicl dlt
kctkvakhl: uby fayi mé nl uby mli qyiqkgaliym hyn hyxlial, w uby bik hy nkm
xkwltym ym dliytny k bi rlxfty yi yn yiqyihaxayiql uby dbyhy glxdliyt w
axdtaxat bi naftl, gli uby ckiy qkiqk pkxk glxl haiytlm, w qkiqlm haiytlm
gbkiqk pkxk; w, dktk glipatxkgaói hymql, ubaytl uby yi qb fbyi hlikaty w
ctkgak ny gbyiqym ymqy gbyiql:

«rkfík yi myvannk bi nlgl uby hal yi yn xám ctkgalml hamdktkqy w qyxk uby
hal nlgl yi yn xbihl. w pby uby rael bi gkñbql hy gkñk dbiqakcbhl yi yn
pai, w, yi glcayihl kncúi dyttl yi nk gknny, l yi gbknubaytk lqtk dktqy,
gli yn bi day ny glcík yn mbwl, w yn lqtl ny knekfk gli nk xkil, w glxl
xyolt dlhík ny kglxlhkfk yn gkñbql yi nk dktqy uby, mldnáihlny, ny dliík
tyhlihl glxl bik dynlqk; w, yi qyiaéihlnl hymqk mbytqy, ny hkfk hlm
dknxkhaqkm yi nk fkttack, w ny mlnqkfk, hagayihl k nlm gatgbimqkiqym, uby
mayxdty ytki xbgrlm: ''¿dyimktái vbymqtkm xytgyhym krltk uby ym dlgl
qtkfkol raigrkt bi dyttl?''»

¿dyimktá vbymqtk xytgyh krltk uby ym dlgl qtkfkol rkgyt bi naftl?

w ma ymqy gbyiql il ny gbkhtkty, hatámny, nygqlt kxacl, émqy, uby qkxfaéi
ym hy nlgl w hy dyttl:

«rkfík yi góthlfk lqtl nlgl, uby qyiík dlt glmqbxfty hy qtkyt yigaxk hy nk
gkfyek bi dyhkel hy nlmk hy xátxln, l bi gkiql il xbw navakil, w, yi
qldkihl kncúi dyttl hymgbahkhl, my ny dliík obiql, w k dnlxl hyokfk gkyt
mlfty én yn dyml. kxlraiáfkmy yn dyttl, w, hkihl nkhtahlm w kbnnahlm, il
dktkfk yi qtym gknnym. mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, yiqty nlm dyttlm uby hymgktcó nk
gktck, pby bil bi dyttl hy bi fliyqytl, k ubayi ubytík xbgrl mb hbyñl. fkoó
yn gkiql, halny yi nk gkfyek, kneó yn ctaql yn xlnahl dyttl, valnl w
maiqaónl mb kxl, kmaó hy bik vktk hy xyhat, w mknaó kn nlgl w il ny hyoó
rbyml mkil; w gkhk dknl uby ny hkfk hygík: ''dyttl nkhtói, ¿k xa dlhyigl?
¿il vamqy, gtbyn, uby ytk dlhyigl xa dyttl?'' w, tydaqaéihlny yn ilxfty hy
dlhyigl xbgrkm vygym, yivaó kn nlgl rygrl bik knryñk. ymgktxyiqó yn nlgl w
tyqatómy, w yi xám hy bi xym il mknaó k nk dnkek; kn gkfl hyn gbkn qayxdl,
vlnvaó gli mb aivyigaói w gli xám gktck. nnycáfkmy hlihy ymqkfk yn dyttl,
w, xatáihlny xbw fayi hy raql yi raql, w mai ubytyt ia kqtyvytmy k
hymgktckt nk dayhtk, hygík: ''ymqy ym dlhyigl: ¡cbkthk!'' yi ypyql, qlhlm
gbkiqlm dyttlm qldkfk, kbiuby pbymyi knkilm, l cleubym, hygík uby ytki
dlhyiglm; w kmí, il mlnqó xám yn gkiql.»

ubaeá hy ymqk mbytqy ny dlhtá kgliqygyt k ymqy ramqltakhlt: uby il my
kqtyvytá k mlnqkt xám nk dtymk hy mb aicyial yi naftlm uby, yi mayihl
xknlm, mli xám hbtlm uby nkm dyñkm.

hany qkxfaéi uby hy nk kxyikek uby xy rkgy, uby xy rk hy ubaqkt nk ckikigak
gli mb naftl, il my xy hk bi kthaqy, uby, kglxlháihlxy kn yiqtyxém pkxlml
hy nk dytyihyick, ny tymdlihl uby xy vavk yn vyaiqy w gbkqtl, xa myñlt, w
gtamql gli qlhlm. vavk yn ctki glihy hy nyxlm, gbwk gtamqakihkh w
nafytknahkh, fayi glilgahk, gliqtk qlhlm nlm clndym hy xa gltqk pltqbik xy
qayiy yi day, w vívkxy nk mbxk gktahkh hyn anbmqtímaxl hy qlnyhl, hli
fytikthl hy mkihlvkn w tlokm, w maubaytk il rkwk yxdtyiqkm yi yn xbihl, w
maubaytk my axdtaxki gliqtk xí xám naftlm uby qayiyi nyqtkm nkm gldnkm hy
xaicl tyvbncl. ymqlm hlm dtíigadym, mai uby nlm mlnagaqy khbnkgaói xík ia
lqtl céiytl hy kdnkbml, dlt mlnk mb flihkh, rki qlxkhl k mb gktcl yn
rkgytxy xytgyh w pkvltygytxy; yi nl uby xy qyicl dlt xám hagrlml w xám tagl
uby ma nk pltqbik dlt gkxail lthaiktal xy rbfaytk dbymql yi mb gbxfty. nk
rlitk dbéhynk qyiyt yn dlfty, dytl il yn vagalml; nk dlftyek dbyhy kibfnkt
k nk ilfnyek, dytl il ymgbtygytnk hyn qlhl; dytl, glxl nk vatqbh hé kncbik
nbe hy mí, kbiuby myk dlt nlm aiglivyiayiqym w tymubagalm hy nk ymqtygryek,
vayiy k myt ymqaxkhk hy nlm knqlm w ilfnym ymdítaqbm, w, dlt yn
glimacbayiqy, pkvltygahk.

w il ny hackm xám, ia wl ubaytl hygatqy xám k qa, mail khvytqatqy uby
glimahytym uby ymqk mycbihk dktqy hy hli ubaolqy uby qy lptyegl ym gltqkhk
hyn xamxl ktqípagy w hyn xymxl dkñl uby nk dtaxytk, w uby yi ynnk qy hlw k
hli ubaolqy hankqkhl, w, paiknxyiqy, xbytql w mydbnqkhl, dltuby iaicbil my
kqtyvk k nyvkiqktny ibyvlm qymqaxlialm, dbym fkmqki nlm dkmkhlm w fkmqk
qkxfaéi uby bi rlxfty rlitkhl rkwk hkhl ilqagak hymqkm hamgtyqkm nlgbtkm,
mai ubytyt hy ibyvl yiqtktmy yi ynnkm: uby nk kfbihkigak hy nkm glmkm,
kbiuby myki fbyikm, rkgy uby il my ymqaxyi, w nk gktymqík, kbi hy nkm
xknkm, my ymqaxk yi kncl. lnvíhkmyxy hy hygatqy uby ymdytym yn dytmanym,
uby wk ymqlw kgkfkihl, w nk mycbihk dktqy hy cknkqyk.

hyhagkqltak, kn glihy hy nyxlm

yivakihl k vbymqtk yzgynyigak nlm híkm dkmkhlm xam glxyhakm, kiqym axdtymkm
uby tydtymyiqkhkm, ma fayi xy kgbythl, haoy uby hli ubaolqy ubyhkfk
gknekhkm nkm ymdbynkm dktk at k fymkt nkm xkilm k vbymqtk yzgynyigak; w
krltk hacl uby my nkm rk gknekhl w my rk dbymql yi gkxail, w ma én knná
nnyck, xy dktygy uby rkfté rygrl kncúi mytvagal k vbymqtk yzgynyigak,
dltuby ym xbgrk nk dtaymk uby hy aipaiaqkm dktqym xy hki k uby ny yivíy
dktk ubaqkt yn ráxkcl w nk iábmyk uby rk gkbmkhl lqtl hli ubaolqy, uby, gli
ilxfty hy mycbihk dktqy, my rk hamptkekhl w glttahl dlt yn ltfy; w yn uby
xám rk xlmqtkhl hymyktny rk mahl yn ctkihy yxdytkhlt hy nk graik, dbym yi
nyicbk graiymgk rkftá bi xym uby xy ymgtafaó bik gktqk gli bi dtldal,
dahaéihlxy, l, dlt xyolt hygat, mbdnagáihlxy my ny yivakmy, dltuby ubytík
pbihkt bi glnycal hlihy my nywymy nk nyicbk gkmqynnkik, w ubytík uby yn
naftl uby my nywymy pbymy yn hy nk ramqltak hy hli ubaolqy. obiqkxyiqy gli
ymql, xy hygík uby pbymy wl k myt yn tygqlt hyn qkn glnycal.

dtycbiqény kn dltqkhlt ma mb xkoymqkh ny rkfík hkhl dktk xí kncbik kwbhk hy
glmqk. tymdlihaóxy uby ia dlt dyimkxayiql. ''dbym, rytxkil -ny tymdlihí
wl-, vlm lm dlhéam vlnvyt k vbymqtk graik k nkm haye, l k nkm vyaiqy, l k
nkm uby vyiím hymdkgrkhl, dltuby wl il ymqlw gli mknbh dktk dliytxy yi qki
nktcl vakoy; khyxám uby, mlfty ymqkt yipytxl, ymqlw xbw mai haiytlm, w
yxdytkhlt dlt yxdytkhlt, w xliktgk dlt xliktgk, yi iádlnym qyicl kn ctkihy
glihy hy nyxlm, uby, mai qkiqlm qaqbnannlm hy glnycalm ia tygqltíkm, xy
mbmqyiqk, xy kxdktk w rkgy xám xytgyh uby nk uby wl kgaytql k hymykt''.

gli ymql ny hymdyhí, w gli ymql xy hymdahl, lptygayihl k vbymqtk yzgynyigak
nlm qtkfkolm hy dytmanym w macamxbihk, naftl k ubayi hkté pai hyiqtl hy
gbkqtl xymym, hyl vlnyiqy; yn gbkn rk hy myt l yn xám xknl l yn xyolt uby
yi ibymqtk nyicbk my rkwk glxdbymql, ubaytl hygat hy nlm hy
yiqtyqyiaxayiql; w hacl uby xy kttydayiql hy rkfyt hagrl yn xám xknl,
dltuby, mycúi nk ldaiaói hy xam kxaclm, rk hy nnyckt kn ymqtyxl hy flihkh
dlmafny.

vyick vbymqtk yzgynyigak gli nk mknbh uby ym hymykhl; uby wk ymqktá
dytmanym dktk fymktny nkm xkilm, w wl nlm daym, glxl gtakhl uby mlw hy
vbymqtk yzgynyigak. hy xkhtah, únqaxl hy lqbfty hy xan myamgayiqlm w
ubaigy.

gtakhl hy vbymqtk yzgynyigak,

xacbyn hy gytvkiqym mkkvyhtk.





gkdíqbnl dtaxytl. hy nl uby yn gbtk w yn fktfytl dkmktli gli hli ubaolqy
gytgk hy mb yipytxyhkh


gbyiqk gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna, yi nk mycbihk dktqy hymqk ramqltak w qytgytk
mknahk hy hli ubaolqy, uby yn gbtk w yn fktfytl my ymqbvaytli gkma bi xym
mai vytny, dlt il tyilvktny w qtkytny k nk xyxltak nkm glmkm dkmkhkm; dytl
il dlt ymql hyoktli hy vamaqkt k mb mlftaik w k mb kxk, yigktcáihlnkm
qbvaymyi gbyiqk gli tycknktny, háihlny k glxyt glmkm glipltqkqavkm w
kdtldakhkm dktk yn gltkeói w yn gynyftl, hy hlihy dtlgyhík, mycúi fbyi
hamgbtml, qlhk mb xknk vyiqbtk. nkm gbknym haoytli uby kmí nl rkgíki, w nl
rktíki, gli nk vlnbiqkh w gbahkhl dlmafny, dltuby ygrkfki hy vyt uby mb
myñlt dlt xlxyiqlm afk hkihl xbymqtkm hy ymqkt yi mb yiqytl obagal; hy nl
gbkn tygafaytli nlm hlm ctki gliqyiql, dlt dktygytnym uby rkfíki kgytqkhl
yi rkfytny qtkíhl yigkiqkhl yi yn gkttl hy nlm fbywym, glxl my gliqó yi nk
dtaxytk dktqy hymqk qki ctkihy glxl dbiqbkn ramqltak, yi mb únqaxl
gkdíqbnl. w kmí, hyqytxaiktli hy vamaqktny w rkgyt ymdytayigak hy mb
xyoltík, kbiuby qyiíki gkma dlt axdlmafny uby nk qbvaymy, w kglthktli hy il
qlgktny yi iaicúi dbiql hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, dlt il dliytmy k dynactl
hy hymglmyt nlm hy nk rytahk, uby qki qaytilm ymqkfki.

vamaqátliny, yi pai, w rknnátliny myiqkhl yi nk gkxk, vymqahk bik knxannk
hy fkwyqk vythy, gli bi fliyqy glnltkhl qlnyhkil; w ymqkfk qki mygl w
kxlokxkhl, uby il dktygík mail rygrl hy gktiy xlxak. pbytli hén xbw fayi
tygyfahlm, dtycbiqátliny dlt mb mknbh, w én hal gbyiqk hy mí w hy ynnk gli
xbgrl obagal w gli xbw ynyckiqym dknkftkm; w yi yn hamgbtml hy mb dnáqagk
vaiaytli k qtkqkt yi ymql uby nnkxki tkeói hy ymqkhl w xlhlm hy clfaytil,
yixyihkihl ymqy kfbml w glihyikihl kubén, typltxkihl bik glmqbxfty w
hymqyttkihl lqtk, rkgaéihlmy gkhk bil hy nlm qtym bi ibyvl nycamnkhlt, bi
nagbtcl xlhytil l bi mlnói pnkxkiqy; w hy qkn xkiytk tyilvktli nk
tydúfnagk, uby il dktygaó mail uby nk rkfíki dbymql yi bik ptkcbk, w mkgkhl
lqtk hy nk uby dbmaytli; w rkfnó hli ubaolqy gli qkiqk hamgtygaói yi qlhkm
nkm xkqytakm uby my qlgktli, uby nlm hlm ymkxaikhltym gtywytli
aihbfaqkhkxyiqy uby ymqkfk hyn qlhl fbyil w yi mb yiqytl obagal.

rknnátlimy dtymyiqym k nk dnáqagk nk mlftaik w kxk, w il my rktqkfki hy hkt
ctkgakm k halm hy vyt k mb myñlt gli qki fbyi yiqyihaxayiql; dytl yn gbtk,
xbhkihl yn dtldómaql dtaxytl, uby ytk hy il qlgktny yi glmk hy gkfknnytíkm,
ubaml rkgyt hy qlhl yi qlhl ymdytayigak ma nk mkiahkh hy hli ubaolqy ytk
pknmk l vythkhytk, w kmí, hy nkigy yi nkigy, vail k gliqkt kncbikm ibyvkm
uby rkfíki vyiahl hy nk gltqy; w, yiqty lqtkm, haol uby my qyiík dlt gaytql
uby yn qbtgl fkokfk gli bik dlhytlmk ktxkhk, w uby il my mkfík mb hymacial,
ia khóihy rkfík hy hymgktckt qki ctki ibfnkhl; w, gli ymqy qyxlt, gli uby
gkma gkhk kñl ilm qlgk ktxk, ymqkfk dbymqk yi ynnk qlhk nk gtamqakihkh, w
mb xkoymqkh rkfík rygrl dtlvyyt nkm glmqkm hy iádlnym w maganak w nk amnk
hy xknqk. k ymql tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-mb xkoymqkh rk rygrl glxl dtbhyiqímaxl cbyttytl yi dtlvyyt mbm ymqkhlm gli
qayxdl, dltuby il ny rknny hymkdytgyfahl yn yiyxacl; dytl ma my qlxktk xa
glimyol, kglimyoátkny wl uby bmktk hy bik dtyvyigaói, hy nk gbkn mb
xkoymqkh nk rltk hy kcltk hyfy ymqkt xbw koyil hy dyimkt yi ynnk.

kdyikm lwó ymql yn gbtk, gbkihl haol yiqty mí:

-¡halm qy qyick hy mb xkil, dlfty hli ubaolqy: uby xy dktygy uby qy
hymdyñkm hy nk knqk gbxfty hy qb nlgbtk rkmqk yn dtlpbihl kfamxl hy qb
maxdnagahkh!

xkm yn fktfytl, uby wk rkfík hkhl yi yn xymxl dyimkxayiql uby yn gbtk,
dtycbiqó k hli ubaolqy gbán ytk nk khvytqyigak hy nk dtyvyigaói uby hygík
ytk fayi my ragaymy; ubaeá dlhtík myt qkn, uby my dbmaymy yi nk namqk hy
nlm xbgrlm khvytqaxayiqlm axdytqaiyiqym uby my mbynyi hkt k nlm dtíigadym.

-yn xíl, myñlt tkdkhlt -haol hli ubaolqy-, il mytá axdytqaiyiqy, mail
dytqyiygayiqy.

-il nl hacl dlt qkiql -tydnagó yn fktfytl-, mail dltuby qayiy xlmqtkhl nk
ymdytayigak uby qlhlm l nlm xám ktfaqtalm uby my hki k mb xkoymqkh, l mli
axdlmafnym, l hamdktkqkhlm, l yi hkñl hyn tyw l hyn tyail.

-dbym yn xíl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- ia ym axdlmafny ia hamdktkqkhl, mail
yn xám págan, yn xám obmql w yn xám xkñytl w ftyvy uby dbyhy gkfyt yi
dyimkxayiql hy ktfaqtkiqy kncbil.

-wk qkthk yi hygatny vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy -haol yn gbtk.

-il ubyttík -haol hli ubaolqy- uby ny haoymy wl kubí kcltk, w kxkiygaymy
xkñkik yi nlm líhlm hy nlm myñltym glimyoytlm, w my nnyvkmy lqtl nkm
ctkgakm w yn dtyxal hy xa qtkfkol.

-dlt xí -haol yn fktfytl-, hlw nk dknkftk, dktk kubí w dktk hynkiqy hy
halm, hy il hygat nl uby vbymqtk xytgyh haoyty k tyw ia k tluby, ia k
rlxfty qyttyikn, obtkxyiql uby kdtyihí hyn tlxkigy hyn gbtk uby yi yn
dtypkgal kvamó kn tyw hyn nkhtói uby ny rkfík tlfkhl nkm gayi hlfnkm w nk
mb xbnk nk kihktayck.

-il mé ramqltakm -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl mé uby ym fbyil ymy obtkxyiql, yi
pyy hy uby mé uby ym rlxfty hy fayi yn myñlt fktfytl.

-gbkihl il nl pbytk -haol yn gbtk-, wl ny kflil w mkncl dlt én, uby yi ymqy
gkml il rkfnktá xám uby bi xbhl, ml dyik hy dkckt nl obeckhl w myiqyigakhl.

-w k vbymqtk xytgyh, ¿ubaéi ny pík, myñlt gbtk? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-xa dtlpymaói -tymdlihaó yn gbtk-, uby ym hy cbkthkt mygtyql.

-¡gbytdl hy qkn! -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-. ¿rkw xám, mail xkihkt mb
xkoymqkh dlt dúfnagl dtycói uby my obiqyi yi nk gltqy dktk bi hík myñknkhl
qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym uby vkcki dlt ymdkñk; uby, kbiuby il vaiaymyi
mail xyhak hlgyik, qkn dlhtík vyiat yiqty ynnlm, uby mlnl fkmqkmy k
hymqtbat qlhk nk dlqymqkh hyn qbtgl? ymqéixy vbymqtkm xytgyhym kqyiqlm, w
vkwki glixacl. ¿dlt vyiqbtk ym glmk ibyvk hymrkgyt bi mlnl gkfknnytl
kihkiqy bi yoétgaql hy hlgayiqlm xan rlxftym, glxl ma qlhlm obiqlm qbvaytki
bik mlnk cktckiqk, l pbytki rygrlm hy knpyiauby? ma il, híckixy: ¿gbáiqkm
ramqltakm ymqái nnyikm hymqkm xktkvannkm? ¡rkfík, yi rltk xknk dktk xí, uby
il ubaytl hygat dktk lqtl, hy vavat rlw yn pkxlml hli fynakiím, l kncbil hy
nlm hyn aibxytkfny naikoy hy kxkhím hy ckbnk; uby ma kncbil hémqlm rlw
vavaytk w gli yn qbtgl my kptliqktk, k pyy uby il ny kttyihktk nk ckikigak!
dytl halm xatktá dlt mb dbyfnl, w hydktktá kncbil uby, ma il qki ftkvl glxl
nlm dkmkhlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm, k nl xyilm il nym mytá aipytalt yi yn
áiaxl; w halm xy yiqayihy, w il hacl xám.

-¡kw! -haol k ymqy dbiql nk mlftaik-; ¡uby xy xkqyi ma il ubayty xa myñlt
vlnvyt k myt gkfknnytl kihkiqy!

k nl uby haol hli ubaolqy:

-gkfknnytl kihkiqy ry hy xltat, w fkoy l mbfk yn qbtgl gbkihl én ubamayty w
gbki dlhytlmkxyiqy dbhayty; uby lqtk vye hacl uby halm xy yiqayihy.

k ymqk mkeói haol yn fktfytl:

-mbdnagl k vbymqtkm xytgyhym uby my xy hé nagyigak dktk gliqkt bi gbyiql
ftyvy uby mbgyhaó yi myvannk, uby, dlt vyiat kubí glxl hy xlnhy, xy hk ckik
hy gliqktny.

hal nk nagyigak hli ubaolqy, w yn gbtk w nlm hyxám ny dtymqktli kqyigaói, w
én glxyieó hymqk xkiytk:

-«yi nk gkmk hy nlm nlglm hy myvannk ymqkfk bi rlxfty k ubayi mbm dktayiqym
rkfíki dbymql knní dlt pknql hy obagal. ytk ctkhbkhl yi gáiliym dlt lmbik,
dytl, kbiuby nl pbytk dlt mknkxkigk, mycúi ldaiaói hy xbgrlm, il hyoktk hy
myt nlgl. ymqy qkn ctkhbkhl, kn gkfl hy kncbilm kñlm hy tyglcaxayiql, my
hal k yiqyihyt uby ymqkfk gbythl w yi mb yiqytl obagal, w gli ymqk
axkcaikgaói ymgtafaó kn ktelfamdl, mbdnagáihlny yigktygahkxyiqy w gli xbw
gligytqkhkm tkeliym ny xkihkmy mkgkt hy kubynnk xamytak yi uby vavík, dbym
dlt nk xamytaglthak hy halm rkfík wk glftkhl yn obagal dythahl; dytl uby
mbm dktayiqym, dlt clekt hy nk dktqy hy mb rkgayihk, ny qyiíki knní, w, k
dymkt hy nk vythkh, ubytíki uby pbymy nlgl rkmqk nk xbytqy.

»yn ktelfamdl, dytmbkhahl hy xbgrlm fannyqym gligytqkhlm w hamgtyqlm, xkihó
k bi gkdynnái mbwl my aipltxkmy hyn tyqlt hy nk gkmk ma ytk vythkh nl uby
kubyn nagyigakhl ny ymgtafík, w uby kmaxymxl rkfnkmy gli yn nlgl, w uby ma
ny dktygaymy uby qyiík obagal, ny mkgkmy w dbmaymy yi nafytqkh. ríelnl kmí
yn gkdynnái, w yn tyqlt ny haol uby kubyn rlxfty kúi my ymqkfk nlgl: uby,
dbymql uby rkfnkfk xbgrkm vygym glxl dytmlik hy ctkihy yiqyihaxayiql, kn
gkfl hamdktkfk gli qkiqkm iygyhkhym, uby yi xbgrkm w yi ctkihym acbknkfki k
mbm dtaxytkm hamgtygaliym, glxl my dlhík rkgyt nk ymdytayigak rkfnáihlny.
ubaml rkgytnk yn gkdynnái, w, dliaéihlny gli yn nlgl, rkfnó gli én bik rltk
w xám, w yi qlhl kubyn qayxdl okxám yn nlgl haol tkeói qltgahk ia
hamdktkqkhk; kiqym, rkfnó qki kqyiqkhkxyiqy, uby yn gkdynnái pby pltekhl k
gtyyt uby yn nlgl ymqkfk gbythl; w yiqty lqtkm glmkm uby yn nlgl ny haol
pby uby yn tyqlt ny qyiík loytaek, dlt il dythyt nlm tycknlm uby mbm
dktayiqym ny rkgíki dltuby haoymy uby kúi ymqkfk nlgl, w gli núgahlm
aiqytvknlm; w uby yn xkwlt gliqtktal uby yi mb hymctkgak qyiík ytk mb xbgrk
rkgayihk, dbym, dlt clekt hynnk mbm yiyxaclm, dliíki hlnl w hbhkfki hy nk
xytgyh uby ibymqtl myñlt ny rkfík rygrl yi vlnvytny hy fymqak yi rlxfty.
paiknxyiqy, én rkfnó hy xkiytk uby rael mlmdygrlml kn tyqlt, glhagalmlm w
hymknxkhlm k mbm dktayiqym, w k én qki hamgtyql uby yn gkdynnái my
hyqytxaió k nnyvátmyny glimacl k uby yn ktelfamdl ny vaymy w qlgkmy gli nk
xkil nk vythkh hy kubyn iyclgal.

»gli ymqk fbyik pyy, yn fbyi gkdynnái dahaó kn tyqlt xkihkmy hkt nlm
vymqahlm gli uby knní rkfík yiqtkhl yn nagyigakhl; vlnvaó k hygat yn tyqlt
uby xatkmy nl uby rkgík, dltuby, mai hbhk kncbik, yn nagyigakhl kúi my
ymqkfk nlgl. il matvaytli hy ikhk dktk gli yn gkdynnái nkm dtyvyigaliym w
khvytqaxayiqlm hyn tyqlt dktk uby hyokmy hy nnyvktny; lfyhygaó yn tyqlt,
vayihl myt lthyi hyn ktelfamdl; dbmaytli kn nagyigakhl mbm vymqahlm, uby
ytki ibyvlm w hygyiqym, w, glxl én my val vymqahl hy gbythl w hymibhl hy
nlgl, mbdnagó kn gkdynnái uby dlt gktahkh ny haymy nagyigak dktk at k
hymdyhatmy hy mbm glxdkñytlm nlm nlglm. yn gkdynnái haol uby én ny ubytík
kglxdkñkt w vyt nlm nlglm uby yi nk gkmk rkfík. mbfaytli, yi ypyql, w gli
ynnlm kncbilm uby my rknnktli dtymyiqym; w, nnyckhl yn nagyigakhl k bik
okbnk khlihy ymqkfk bi nlgl pbtalml, kbiuby yiqligym mlmyckhl w ubayql, ny
haol: ''rytxkil xíl, xaty ma xy xkihk kncl, uby xy vlw k xa gkmk; uby wk
halm rk mahl mytvahl, dlt mb aipaiaqk flihkh w xamytaglthak, mai wl
xytygytnl, hy vlnvytxy xa obagal: wk ymqlw mkil w gbythl; uby kgytgk hyn
dlhyt hy halm iaicbik glmk ym axdlmafny. qyick ctkihy ymdytkiek w glipakiek
yi Én, uby, dbym k xí xy rk vbynql k xa dtaxytl ymqkhl, qkxfaéi ny vlnvytá
k én ma yi Én glipík. wl qyihté gbahkhl hy yivaktny kncbilm tycknlm uby
glxk, w góxknlm yi qlhl gkml, uby ny rkcl mkfyt uby axkcail, glxl ubayi rk
dkmkhl dlt ynnl, uby qlhkm ibymqtkm nlgbtkm dtlgyhyi hy qyiyt nlm ymqóxkclm
vkgílm w nlm gynyftlm nnyilm hy katy. ympbétgymy, ympbétgymy, uby yn
hymgkygaxayiql yi nlm aipltqbialm kdlgk nk mknbh w kgkttyk nk xbytqy''.

»qlhkm ymqkm tkeliym hyn nagyigakhl ymgbgró lqtl nlgl uby ymqkfk yi lqtk
okbnk, ptliqytl hy nk hyn pbtalml, w, nyvkiqáihlmy hy bik ymqytk vayok
hlihy ymqkfk ygrkhl w hymibhl yi gbytlm, dtycbiqó k ctkihym vlgym ubaéi ytk
yn uby my afk mkil w gbythl. yn nagyigakhl tymdlihaó: ''wl mlw, rytxkil, yn
uby xy vlw; uby wk il qyicl iygymahkh hy ymqkt xám kubí, dlt nl uby hlw
aipaiaqkm ctkgakm k nlm gaynlm, uby qki ctkihy xytgyh xy rki rygrl''.
''xatkh nl uby hygím, nagyigakhl, il lm yickñy yn hakfnl -tydnagó yn nlgl-;
mlmyckh yn day, w ymqklm ubyhaql yi vbymqtk gkmk, w krlttktéam nk vbynqk''.
''wl mé uby ymqlw fbyil -tydnagó yn nagyigakhl-, w il rkftá dktk ubé qltikt
k kihkt ymqkgaliym''. ''¿vlm fbyil? -haol yn nlgl-: kcltk fayi, ynnl hatá;
kihkh gli halm, dytl wl lm vlql k oúdaqyt, gbwk xkoymqkh wl tydtymyiql yi
nk qayttk, uby dlt mlnl ymqy dygkhl uby rlw glxyqy myvannk, yi mkgktlm
hymqk gkmk w yi qyiytlm dlt gbythl, qyicl hy rkgyt bi qkn gkmqacl yi ynnk,
uby ubyhy xyxltak hén dlt qlhlm nlm macnlm hyn nlm macnlm, kxéi. ¿il mkfym
qú, nagyigakhannl xyicbkhl, uby nl dlhté rkgyt, dbym, glxl hacl, mlw
oúdaqyt qlikiqy, uby qyicl yi xam xkilm nlm tkwlm kftkmkhltym gli uby dbyhl
w mbynl kxyikekt w hymqtbat yn xbihl? dytl gli mlnk bik glmk ubaytl
gkmqackt k ymqy aciltkiqy dbyfnl, w ym gli il nnlvyt yi én ia yi qlhl mb
hamqtaql w gliqltil dlt qtym yiqytlm kñlm, uby my rki hy gliqkt hymhy yn
hík w dbiql yi uby rk mahl rygrk ymqk kxyikek yi khynkiqy. ¿qú nafty, qú
mkil, qú gbythl, w wl nlgl, w wl yipytxl, w wl kqkhl...? kmí dayiml nnlvyt
glxl dyimkt krltgktxy''.

»k nkm vlgym w k nkm tkeliym hyn nlgl ymqbvaytli nlm gatgbmqkiqym kqyiqlm,
dytl ibymqtl nagyigakhl, vlnvaéihlmy k ibymqtl gkdynnái w kmaéihlny hy nkm
xkilm, ny haol: ''il qyick vbymqtk xytgyh dyik, myñlt xíl, ia rkck gkml hy
nl uby ymqy nlgl rk hagrl, uby ma én ym oúdaqyt w il ubamayty nnlvyt, wl,
uby mlw iydqbil, yn dkhty w yn halm hy nkm kcbkm, nnlvyté qlhkm nkm vygym
uby my xy kiqlokty w pbyty xyiymqyt''. k nl uby tymdlihaó yn gkdynnái:
''gli qlhl yml, myñlt iydqbil, il mytá fayi yilokt kn myñlt oúdaqyt:
vbymqtk xytgyh my ubyhy yi mb gkmk, uby lqtl hík, gbkihl rkwk xám glxlhahkh
w xám ymdkgal, vlnvytyxlm dlt vbymqtk xytgyh''. taómy yn tyqlt w nlm
dtymyiqym, dlt gbwk tamk my xyhal glttaó yn gkdynnái; hymibhktli kn
nagyigakhl, ubyhómy yi gkmk w kgkfómy yn gbyiql.»

-dbym, ¿émqy ym yn gbyiql, myñlt fktfytl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby, dlt vyiat
kubí glxl hy xlnhy, il dlhík hyokt hy gliqktny? ¡kr, myñlt tkdamqk, myñlt
tkdamqk, w gbái gaycl ym kubyn uby il vyy dlt qynk hy gyhkel! w ¿ym dlmafny
uby vbymqtk xytgyh il mkfy uby nkm glxdktkgaliym uby my rkgyi hy aicyial k
aicyial, hy vknlt k vknlt, hy rytxlmbtk k rytxlmbtk w hy naikoy k naikoy
mli mayxdty lhalmkm w xkn tygyfahkm? wl, myñlt fktfytl, il mlw iydqbil, yn
halm hy nkm kcbkm, ia dtlgbtl uby ikhay xy qyick dlt hamgtyql il nl mayihl;
mónl xy pkqacl dlt hkt k yiqyihyt kn xbihl yi yn yttlt yi uby ymqá yi il
tyilvkt yi mí yn pynagímaxl qayxdl hlihy gkxdykfk nk lthyi hy nk kihkiqy
gkfknnytík. dytl il ym xytygyhltk nk hydtkvkhk yhkh ibymqtk hy clekt qkiql
fayi glxl yn uby clektli nkm yhkhym hlihy nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm qlxktli k
mb gktcl w ygrktli mlfty mbm ymdknhkm nk hypyimk hy nlm tyailm, yn kxdktl
hy nkm hligynnkm, yn mlglttl hy nlm rbétpkilm w dbdanlm, yn gkmqacl hy nlm
mlfytfalm w yn dtyxal hy nlm rbxanhym. nlm xám hy nlm gkfknnytlm uby kcltk
my bmki, kiqym nym gtboyi nlm hkxkmglm, nlm ftlgkhlm w lqtkm tagkm qynkm hy
uby my vamqyi, uby nk xknnk gli uby my ktxki; wk il rkw gkfknnytl uby
hbytxk yi nlm gkxdlm, mboyql kn taclt hyn gaynl, ktxkhl hy qlhkm ktxkm
hymhy nlm daym k nk gkfyek; w wk il rkw ubayi, mai mkgkt nlm daym hy nlm
ymqtaflm, kttaxkhl k mb nkiek, mónl dtlgbty hymgkfyekt, glxl hagyi, yn
mbyñl, glxl nl rkgíki nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym. wk il rkw iaicbil uby,
mknayihl hymqy flmuby, yiqty yi kubynnk xliqkñk, w hy knní damy bik ymqétan
w hymaytqk dnkwk hyn xkt, nkm xám vygym dtlgynlml w knqytkhl, w, rknnkihl
yi ynnk w yi mb ltannk bi dyubyñl fkqyn mai tyxlm, vynk, xámqan ia oktgak
kncbik, gli aiqtédahl gltkeói my kttloy yi én, yiqtycáihlmy k nkm
axdnkgkfnym lnkm hyn xkt dtlpbihl, uby wk ny mbfyi kn gaynl w wk ny fkoki
kn kfamxl; w én, dbymql yn dygrl k nk aigliqtkmqkfny flttkmgk, gbkihl xyilm
my gkqk, my rknnk qtym xan w xám nycbkm hamqkiqy hyn nbckt hlihy my
yxfktgó, w, mknqkihl yi qayttk tyxlqk w il glilgahk, ny mbgyhyi glmkm
hacikm hy ymqkt ymgtaqkm, il yi dytckxailm, mail yi ftligym. xkm kcltk, wk
qtabipk nk dytyek hy nk hanacyigak, nk lgalmahkh hyn qtkfkol, yn vagal hy
nk vatqbh, nk kttlckigak hy nk vknyiqík w nk qyótagk hy nk dtágqagk hy nkm
ktxkm, uby mónl vavaytli w tymdnkihygaytli yi nkm yhkhym hyn ltl w yi nlm
kihkiqym gkfknnytlm. ma il, híckixy: ¿ubaéi xám rliymql w xám vknayiqy uby
yn pkxlml kxkhím hy ckbnk?; ¿ubaéi xám hamgtyql uby dknxytíi hy
aicnkqyttk?; ¿ubaéi xám kglxlhkhl w xkibkn uby qatkiqy yn fnkigl?; ¿ubaéi
xám cknái uby nambktqy hy ctygak?; ¿ubaéi xám kgbgrannkhl ia kgbgrannkhlt
uby hli fynakiím?; ¿ubaéi xám aiqtédahl uby dytaói hy ckbnk, l ubaéi xám
kglxyqyhlt hy dynactlm uby pynazxktqy hy ratgkiak, l ubaéi xám maigytl uby
ymdnkihaái?; ¿ubaéi xkm kttlokhl uby hli gatlicanal hy qtkgak?; ¿ubaéi xám
ftkvl uby tlhkxliqy?; ¿ubaéi xám dtbhyiqy uby yn tyw mlftail?; ¿ubaéi xám
kqtyvahl uby tyaiknhlm?; ¿ubaéi xám aivyigafny uby tlnhái?; w ¿ubaéi xám
cknnkthl w xám gltqém uby tbcytl, hy ubayi hygayihyi rlw nlm hbubym hy
pyttktk, mycúi qbtdíi yi mb glmxlctkpík? qlhlm ymqlm gkfknnytlm, w lqtlm
xbgrlm uby dbhaytk hygat, myñlt gbtk, pbytli gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, nbe w
cnltak hy nk gkfknnytík. hémqlm, l qknym glxl émqlm, ubamaytk wl uby pbytki
nlm hy xa ktfaqtal, uby, k mytnl, mb xkoymqkh my rknnktk fayi mytvahl w
krlttktk hy xbgrl ckmql, w yn qbtgl my ubyhktk dynkihl nkm fktfkm, w gli
ymql, il ubaytl ubyhkt yi xa gkmk, dbym il xy mkgk yn gkdynnái hynnk; w ma
mb oúdaqyt, glxl rk hagrl yn fktfytl, il nnlvayty, kubí ymqlw wl, uby
nnlvyté gbkihl my xy kiqlokty. hacl ymql dltuby mydk yn myñlt fkgík uby ny
yiqayihl.

-yi vythkh, myñlt hli ubaolqy -haol yn fktfytl-, uby il nl haoy dlt qkiql,
w kmí xy kwbhy halm glxl pby fbyik xa aiqyigaói, w uby il hyfy vbymqtk
xytgyh myiqatmy.

-ma dbyhl myiqatxy l il -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, wl xy nl mé.

k ymql haol yn gbtk:

-kbi fayi uby wl gkma il ry rkfnkhl dknkftk rkmqk krltk, w il ubamaytk
ubyhkt gli bi ymgtúdbnl uby xy tly w ymgktfk nk gligayigak, ikgahl hy nl
uby kubí yn myñlt hli ubaolqy rk hagrl.

-dktk lqtkm glmkm xám -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- qayiy nagyigak yn myñlt gbtk;
w kmí, dbyhy hygat mb ymgtúdbnl, dltuby il ym hy cbmql kihkt gli nk
gligayigak ymgtbdbnlmk.

-dbym gli ymy fyiydnágaql -tymdlihaó yn gbtk-, hacl uby xa ymgtúdbnl ym uby
il xy dbyhl dytmbkhat yi iaicbik xkiytk k uby qlhk nk gkqytvk hy gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym uby vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, rk typytahl, rkwki mahl
tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy dytmlikm hy gktiy w rbyml yi yn xbihl; kiqym, axkcail
uby qlhl ym paggaói, páfbnk w xyiqatk, w mbyñlm gliqkhlm dlt rlxftym
hymdaytqlm, l, dlt xyolt hygat, xyhal hltxahlm.

-Émy ym lqtl yttlt -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- yi uby rki gkíhl xbgrlm, uby il
gtyyi uby rkwk rkfahl qknym gkfknnytlm yi yn xbihl; w wl xbgrkm vygym,
gli havytmkm cyiqym w lgkmaliym, ry dtlgbtkhl mkgkt k nk nbe hy nk vythkh
ymqy gkma glxúi yickñl; dytl kncbikm vygym il ry mknahl gli xa aiqyigaói, w
lqtkm mí, mbmqyiqáihlnk mlfty nlm rlxftlm hy nk vythkh; nk gbkn vythkh ym
qki gaytqk, uby ymqlw dlt hygat uby gli xam dtldalm lolm va k kxkhím hy
ckbnk, uby ytk bi rlxfty knql hy gbytdl, fnkigl hy tlmqtl, fayi dbymql hy
fktfk, kbiuby iyctk, hy vamqk yiqty fnkihk w tacbtlmk, gltql hy tkeliym,
qkthl yi katktmy w dtymql yi hydliyt nk atk; w hyn xlhl uby ry hynaiykhl k
kxkhím dbhaytk, k xa dktygyt, daiqkt w hymgbftat qlhlm gbkiqlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym kihki yi nkm ramqltakm yi yn ltfy, uby, dlt nk kdtyryimaói uby
qyicl hy uby pbytli glxl mbm ramqltakm gbyiqki, w dlt nkm rkekñkm uby
ragaytli w glihagaliym uby qbvaytli, my dbyhyi mkgkt dlt fbyik panlmlpík
mbm pkgaliym, mbm glnltym w ymqkqbtkm.

-¿uby qki ctkihy ny dktygy k vbymqtk xytgyh, xa myñlt hli ubaolqy -dtycbiqó
yn fktfytl-, hyfík hy myt yn cackiqy xltckiqy?

-yi ymql hy cackiqym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- rkw hapytyiqym ldaialiym, ma
nlm rk rkfahl l il yi yn xbihl; dytl nk mkiqk ymgtaqbtk, uby il dbyhy
pknqkt bi áqlxl yi nk vythkh, ilm xbymqtk uby nlm rbfl, gliqáihlilm nk
ramqltak hy kubyn panamqykel hy clníkm, uby qyiík mayqy glhlm w xyhal hy
knqbtk, uby ym bik hymxymbtkhk ctkihyek. qkxfaéi yi nk amnk hy maganak my
rki rknnkhl gkiannkm w ymdknhkm qki ctkihym, uby mb ctkihyek xkiapaymqk uby
pbytli cackiqym mbm hbyñlm, w qki ctkihym glxl ctkihym qlttym; uby nk
cylxyqtík mkgk ymqk vythkh hy hbhk. dytl, gli qlhl ymql, il mkfté hygat gli
gytqahbxfty ubé qkxkñl qbvaymy xltckiqy, kbiuby axkcail uby il hyfaó hy myt
xbw knql; w xbévyxy k myt hymqy dktygyt rknnkt yi nk ramqltak hlihy my rkgy
xyigaói dktqagbnkt hy mbm rkekñkm uby xbgrkm vygym hltxík hyfkol hy
qygrkhl; w, dbym rknnkfk gkmk hlihy gbdaymy, gnktl ymqá uby il ytk
hymxymbtkhk mb ctkihyek.

-kmí ym -haol yn gbtk.

yn gbkn, cbmqkihl hy lítny hygat qki ctkihym hamdktkqym, ny dtycbiqó uby
ubé myiqík kgytgk hy nlm tlmqtlm hy tyaiknhlm hy xliqknfái w hy hli tlnhái,
w hy nlm hyxám hlgy dktym hy ptkigak, dbym qlhlm rkfíki mahl gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym.

-hy tyaiknhlm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- xy kqtyvl k hygat uby ytk kigrl hy
tlmqtl, hy glnlt fytxyol, nlm lolm fkankhltym w kncl mknqkhlm, dbiqlml w
glnétagl yi hyxkmík, kxacl hy nkhtliym w hy cyiqy dythahk. hy tlnhái, l
tlqlnkihl, l ltnkihl, uby gli qlhlm ymqlm ilxftym ny ilxftki nkm ramqltakm,
mlw hy dktygyt w xy kpatxl uby pby hy xyhakik ymqkqbtk, kigrl hy ymdknhkm,
kncl ymqyvkhl, xltyil hy tlmqtl w fktfaqkryñl, vynnlml yi yn gbytdl w hy
vamqk kxyikekhltk; gltql hy tkeliym, dytl xbw glxyhahl w fayi gtakhl.

-ma il pby tlnhái xám cyiqanrlxfty uby vbymqtk xytgyh rk hagrl -tydnagó yn
gbtk-, il pby xktkvannk uby nk myñltk kicénagk nk fynnk ny hymhyñkmy w
hyokmy dlt nk cknk, ftíl w hlikaty uby hyfík hy qyiyt yn xltannl
fktfadliayiqy k ubayi ynnk my yiqtycó; w kihbvl hamgtyqk hy khkxkt kiqym nk
fnkihbtk hy xyhltl uby nk kmdytyek hy tlnhái.

-ymk kicénagk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, myñlt gbtk, pby bik hligynnk
hymqtkíhk, kihktayck w kncl kiqlokhaek, w qki nnyil hyoó yn xbihl hy mbm
axdytqaiyigakm glxl hy nk pkxk hy mb rytxlmbtk: hymdtygaó xan myñltym, xan
vknayiqym w xan hamgtyqlm, w gliqyiqómy gli bi dkoygannl fktfanbgal, mai
lqtk rkgayihk ia ilxfty uby yn uby ny dbhl hkt hy kctkhygahl nk kxamqkh uby
cbkthó k mb kxacl. yn ctki gkiqlt hy mb fynnyek, yn pkxlml ktalmql, dlt il
kqtyvytmy, l dlt il ubytyt gkiqkt nl uby k ymqk myñltk ny mbgyhaó hymdbém
hy mb tbai yiqtycl, uby il hyfaytli myt glmkm hyxkmakhkxyiqy rliymqkm, nk
hyoó hlihy haol:

w glxl hyn gkqkw tygafaó yn gyqtl,

ubaeá lqtl gkiqktá gli xyolt dnygqtl.

w, mai hbhk, uby ymql pby glxl dtlpygík; uby nlm dlyqkm qkxfaéi my nnkxki
vkqym, uby ubayty hygat khavailm. véymy ymqk vythkh gnktk, dltuby, hymdbém
kgá, bi pkxlml dlyqk kihknbe nnltó w gkiqó mbm náctaxkm, w lqtl pkxlml w
úiagl dlyqk gkmqynnkil gkiqó mb rytxlmbtk.

-híckxy, myñlt hli ubaolqy -haol k ymqk mkeói yn fktfytl-, ¿il rk rkfahl
kncúi dlyqk uby rkwk rygrl kncbik máqatk k ymk myñltk kicénagk, yiqty
qkiqlm glxl nk rki knkfkhl?

-fayi gtyl wl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby ma mkgtadkiqy l tlnhái pbytki
dlyqkm, uby wk xy rbfaytki okflikhl k nk hligynnk; dltuby ym dtldal w
ikqbtkn hy nlm dlyqkm hymhyñkhlm w il khxaqahlm hy mbm hkxkm paicahkm -l
paicahkm, yi ypyql, hy kubénnlm k ubayi ynnlm ymglcaytli dlt myñltkm hy mbm
dyimkxayiqlm-, vyicktmy gli máqatkm w nafynlm (vyickiek, dlt gaytql,
aihacik hy dygrlm cyiytlmlm), dytl rkmqk kcltk il rk nnyckhl k xa ilqagak
iaicúi vytml aipkxkqltal gliqtk nk myñltk kicénagk, uby qtbol tyvbynql yn
xbihl.

-¡xankctl! -haol yn gbtk.

w, yi ymql, lwytli uby nk kxk w nk mlftaik, uby wk rkfíki hyokhl nk
glivytmkgaói, hkfki ctkihym vlgym yi yn dkqal, w kgbhaytli qlhlm kn tbahl.





gkdíqbnl aa. uby qtkqk hy nk ilqkfny dyihyigak uby mkigrl dkiek qbvl gli nk
mlftaik w kxk hy hli ubaolqy, gli lqtlm mboyqlm ctkgalmlm


gbyiqk nk ramqltak uby nkm vlgym uby lwytli hli ubaolqy, yn gbtk w yn
fktfytl ytki hy nk mlftaik w kxk, uby nkm hkfki hagayihl k mkigrl dkiek,
uby dbcikfk dlt yiqtkt k vyt k hli ubaolqy, w ynnkm ny hypyihíki nk dbytqk:

-¿ubé ubayty ymqy xlmqtyigl yi ymqk gkmk? ahlm k nk vbymqtk, rytxkil, uby
vlm mlam, w il lqtl, yn uby hymqtky w mlimkgk k xa myñlt, w ny nnyvk dlt
ymlm kihbttaknym.

k nl uby mkigrl tymdlihaó:

-kxk hy mkqkiám, yn mlimkgkhl, w yn hymqtkíhl, w yn nnyvkhl dlt ymlm
kihbttaknym mlw wl, uby il qb kxl; én xy nnyvó dlt ymlm xbihlm, w vlmlqtkm
lm yickñáam yi nk xaqkh hyn obmql dtygal: én xy mkgó hy xa gkmk gli
yickñapkm, dtlxyqaéihlxy bik íimbnk, uby rkmqk kcltk nk ymdytl.

-xknkm íimbnkm qy krlcbyi -tymdlihaó nk mlftaik-, mkigrl xknhaql. w ¿ubé
mli íimbnkm? ¿ym kncbik glmk hy glxyt, clnlmkel, glxanói, uby qú ytym?

-il ym hy glxyt -tydnagó mkigrl-, mail hy clfytikt w tycat xyolt uby gbkqtl
gabhkhym w uby gbkqtl kngknhym hy gltqy.

-gli qlhl yml -haol yn kxk-, il yiqtktéam kgá, mkgl hy xknhkhym w glmqkn hy
xknagakm. ah k clfytikt vbymqtk gkmk w k nkftkt vbymqtlm dycboktym, w
hyoklm hy dtyqyihyt íimbnkm ia íimbnlm.

ctkihy cbmql tygyfíki yn gbtk w yn fktfytl hy lít yn glnlubal hy nlm qtym;
dytl hli ubaolqy, qyxytlml uby mkigrl my hymglmaymy w hymfbgrkmy kncúi
xliqói hy xknagalmkm iygyhkhym, w qlgkmy yi dbiqlm uby il ny ymqktíki fayi
k mb gtéhaql, ny nnkxó, w rael k nkm hlm uby gknnkmyi w ny hyokmyi yiqtkt.
yiqtó mkigrl, w yn gbtk w yn fktfytl my hymdahaytli hy hli ubaolqy, hy gbwk
mknbh hymymdytktli, vayihl gbái dbymql ymqkfk yi mbm hymvktakhlm
dyimkxayiqlm, w gbái yxfyfahl yi nk maxdnagahkh hy mbm xknkihkiqym
gkfknnytíkm; w kmí, haol yn gbtk kn fktfytl:

-vlm vytéam, glxdkhty, góxl, gbkihl xyilm nl dyimyxlm, ibymqtl rahkncl mkny
lqtk vye k vlnkt nk tafytk.

il dlicl wl hbhk yi yml -tymdlihaó yn fktfytl-, dytl il xy xktkvannl qkiql
hy nk nlgbtk hyn gkfknnytl glxl hy nk maxdnagahkh hyn ymgbhytl, uby qki
gtyíhl qayiy kubynnl hy nk íimbnk, uby gtyl uby il my nl mkgktái hyn gkmgl
gbkiqlm hymyickñlm dbyhyi axkcaiktmy.

-halm nlm tyxyhay -haol yn gbtk-, w ymqyxlm k nk xatk: vytyxlm yi nl uby
dktk ymqk xáubaik hy hamdktkqym hy qkn gkfknnytl w hy qkn ymgbhytl, uby
dktygy uby nlm pltoktli k nlm hlm yi bik xymxk qbtubymk, w uby nkm nlgbtkm
hyn myñlt, mai nkm iygyhkhym hyn gtakhl, il vkníki bi kthaqy.

-kmí ym -haol yn fktfytl-, w rlncktk xbgrl mkfyt ubé qtkqktái krltk nlm
hlm.

-wl mycbtl -tymdlihaó yn gbtk- uby nk mlftaik l yn kxk ilm nl gbyiqk
hymdbém, uby il mli hy glihagaói uby hyoktái hy ymgbgrktnl.

yi qkiql, hli ubaolqy my yigyttó gli mkigrl yi mb kdlmyiql; w, ymqkihl
mlnlm, ny haol:

-xbgrl xy dymk, mkigrl, uby rkwkm hagrl w hackm uby wl pba yn uby qy mkubé
hy qbm gkmannkm, mkfayihl uby wl il xy ubyhé yi xam gkmkm: obiqlm mknaxlm,
obiqlm pbaxlm w obiqlm dytyctaikxlm; bik xamxk pltqbik w bik xamxk mbytqy
rk glttahl dlt nlm hlm: ma k qa qy xkiqyktli bik vye, k xí xy rki xlnahl
gayiql, w ymql ym nl uby qy nnyvl hy vyiqkok.

-yml ymqkfk dbymql yi tkeói -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby, mycúi vbymqtk
xytgyh hagy, xám kiyokm mli k nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym nkm hymctkgakm uby k
mbm ymgbhytlm.

-yicáñkmqy, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-; mycúi kubynnl, ubkihl gkdbq
hlnyq..., yqgéqytk.

-il yiqayihl lqtk nyicbk uby nk xík -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-ubaytl hygat -haol hli ubaolqy- uby, gbkihl nk gkfyek hbyny, qlhlm nlm
xayxftlm hbynyi; w kmí, mayihl wl qb kxl w myñlt, mlw qb gkfyek, w qú xa
dktqy, dbym ytym xa gtakhl; w, dlt ymqk tkeói, yn xkn uby k xí xy qlgk, l
qlgkty, k qa qy rk hy hlnyt, w k xí yn qbwl.

-kmí rkfík hy myt -haol mkigrl-, dytl gbkihl k xí xy xkiqykfki glxl k
xayxftl, my ymqkfk xa gkfyek hyqtám hy nkm fkthkm, xatáihlxy vlnkt dlt nlm
katym, mai myiqat hlnlt kncbil; w, dbym nlm xayxftlm ymqái lfnackhlm k
hlnytmy hyn xkn hy nk gkfyek, rkfík hy ymqkt lfnackhk ynnk k hlnytmy
hynnlm.

-¿ubyttám qú hygat kcltk, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby il xy hlník
wl gbkihl k qa qy xkiqykfki? w ma nl hagym, il nl hackm, ia nl dayimym;
dbym xám hlnlt myiqík wl yiqligym yi xa ymdítaqb uby qú yi qb gbytdl. dytl
hyoyxlm ymql kdktqy dlt kcltk, uby qayxdl rkftá hlihy nl dlihytyxlm w
dlickxlm yi mb dbiql, w haxy, mkigrl kxacl: ¿ubé ym nl uby hagyi hy xí dlt
ymy nbckt? ¿yi ubé ldaiaói xy qayiy yn vbncl, yi ubé nlm rahknclm w yi ubé
nlm gkfknnytlm? ¿ubé hagyi hy xa vknyiqík, ubé hy xam rkekñkm w ubé hy xa
gltqymík? ¿ubé my dnkqagk hyn kmbxdql uby ry qlxkhl hy tymbgaqkt w vlnvyt
kn xbihl nk wk lnvahkhk lthyi gkfknnytymgk? paiknxyiqy, ubaytl, mkigrl, xy
hackm nl uby kgytgk hymql rk nnyckhl k qbm líhlm; w ymql xy rkm hy hygat
mai kñkhat kn fayi ia ubaqkt kn xkn glmk kncbik, uby hy nlm vkmknnlm nyknym
ym hygat nk vythkh k mbm myñltym yi mb myt w pacbtk dtldak, mai uby nk
khbnkgaói nk kgtygayiqy l lqtl vkil tymdyql nk hamxaibwk; w ubaytl uby
mydkm, mkigrl, uby ma k nlm líhlm hy nlm dtíigadym nnyckmy nk vythkh
hymibhk, mai nlm vymqahlm hy nk namliok, lqtlm macnlm glttytíki, lqtkm
yhkhym mytíki qyiahkm dlt xám hy rayttl uby nk ibymqtk, uby yiqayihl uby,
hy nkm uby krltk my bmki, ym nk hltkhk. mítvkqy ymqy khvytqaxayiql, mkigrl,
dktk uby hamgtyqk w fayiaiqyigalikhkxyiqy dlickm yi xam líhlm nk vythkh hy
nkm glmkm uby mbdaytym hy nl uby qy ry dtycbiqkhl.

-yml rkté wl hy xbw fbyik ckik, myñlt xíl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, gli glihagaói
uby vbymqtk xytgyh il my rk hy yilokt hy nl uby haoyty, dbym ubayty uby nl
hack yi gbytlm, mai vymqatnl hy lqtkm tldkm hy kubynnkm gli uby nnycktli k
xa ilqagak.

-yi iaicbik xkiytk xy yilokté -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. fayi dbyhym, mkigrl,
rkfnkt naftyxyiqy w mai tlhyl kncbil.

-dbym nl dtaxytl uby hacl -haol-, ym uby yn vbncl qayiy k vbymqtk xytgyh
dlt ctkihímaxl nlgl, w k xí dlt il xyilm xyiqygkql. nlm rahknclm hagyi uby,
il gliqyiaéihlmy vbymqtk xytgyh yi nlm níxaqym hy nk rahkncbík, my rk
dbymql hli w my rk kttyxyqahl k gkfknnytl gli gbkqtl gydkm w hlm wbckhkm hy
qayttk w gli bi qtkdl kqtám w lqtl khynkiqy. hagyi nlm gkfknnytlm uby il
ubyttíki uby nlm rahknclm my ldbmaymyi k ynnlm, ymdygaknxyiqy kubynnlm
rahknclm ymgbhytanym uby hki rbxl k nlm ekdkqlm w qlxki nlm dbiqlm hy nkm
xyhakm iyctkm gli myhk vythy.

-yml -haol hli ubaolqy- il qayiy uby vyt glixacl, dbym kihl mayxdty fayi
vymqahl, w okxám tyxyihkhl; tlql, fayi dlhtík myt; w yn tlql, xám hy nkm
ktxkm uby hyn qayxdl.

-yi nl uby qlgk -dtlmacbaó mkigrl- k nk vknyiqík, gltqymík, rkekñkm w
kmbxdql hy vbymqtk xytgyh, rkw hapytyiqym ldaialiym; bilm hagyi: "nlgl,
dytl ctkgalml"; lqtlm, "vknayiqy, dytl hymctkgakhl"; lqtlm, "gltqém, dytl
axdytqaiyiqy"; w dlt kubí vki hamgbttayihl yi qkiqkm glmkm, uby ia k
vbymqtk xytgyh ia k xí ilm hyoki rbyml mkil.

-xatk, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-: hlihyubaytk uby ymqá nk vatqbh yi
yxaiyiqy ctkhl, ym dytmycbahk. dlglm l iaicbil hy nlm pkxlmlm vktliym uby
dkmktli hyoó hy myt gknbxiakhl hy nk xknagak. obnal gémkt, kiaxlmímaxl,
dtbhyiqímaxl w vknyiqímaxl gkdaqái, pby ilqkhl hy kxfagalml w kncúi qkiql
il naxdal, ia yi mbm vymqahlm ia yi mbm glmqbxftym. knyokihtl, k ubayi mbm
rkekñkm ny kngkiektli yn tyilxfty hy xkcil, hagyi hén uby qbvl mbm gaytqlm
dbiqlm hy flttkgrl. hy rétgbnym, yn hy nlm xbgrlm qtkfkolm, my gbyiqk uby
pby nkmgavl w xbynny. hy hli cknklt, rytxkil hy kxkhím hy ckbnk, my xbtxbtk
uby pby xám uby hyxkmakhkxyiqy taolml; w hy mb rytxkil, uby pby nnltói. kmí
uby, ¡lr mkigrl!, yiqty nkm qkiqkm gknbxiakm hy fbyilm, fayi dbyhyi dkmkt
nkm xíkm, glxl il myki xám hy nkm uby rkm hagrl.

-¡krí ymqá yn qluby, gbytdl hy xa dkhty! -tydnagó mkigrl.

-dbym, ¿rkw xám? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-kúi nk glnk pknqk dlt hymlnnkt -haol mkigrl-. nl hy rkmqk kubí mli qltqkm
w dki daiqkhl; xkm ma vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty mkfyt qlhl nl uby rkw kgytgk hy
nkm gknlñkm uby ny dliyi, wl ny qtkyté kubí nbycl kn xlxyiql ubayi my nkm
hack qlhkm, mai uby nym pknqy bik xykok; uby kilgry nnycó yn raol hy
fktqlnlxé gkttkmgl, uby vayiy hy ymqbhakt hy mknkxkigk, rygrl fkgrannyt, w,
wéihlny wl k hkt nk fayivyiahk, xy haol uby kihkfk wk yi naftlm nk ramqltak
hy vbymqtk xytgyh, gli ilxfty hyn aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk; w hagy uby xy xayiqki k xí yi ynnk gli xa xymxl ilxfty hy mkigrl
dkiek, w k nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, gli lqtkm glmkm uby dkmkxlm
ilmlqtlm k mlnkm, uby xy ragy gtbgym hy ymdkiqkhl góxl nkm dbhl mkfyt yn
ramqltakhlt uby nkm ymgtafaó.

-wl qy kmycbtl, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby hyfy hy myt kncúi mkfal
yigkiqkhlt yn kbqlt hy ibymqtk ramqltak; uby k nlm qknym il my nym yigbfty
ikhk hy nl uby ubaytyi ymgtafat.

-w ¡góxl -haol mkigrl- ma ytk mkfal w yigkiqkhlt, dbym (mycúi hagy yn
fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, uby kmí my nnkxk yn uby hagrl qyicl) uby yn
kbqlt hy nk ramqltak my nnkxk gahy rkxyqy fytyioyik!

-ymy ilxfty ym hy xltl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-kmí mytá -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby dlt nk xkwlt dktqy ry líhl hygat uby
nlm xltlm mli kxaclm hy fytyioyikm.

-qú hyfym, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, yttktqy yi yn mlftyilxfty hy ymy
gahy, uby yi ktáfacl ubayty hygat myñlt.

-fayi dlhtík myt -tydnagó mkigrl-, xkm, ma vbymqtk xytgyh cbmqk uby wl ny
rkck vyiat kubí, até dlt én yi vlnkihkm.

-rktámxy xbgrl dnkgyt, kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby xy qayiy mbmdyiml nl
uby xy rkm hagrl, w il glxyté flgkhl uby fayi xy mydk rkmqk myt aipltxkhl
hy qlhl.

-dbym wl vlw dlt én -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

w, hyokihl k mb myñlt, my pby k fbmgkt kn fkgrannyt, gli yn gbkn vlnvaó hy
knní k dlgl ymdkgal, w yiqty nlm qtym dkmktli bi ctkgalmímaxl glnlubal.





gkdíqbnl aaa. hyn tahígbnl tkelikxayiql uby dkmó yiqty hli ubaolqy, mkigrl
dkiek w yn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl


dyimkqavl khyxám ubyhó hli ubaolqy, ymdytkihl kn fkgrannyt gkttkmgl, hy
ubayi ymdytkfk lít nkm ibyvkm hy mí xamxl dbymqkm yi naftl, glxl rkfík
hagrl mkigrl; w il my dlhík dytmbkhat k uby qkn ramqltak rbfaymy, dbym kúi
il ymqkfk yiobqk yi nk gbgrannk hy mb ymdkhk nk mkicty hy nlm yiyxaclm uby
rkfík xbytql, w wk ubytíki uby kihbvaymyi yi ymqkxdk mbm knqkm gkfknnytíkm.
gli qlhl yml, axkcaió uby kncúi mkfal, l wk kxacl l yiyxacl, dlt ktqy hy
yigkiqkxyiql nkm rkftá hkhl k nk ymqkxdk: ma kxacl, dktk yictkihygytnkm w
nyvkiqktnkm mlfty nkm xám myñknkhkm hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy; ma yiyxacl, dktk
kiaubanktnkm w dliytnkm hyfkol hy nkm xám vanym uby hy kncúi van ymgbhytl
my rbfaymyi ymgtaql, dbymql -hygík yiqty mí- uby ibigk rkekñkm hy ymgbhytlm
my ymgtafaytli; w gbkihl pbymy vythkh uby nk qkn ramqltak rbfaymy, mayihl
hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy, dlt pbytek rkfík hy myt ctkihínlgbk, knqk, aimaciy,
xkciípagk w vythkhytk.

gli ymql my glimlnó kncúi qkiql, dytl hymglimlnóny dyimkt uby mb kbqlt ytk
xltl, mycúi kubyn ilxfty hy gahy; w hy nlm xltlm il my dlhík ymdytkt vythkh
kncbik, dltuby qlhlm mli yxfynygkhltym, pknmktalm w ubaxytamqkm. qyxíkmy il
rbfaymy qtkqkhl mbm kxltym gli kncbik aihygyigak, uby tyhbihkmy yi
xyilmgkfl w dytobagal hy nk rliymqahkh hy mb myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml;
hymykfk uby rbfaymy hygnktkhl mb pahynahkh w yn hygltl uby mayxdty nk rkfík
cbkthkhl, xyilmdtygakihl tyaikm, yxdytkqtagym w hligynnkm hy qlhkm
gknahkhym, qyiayihl k tkwk nlm íxdyqbm hy nlm ikqbtknym xlvaxayiqlm; w kmí,
yivbynql w tyvbynql yi ymqkm w lqtkm xbgrkm axkcaikgaliym, ny rknnktli
mkigrl w gkttkmgl, k ubayi hli ubaolqy tygafaó gli xbgrk gltqymík.

ytk yn fkgrannyt, kbiuby my nnkxkfk mkimói, il xbw ctkihy hy gbytdl, kbiuby
xbw ctki mlgkttói, hy glnlt xkganyiqk, dytl hy xbw fbyi yiqyihaxayiql;
qyihtík rkmqk vyaiqy w gbkqtl kñlm, gktattyhlihl, hy iktae grkqk w hy
flgk ctkihy, myñknym qlhkm hy myt hy glihagaói xknagalmk w kxacl hy
hlikatym w hy fbtnkm, glxl nl xlmqtó yi vayihl k hli ubaolqy, dliaéihlmy
hynkiqy hén hy tlhannkm, hagaéihlny:

-héxy vbymqtk ctkihyek nkm xkilm, myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk; uby, dlt
yn ráfaql hy mki dyhtl uby vamql, kbiuby il qyicl lqtkm óthyiym uby nkm
gbkqtl dtaxytkm, uby ym vbymqtk xytgyh bil hy nlm xám pkxlmlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym uby rk rkfahl, ia kbi rkftá, yi qlhk nk tyhlihye hy nk qayttk.
fayi rkwk gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna, uby nk ramqltak hy vbymqtkm ctkihyekm hyoó
ymgtaqkm, w tyfaéi rkwk yn gbtalml uby qbvl gbahkhl hy rkgytnkm qtkhbgat hy
ktáfacl yi ibymqtl vbnckt gkmqynnkil, dktk biavytmkn yiqtyqyiaxayiql hy nkm
cyiqym.

ríelny nyvkiqkt hli ubaolqy, w haol:

-hymk xkiytk, ¿vythkh ym uby rkw ramqltak xík, w uby pby xltl w mkfal yn
uby nk glxdbml?

-ym qki vythkh, myñlt -haol mkimói-, uby qyicl dktk xí uby yn hík hy rlw
ymqái axdtymlm xám hy hlgy xan naftlm hy nk qkn ramqltak; ma il, hícknl
dltqbckn, fktgynlik w vknyigak, hlihy my rki axdtyml; w kbi rkw pkxk uby my
ymqá axdtaxayihl yi kxfytym, w k xí my xy qtkmnbgy uby il rk hy rkfyt
ikgaói ia nyicbk hlihy il my qtkhbeck.

-bik hy nkm glmkm -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy- uby xám hyfy hy hkt
gliqyiql k bi rlxfty vatqblml w yxaiyiqy ym vytmy, vavayihl, kihkt gli fbyi
ilxfty dlt nkm nyicbkm hy nkm cyiqym, axdtyml w yi ymqkxdk. haoy gli fbyi
ilxfty dltuby, mayihl kn gliqtktal, iaicbik xbytqy my ny acbknktá.

-ma dlt fbyik pkxk w ma dlt fbyi ilxfty vk -haol yn fkgrannyt-, mlnl
vbymqtk xytgyh nnyvk nk dknxk k qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym; dltuby yn
xltl yi mb nyicbk w yn gtamqakil yi nk mbwk qbvaytli gbahkhl hy daiqktilm
xbw kn vavl nk cknnkthík hy vbymqtk xytgyh, yn áiaxl ctkihy yi kglxyqyt nlm
dynactlm, nk dkgayigak yi nkm khvytmahkhym w yn mbptaxayiql, kmí yi nkm
hymctkgakm glxl yi nkm rytahkm, nk rliymqahkh w gliqaiyigak yi nlm kxltym
qki dnkqóiaglm hy vbymqtk xytgyh w hy xa myñltk hlñk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

-ibigk -haol k ymqy dbiql mkigrl dkiek- ry líhl nnkxkt gli hli k xa myñltk
hbngaiyk, mail mlnkxyiqy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, w wk yi ymql kihk
yttkhk nk ramqltak.

-il ym lfoygaói hy axdltqkigak émk -tymdlihaó gkttkmgl.

-il, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; dytl híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt
fkgrannyt: ¿ubé rkekñkm xíkm mli nkm uby xám my dlihytki yi ymk ramqltak?

-yi yml -tymdlihaó yn fkgrannyt-, rkw hapytyiqym ldaialiym, glxl rkw
hapytyiqym cbmqlm: bilm my kqayiyi k nk kvyiqbtk hy nlm xlnailm hy vayiql,
uby k vbymqtk xytgyh ny dktygaytli ftaktylm w cackiqym; lqtlm, k nk hy nlm
fkqkiym; émqy, k nk hymgtadgaói hy nlm hlm yoétgaqlm, uby hymdbém
dktygaytli myt hlm xkikhkm hy gktiytlm; kubén yigktygy nk hyn xbytql uby
nnyvkfki k yiqyttkt k myclvak; bil hagy uby k qlhkm my kvyiqkok nk hy nk
nafytqkh hy nlm cknylqym; lqtl, uby iaicbik acbknk k nk hy nlm hlm cackiqym
fyiaqlm, gli nk dyihyigak hyn vknytlml vaegkíil.

-híckxy, myñlt fkgrannyt -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl-: ¿yiqtk krí nk kvyiqbtk
hy nlm wkicüymym, gbkihl k ibymqtl fbyi tlgaikiqy my ny kiqloó dyhat
glqbpkm yi yn clnpl?

-il my ny ubyhó ikhk -tymdlihaó mkimói- kn mkfal yi yn qaiqytl: qlhl nl
hagy w qlhl nl kdbiqk, rkmqk nl hy nkm gkftalnkm uby yn fbyi mkigrl rael yi
nk xkiqk.

-yi nk xkiqk il ragy wl gkftalnkm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; yi yn katy mí, w kbi
xám hy nkm uby wl ubamaytk.

-k nl uby wl axkcail -haol hli ubaolqy-, il rkw ramqltak rbxkik yi yn xbihl
uby il qyick mbm knqafkolm, ymdygaknxyiqy nkm uby qtkqki hy gkfknnytíkm,
nkm gbknym ibigk dbyhyi ymqkt nnyikm hy dtómdytlm mbgymlm.

-gli qlhl yml -tymdlihaó yn fkgrannyt-, hagyi kncbilm uby rki nyíhl nk
ramqltak uby my rlncktki my nym rbfaytk lnvahkhl k nlm kbqltym hynnk
kncbilm hy nlm aipaiaqlm dknlm uby yi hapytyiqym yigbyiqtlm haytli kn myñlt
hli ubaolqy.

-krí yiqtk nk vythkh hy nk ramqltak -haol mkigrl.

-qkxfaéi dbhaytki gknnktnlm dlt yubahkh -haol hli ubaolqy-, dbym nkm
kggaliym uby ia xbhki ia knqytki nk vythkh hy nk ramqltak il rkw dktk ubé
ymgtafatnkm, ma rki hy tyhbihkt yi xyilmdtygal hyn myñlt hy nk ramqltak. k
pyy uby il pby qki dakhlml yiykm glxl vatcanal ny daiqk, ia qki dtbhyiqy
bnamym glxl ny hymgtafy rlxytl.

-kmí ym -tydnagó mkimói-, dytl bil ym ymgtafat glxl dlyqk w lqtl glxl
ramqltakhlt: yn dlyqk dbyhy gliqkt, l gkiqkt nkm glmkm, il glxl pbytli,
mail glxl hyfíki myt; w yn ramqltakhlt nkm rk hy ymgtafat, il glxl hyfíki
myt, mail glxl pbytli, mai kñkhat ia ubaqkt k nk vythkh glmk kncbik.

-dbym ma ym uby my kihk k hygat vythkhym ymy myñlt xltl -haol mkigrl-, k
fbyi mycbtl uby yiqty nlm dknlm hy xa myñlt my rknnyi nlm xílm; dltuby
ibigk k mb xytgyh ny qlxktli nk xyhahk hy nkm ymdknhkm uby il xy nk qlxkmyi
k xí hy qlhl yn gbytdl; dytl il rkw hy ubé xktkvannktxy, dbym, glxl hagy yn
xamxl myñlt xíl, hyn hlnlt hy nk gkfyek rki hy dktqagadkt nlm xayxftlm.

-mlgkttói mlam, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. k pyy uby il lm pknqk
xyxltak gbkihl vlm ubytéam qyiytnk.

-gbkihl wl ubamaymy lnvahktxy hy nlm ckttlqkelm uby xy rki hkhl -haol
mkigrl-, il nl glimyiqatái nlm gkthyiknym, uby kúi my ymqái ptymglm yi nkm
glmqannkm.

-gknnkh, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w il aiqyttbxdáam kn myñlt fkgrannyt, k
ubayi mbdnagl dkmy khynkiqy yi hygatxy nl uby my hagy hy xí yi nk typytahk
ramqltak.

-w hy xí -haol mkigrl-, uby qkxfaéi hagyi uby mlw wl bil hy nlm dtaigadknym
dtymlikoym hynnk.

-dytmlikoym uby il dtymlikoym, mkigrl kxacl -haol mkimói.

-¿lqtl tydtlgrkhlt hy vlubafnym qyiyxlm? -haol mkigrl-. dbym áihyimy k yml,
w il kgkfktyxlm yi qlhk nk vahk.

-xknk xy nk hé halm, mkigrl -tymdlihaó yn fkgrannyt-, ma il mlam vlm nk
mycbihk dytmlik hy nk ramqltak; w uby rkw qkn, uby dtygak xám lítlm rkfnkt
k vlm uby kn xám daiqkhl hy qlhk ynnk, dbymql uby qkxfaéi rkw ubayi hack
uby kihbvamqym hyxkmakhkxyiqy hy gtéhbnl yi gtyyt uby dlhík myt vythkh yn
clfaytil hy kubynnk íimbnk, lptygahk dlt yn myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby ymqá
dtymyiqy.

-kúi rkw mln yi nkm fkthkm -haol hli ubaolqy-, w, xayiqtkm xám pbyty
yiqtkihl yi yhkh mkigrl, gli nk ymdytayigak uby hki nlm kñlm, ymqktá xám
ahóiyl w xám ráfan dktk myt clfytikhlt uby il ymqá kcltk.

-dlt halm, myñlt -haol mkigrl-, nk amnk uby wl il clfytikmy gli nlm kñlm
uby qyicl, il nk clfytikté gli nlm kñlm hy xkqbmknéi. yn hkñl ymqá yi uby
nk hagrk íimbnk my yiqtyqayiy, il mé hóihy, w il yi pknqktxy k xí yn
gknyqty dktk clfytiktnk.

-yiglxyihkhnl k halm, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby qlhl my rktá fayi, w
ubaeá xyolt hy nl uby vlm dyimáam; uby il my xbyvy nk rlok yi yn átfln mai
nk vlnbiqkh hy halm.

-kmí ym vythkh -haol mkimói-, uby ma halm ubayty, il ny pknqktái k mkigrl
xan amnkm uby clfytikt, gbkiql xám bik.

-clfytikhlt ry vamql dlt krí -haol mkigrl- uby, k xa dktygyt, il nnycki k
nk mbynk hy xa ekdkql, w, gli qlhl yml, nlm nnkxki myñltík, w my matvyi gli
dnkqk.

-Émlm il mli clfytikhltym hy íimbnkm -tydnagó mkimói-, mail hy lqtlm
clfaytilm xám xkibknym; uby nlm uby clfaytiki íimbnkm, dlt nl xyilm rki hy
mkfyt ctkxáqagk.

-gli nk ctkxk fayi xy kvyihtík wl -haol mkigrl-, dytl gli nk qagk, ia xy
qatl ia xy dkcl, dltuby il nk yiqayihl. dytl, hyokihl ymql hyn clfaytil yi
nkm xkilm hy halm, uby xy ygry k nkm dktqym hlihy xám hy xí my matvk, hacl,
myñlt fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, uby aipaiaqkxyiqy xy rk hkhl cbmql uby yn
kbqlt hy nk ramqltak rkwk rkfnkhl hy xí hy xkiytk uby il yipkhki nkm glmkm
uby hy xí my gbyiqki; uby k py hy fbyi ymgbhytl uby ma rbfaytk hagrl hy xí
glmkm uby il pbytki xbw hy gtamqakil vayol, glxl mlw, uby ilm rkfíki hy lít
nlm mlthlm.

-yml pbytk rkgyt xankctlm -tymdlihaó mkimói.

-xankctlm l il xankctlm -haol mkigrl-, gkhk bil xaty góxl rkfnk l góxl
ymgtafy hy nkm dtymlikm, w il dlick k qtlgry xlgry nl dtaxytl uby ny vayiy
kn xkcíi.

-bik hy nkm qkgrkm uby dliyi k nk qkn ramqltak -haol yn fkgrannyt- ym uby
mb kbqlt dbml yi ynnk bik ilvynk aiqaqbnkhk yn gbtalml axdytqaiyiqy; il dlt
xknk ia dlt xkn tkelikhk, mail dlt il myt hy kubyn nbckt, ia qayiy uby vyt
gli nk ramqltak hy mb xytgyh hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy.

-wl kdlmqkté -tydnagó mkigrl- uby rk xyegnkhl yn rahydyttl fytekm gli
gkdkgrlm.

-krltk hacl -haol hli ubaolqy- uby il rk mahl mkfal yn kbqlt hy xa
ramqltak, mail kncúi aciltkiqy rkfnkhlt, uby, k qayiql w mai kncúi
hamgbtml, my dbml k ymgtafatnk, mknck nl uby mknayty, glxl rkgík ltfkiyok,
yn daiqlt hy Úfyhk, kn gbkn dtycbiqáihlny ubé daiqkfk, tymdlihaó: ''nl uby
mknayty''. qkn vye daiqkfk bi cknnl, hy qkn mbytqy w qki xkn dktygahl, uby
ytk xyiymqyt uby gli nyqtkm cóqagkm ymgtafaymy obiql k én: "Émqy ym cknnl".
w kmí hyfy hy myt hy xa ramqltak, uby qyihtá iygymahkh hy glxyiql dktk
yiqyihytnk.

-yml il -tymdlihaó mkimói-, dltuby ym qki gnktk, uby il rkw glmk uby
hapagbnqkt yi ynnk: nlm iañlm nk xkilmyki, nlm xlelm nk nyyi, nlm rlxftym
nk yiqayihyi w nlm vayolm nk gynyftki; w, paiknxyiqy, ym qki qtannkhk w qki
nyíhk w qki mkfahk hy qlhl céiytl hy cyiqym, uby, kdyikm rki vamql kncúi
tlgíi pnkgl, gbkihl hagyi: "knní vk tlgaikiqy". w nlm uby xám my rki hkhl k
mb nyqbtk mli nlm dkoym: il rkw kiqygáxktk hy myñlt hlihy il my rknny bi
hli ubaolqy: bilm ny qlxki ma lqtlm ny hyoki; émqlm ny yxfamqyi w kubénnlm
ny dahyi. paiknxyiqy, nk qkn ramqltak ym hyn xám cbmqlml w xyilm
dytobhagakn yiqtyqyiaxayiql uby rkmqk kcltk my rkwk vamql, dltuby yi qlhk
ynnk il my hymgbfty, ia dlt myxyokm, bik dknkftk hymrliymqk ia bi
dyimkxayiql xyilm uby gkqónagl.

-k ymgtafat hy lqtk mbytqy -haol hli ubaolqy-, il pbytk ymgtafat vythkhym,
mail xyiqatkm; w nlm ramqltakhltym uby hy xyiqatkm my vknyi rkfíki hy myt
ubyxkhlm, glxl nlm uby rkgyi xliyhk pknmk; w il mé wl ubé ny xlvaó kn kbqlt
k vknytmy hy ilvynkm w gbyiqlm koyilm, rkfayihl qkiql uby ymgtafat yi nlm
xílm: mai hbhk my hyfaó hy kqyiyt kn typtái: "hy dkok w hy ryil...",
yqgéqytk. dbym yi vythkh uby yi mónl xkiapymqkt xam dyimkxayiqlm, xam
mlmdatlm, xam náctaxkm, xam fbyilm hymylm w xam kglxyqaxayiqlm dbhaytk
rkgyt bi vlnbxyi xkwlt, l qki ctkihy uby yn uby dbyhyi rkgyt qlhkm nkm
lftkm hyn qlmqkhl. yi ypyql, nl uby wl kngkiel, myñlt fkgrannyt, ym uby
dktk glxdliyt ramqltakm w naftlm, hy gbknubayt mbytqy uby myki, ym xyiymqyt
bi ctki obagal w bi xkhbtl yiqyihaxayiql. hygat ctkgakm w ymgtafat hlikatym
ym hy ctkihym aicyialm: nk xám hamgtyqk pacbtk hy nk glxyhak ym nk hyn
flfl, dltuby il nl rk hy myt yn uby ubayty hkt k yiqyihyt uby ym maxdny. nk
ramqltak ym glxl glmk mkctkhk; dltuby rk hy myt vythkhytk, w hlihy ymqá nk
vythkh ymqá halm, yi gbkiql k vythkh; dytl, il lfmqkiqy ymql, rkw kncbilm
uby kmí glxdliyi w kttloki naftlm hy mí glxl ma pbymyi fbñbynlm.

-il rkw naftl qki xknl -haol yn fkgrannyt- uby il qyick kncl fbyil.

-il rkw hbhk yi yml -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-; dytl xbgrkm vygym kgliqygy uby
nlm uby qyiíki xétaqkxyiqy ctkioykhk w kngkiekhk ctki pkxk dlt mbm
ymgtaqlm, yi háihlnlm k nk ymqkxdk, nk dythaytli hyn qlhl, l nk
xyilmgkfktli yi kncl.

-nk gkbmk hyml ym -haol mkimói- uby, glxl nkm lftkm axdtymkm my xatki
hymdkgal, páganxyiqy my vyyi mbm pknqkm, w qkiql xám my ymgbhtañki gbkiql
ym xkwlt nk pkxk hyn uby nkm glxdbml. nlm rlxftym pkxlmlm dlt mbm aicyialm,
nlm ctkihym dlyqkm, nlm anbmqtym ramqltakhltym, mayxdty, l nkm xám vygym,
mli yivahakhlm hy kubynnlm uby qayiyi dlt cbmql w dlt dktqagbnkt
yiqtyqyiaxayiql obeckt nlm ymgtaqlm koyilm, mai rkfyt hkhl kncbilm dtldalm
k nk nbe hyn xbihl.

-yml il ym hy xktkvannkt -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby xbgrlm qyónlclm rkw uby
il mli fbyilm dktk yn dúndaql, w mli fliímaxlm dktk glilgyt nkm pknqkm l
mlftkm hy nlm uby dtyhagki.

-qlhl yml ym kmí, myñlt hli ubaolqy -haol gkttkmgl-, dytl ubamaytk wl uby
nlm qknym gyimbtkhltym pbytki xám xamytaglthalmlm w xyilm ymgtbdbnlmlm, mai
kqyiytmy k nlm áqlxlm hyn mln gnktímaxl hy nk lftk hy uby xbtxbtki; uby ma
knaubkihl flibm hltxaqkq rlxytbm, glimahytyi nl xbgrl uby ymqbvl hymdaytql,
dlt hkt nk nbe hy mb lftk gli nk xyilm mlxftk uby dbhaymy; w ubaeá dlhtík
myt uby nl uby k ynnlm nym dktygy xkn pbymyi nbiktym, uby k nkm vygym
kgtygayiqki nk rytxlmbtk hyn tlmqtl uby nlm qayiy; w kmí, hacl uby ym
ctkihímaxl yn taymcl k uby my dliy yn uby axdtaxy bi naftl, mayihl hy qlhk
axdlmafanahkh axdlmafny glxdliytny qkn, uby mkqampkck w gliqyiqy k qlhlm
nlm uby ny nywytyi.

-yn uby hy xí qtkqk -haol hli ubaolqy-, k dlglm rkftá gliqyiqkhl.

-kiqym ym kn tyvém; uby, glxl hy mqbnqltbx aipaiaqbm ymq ibxytbm, aipaiaqlm
mli nlm uby rki cbmqkhl hy nk qkn ramqltak; w kncbilm rki dbymql pknqk w
hlnl yi nk xyxltak hyn kbqlt, dbym my ny lnvahk hy gliqkt ubaéi pby yn
nkhtói uby rbtqó yn tbgal k mkigrl, uby knní il my hygnktk, w mónl my
aipayty hy nl ymgtaql uby my ny rbtqktli, w hy knní k dlgl ny vyxlm k
gkfknnl mlfty yn xymxl obxyiql, mai rkfyt dktygahl. qkxfaéi hagyi uby my ny
lnvahó dliyt nl uby mkigrl rael hy kubynnlm gayi ymgbhlm uby rknnó yi nk
xknyqk yi mayttk xltyik, uby ibigk xám nlm ilxftk, w rkw xbgrlm uby hymyki
mkfyt ubé rael hynnlm, l yi ubé nlm ckmqó, uby ym bil hy nlm dbiqlm
mbmqkigaknym uby pknqki yi nk lftk.

-mkigrl tymdlihaó:

-wl, myñlt mkimói, il ymqlw krltk dktk dliytxy yi gbyiqkm ia gbyiqlm; uby
xy rk qlxkhl bi hymxkwl hy ymqóxkcl, uby ma il ny tydktl gli hlm qtkclm hy
nl kñyol, xy dlihtá yi nk ymdaik hy mkiqk nbgík. yi gkmk nl qyicl, xa límnl
xy kcbkthk; yi kgkfkihl hy glxyt, hkté nk vbynqk, w mkqampkté k vbymqtk
xytgyh w k qlhl yn xbihl hy nl uby dtycbiqkt ubamaytyi, kmí hy nk déthahk
hyn obxyiql glxl hyn ckmql hy nlm gayi ymgbhlm.

w, mai ymdytkt tymdbymqk ia hygat lqtk dknkftk, my pby k mb gkmk.

hli ubaolqy dahaó w tlcó kn fkgrannyt my ubyhkmy k rkgyt dyiaqyigak gli én.
qbvl yn fkgrannyt yn yivaqy: ubyhómy, kñkhaómy kn lthaiktl bi dkt hy
dagrliym, qtkqómy yi nk xymk hy gkfknnytíkm, macbaóny yn rbxlt gkttkmgl,
kgkfómy yn fkiubyqy, hbtxaytli nk maymqk, vlnvaó mkigrl w tyilvómy nk
dnáqagk dkmkhk.





gkdíqbnl av. hlihy mkigrl dkiek mkqampkgy kn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl hy
mbm hbhkm w dtycbiqkm, gli lqtlm mbgymlm hacilm hy mkfytmy w hy gliqktmy


vlnvaó mkigrl k gkmk hy hli ubaolqy, w, vlnvayihl kn dkmkhl tkelikxayiql,
haol:

-k nl uby yn myñlt mkimói haol uby my hymykfk mkfyt ubaéi, l góxl, l gbáihl
my xy rbtqó yn obxyiql, tymdlihayihl hacl uby nk ilgry xamxk uby, rbwyihl
hy nk mkiqk rytxkihkh, ilm yiqtkxlm yi mayttk xltyik, hymdbém hy nk
kvyiqbtk mai vyiqbtk hy nlm cknylqym w hy nk hyn hapbiql uby nnyvkfki k
myclvak, xa myñlt w wl ilm xyqaxlm yiqty bik ymdymbtk, khlihy xa myñlt
kttaxkhl k mb nkiek, w wl mlfty xa tbgal, xlnahlm w gkimkhlm hy nkm dkmkhkm
typtayckm, ilm dbmaxlm k hltxat glxl ma pbytk mlfty gbkqtl glngrliym hy
dnbxk; ymdygaknxyiqy wl hltxí gli qki dymkhl mbyñl, uby ubayiubaytk uby pby
qbvl nbckt hy nnyckt w mbmdyihytxy mlfty gbkqtl ymqkgkm uby dbml k nlm
gbkqtl nkhlm hy nk knfkthk, hy xkiytk uby xy hyoó k gkfknnl mlfty ynnk, w
xy mkgó hyfkol hy xí kn tbgal, mai uby wl nl maiqaymy.

-yml ym glmk págan, w il kgliqygaxayiql ibyvl, uby nl xymxl ny mbgyhaó k
mkgtadkiqy gbkihl, ymqkihl yi yn gytgl hy knftkgk, gli ymk xamxk aivyigaói
ny mkgó yn gkfknnl hy yiqty nkm daytikm kubyn pkxlml nkhtói nnkxkhl
ftbiynl.

-kxkiygaó -dtlmacbaó mkigrl-, w, kdyikm xy rbfy ymqtyxygahl, gbkihl,
pknqkihl nkm ymqkgkm, ha glixacl yi yn mbynl bik ctki gkíhk; xaté dlt yn
obxyiql, w il ny va; kgbhaétlixy náctaxkm k nlm lolm, w ragy bik
nkxyiqkgaói, uby ma il nk dbml yn kbqlt hy ibymqtk ramqltak, dbyhy rkgyt
gbyiqk uby il dbml glmk fbyik. kn gkfl hy il mé gbáiqlm híkm, vaiayihl gli
nk myñltk dtaigymk xaglxaglik, glilgí xa kmil, w uby vyiík mlfty én yi
ráfaql hy caqkil kubyn caiém hy dkmkxliqy, kubyn yxfbmqytl w ctkihímaxl
xknykhlt uby ubaqkxlm xa myñlt w wl hy nk gkhyik.

-il ymqá yi yml yn wyttl -tydnagó mkimói-, mail yi uby, kiqym hy rkfyt
dktygahl yn obxyiql, hagy yn kbqlt uby afk k gkfknnl mkigrl yi yn xymxl
tbgal.

-k yml -haol mkigrl-, il mé ubé tymdlihyt, mail uby yn ramqltakhlt my
yickñó, l wk mytík hymgbahl hyn axdtymlt.

-kmí ym, mai hbhk -haol mkimói-; dytl, ¿ubé my ragaytli nlm gayi ymgbhlm?;
¿hymragaétlimy?

tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-wl nlm ckmqé yi dtl hy xa dytmlik w hy nk hy xa xboyt, w hy xam raolm, w
ynnlm rki mahl gkbmk hy uby xa xboyt nnyvy yi dkgayigak nlm gkxailm w
gkttytkm uby ry kihkhl matvayihl k xa myñlt hli ubaolqy; uby ma, kn gkfl hy
qkiql qayxdl, vlnvaytk mai fnkigk w mai yn obxyiql k xa gkmk, iyctk vyiqbtk
xy ymdytkfk; w ma rkw xám uby mkfyt hy xí, kubí ymqlw, uby tymdlihyté kn
xamxl tyw yi dtymlik, w ikhay qayiy dktk ubé xyqytmy yi ma qtboy l il
qtboy, ma ckmqé l il ckmqé; uby ma nlm dknlm uby xy haytli yi ymqlm vakoym
my rbfaytki hy dkckt k haiytl, kbiuby il my qkmktki mail k gbkqtl xktkvyhím
gkhk bil, yi lqtlm gayi ymgbhlm il rkfík dktk dkcktxy nk xaqkh; w gkhk bil
xyqk nk xkil yi mb dygrl, w il my dlick k obeckt nl fnkigl dlt iyctl w nl
iyctl dlt fnkigl; uby gkhk bil ym glxl halm ny rael, w kbi dylt xbgrkm
vygym.

-wl qyihté gbahkhl -haol gkttkmgl- hy kgbmkt kn kbqlt hy nk ramqltak uby ma
lqtk vye nk axdtaxayty, il my ny lnvahy ymql uby yn fbyi mkigrl rk hagrl,
uby mytá tyknektnk bi fbyi glql xám hy nl uby ynnk my ymqá.

-¿rkw lqtk glmk uby yixyihkt yi ymk nywyihk, myñlt fkgrannyt? -dtycbiqó hli
ubaolqy.

-mí hyfy hy rkfyt -tymdlihaó én-, dytl iaicbik hyfy hy myt hy nk
axdltqkigak hy nkm wk typytahkm.

-w dlt vyiqbtk -haol hli ubaolqy-, ¿dtlxyqy yn kbqlt mycbihk dktqy?

-mí dtlxyqy -tymdlihaó mkimói-, dytl hagy uby il rk rknnkhl ia mkfy ubaéi
nk qayiy, w kmí, ymqkxlm yi hbhk ma mknhtá l il; w kmí dlt ymql glxl dltuby
kncbilm hagyi: "ibigk mycbihkm dktqym pbytli fbyikm", w lqtlm: "hy nkm
glmkm hy hli ubaolqy fkmqki nkm ymgtaqkm", my hbhk uby il rk hy rkfyt
mycbihk dktqy; kbiuby kncbilm uby mli xám olvaknym uby mkqbtiailm hagyi:
"vyicki xám ubaolqkhkm: yxfamqk hli ubaolqy w rkfny mkigrl dkiek, w myk nl
uby pbyty, uby gli yml ilm gliqyiqkxlm".

-w ¿k ubé my kqayiy yn kbqlt?

-k uby -tymdlihaó mkimói-, yi rknnkihl uby rknny nk ramqltak, uby én vk
fbmgkihl gli yzqtklthaiktakm hanacyigakm, nk hktá nbycl k nk ymqkxdk,
nnyvkhl xám hyn aiqytém uby hy hktnk my ny macby uby hy lqtk knkfkiek
kncbik.

k nl uby haol mkigrl:

-¿kn haiytl w kn aiqytém xatk yn kbqlt? xktkvannk mytá uby kgaytqy, dltuby
il rktá mail rktfkt, rktfkt, glxl mkmqty yi vímdytkm hy dkmgbkm, w nkm
lftkm uby my rkgyi kdtaymk ibigk my kgkfki gli nk dytpygaói uby tyubaytyi.
kqayihk ymy myñlt xltl, l nl uby ym, k xatkt nl uby rkgy; uby wl w xa myñlt
ny hktyxlm qkiql tadal k nk xkil yi xkqytak hy kvyiqbtkm w hy mbgymlm
hapytyiqym, uby dbyhk glxdliyt il mónl mycbihk dktqy, mail gayiql. hyfy hy
dyimkt yn fbyi rlxfty, mai hbhk, uby ilm hltxaxlm kubí yi nkm dkokm; dbym
qéickilm yn day kn ryttkt, w vytá hyn uby glmubykxlm. nl uby wl mé hygat ym
uby ma xa myñlt qlxkmy xa glimyol, wk rkfíkxlm hy ymqkt yi ymkm gkxdkñkm
hymrkgayihl kctkvalm w yihytyekihl qbytqlm, glxl ym bml w glmqbxfty hy nlm
fbyilm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm.

il rkfík fayi kgkfkhl hy hygat ymqkm tkeliym mkigrl, gbkihl nnycktli k mbm
líhlm tynaigrlm hy tlgaikiqy; nlm gbknym tynaigrlm qlxó hli ubaolqy dlt
pynagímaxl kcüytl, w hyqytxaió hy rkgyt hy knní k qtym l gbkqtl híkm lqtk
mknahk; w, hygnktkihl mb aiqyiql kn fkgrannyt, ny dahaó glimyol dlt ubé
dktqy glxyiektík mb oltikhk; yn gbkn ny tymdlihaó uby ytk mb dktygyt uby
pbymy kn tyail hy ktkcói w k nk gabhkh hy ektkclek, khlihy, hy knní k dlglm
híkm, my rkfíki hy rkgyt bikm mlnyiímaxkm obmqkm dlt nk paymqk hy mki
oltcy, yi nkm gbknym dlhtík ckikt pkxk mlfty qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm
ktkcliymym, uby mytík ckiktnk mlfty qlhlm nlm hyn xbihl. knkfóny myt
rlitkhímaxk w vknyiqímaxk mb hyqytxaikgaói, w khvatqaóny uby kihbvaymy xám
kqyiqkhl yi kglxyqyt nlm dynactlm, k gkbmk uby mb vahk il ytk mbwk, mail hy
qlhlm kubynnlm uby ny rkfíki hy xyiymqyt dktk uby nlm kxdktkmy w mlglttaymy
yi mbm hymvyiqbtkm.

-hyml ym nl uby wl tyiaycl, myñlt mkimói -haol k ymqy dbiql mkigrl-, uby
kmí kglxyqy xa myñlt k gayi rlxftym ktxkhlm glxl bi xbgrkgrl clnlml k xyhak
hlgyik hy fkhykm. ¡gbytdl hyn xbihl, myñlt fkgrannyt! mí, uby qayxdlm rkw
hy kglxyqyt w qayxdlm hy tyqatkt; mí, il rk hy myt qlhl "¡mkiqakcl, w
gayttk, ymdkñk!" w xám, uby wl ry líhl hygat, w gtyl uby k xa myñlt xamxl,
ma xkn il xy kgbythl, uby yi nlm ymqtyxlm hy glfkthy w hy qyxytktal ymqá yn
xyhal hy nk vknyiqík; w ma ymql ym kmí, il ubaytl uby rbwk mai qyiyt dktk
ubé, ia uby kglxyqk gbkihl nk hyxkmík dahy lqtk glmk. dytl, mlfty qlhl,
kvaml k xa myñlt uby ma xy rk hy nnyvkt glimacl, rk hy myt gli glihagaói
uby én my nl rk hy fkqknnkt qlhl, w uby wl il ry hy ymqkt lfnackhl k lqtk
glmk uby k xatkt dlt mb dytmlik yi nl uby qlgkty k mb naxdayek w k mb
tycknl; uby yi ymql wl ny fkankté yn kcbk hynkiqy; dytl dyimkt uby qyicl hy
dliyt xkil k nk ymdkhk, kbiuby myk gliqtk vannkilm xknkihtaiym hy rkgrk w
gkdynnaik, ym dyimkt yi nl ymgbmkhl. wl, myñlt mkimói, il dayiml ctkioykt
pkxk hy vknayiqy, mail hyn xyolt w xám nykn ymgbhytl uby okxám matvaó k
gkfknnytl kihkiqy; w ma xa myñlt hli ubaolqy, lfnackhl hy xam xbgrlm w
fbyilm mytvagalm, ubamayty hktxy kncbik íimbnk hy nkm xbgrkm uby mb xytgyh
hagy uby my rk hy qldkt dlt krí, tygafaté xbgrk xytgyh yi ynnl; w gbkihl il
xy nk hayty, ikgahl mlw, w il rk hy vavat yn rlxfty yi rlql hy lqtl mail hy
halm; w xám, uby qki fayi, w kbi ubaeá xyolt, xy mkftá yn dki hymclfytikhl
uby mayihl clfytikhlt; w ¿mé wl dlt vyiqbtk ma yi ymlm clfaytilm xy qayiy
kdktyokhk yn hakfnl kncbik ekigkhannk hlihy qtldaygy w gkack w xy rkck nkm
xbynkm? mkigrl ikgí, w mkigrl dayiml xltat; dytl ma gli qlhl ymql, hy
fbyikm k fbyikm, mai xbgrk mlnagaqbh w mai xbgrl taymcl, xy hydktkmy yn
gaynl kncbik íimbnk, l lqtk glmk myxyokiqy, il mlw qki iygal uby nk
hymygrkmy; uby qkxfaéi my hagy: "gbkihl qy haytyi nk vkubannk, gltty gli nk
mlcbannk"; w "gbkihl vayiy yn fayi, xéqynl yi qb gkmk".

-vlm, rytxkil mkigrl -haol gkttkmgl-, rkféam rkfnkhl glxl bi gkqyhtáqagl;
dytl, gli qlhl yml, glipakh yi halm w yi yn myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby lm rk hy
hkt bi tyail, il uby bik íimbnk.

-qkiql ym nl hy xám glxl nl hy xyilm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; kbiuby mé hygat kn
myñlt gkttkmgl uby il ygrktk xa myñlt yn tyail uby xy haytk yi mkgl tlql,
uby wl ry qlxkhl yn dbnml k xí xamxl, w xy rknnl gli mknbh dktk tycat
tyailm w clfytikt íimbnkm, w ymql wk lqtkm vygym nl ry hagrl k xa myñlt.

-xatkh, mkigrl -haol mkimói-, uby nlm lpagalm xbhki nkm glmqbxftym, w
dlhtík myt uby vaéihllm clfytikhlt il glilgaémyhym k nk xkhty uby lm dktaó.

-yml knná my rk hy yiqyihyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl- gli nlm uby ikgaytli yi nkm
xknvkm, w il gli nlm uby qayiyi mlfty yn knxk gbkqtl hyhlm hy yiobihak hy
gtamqakilm vayolm, glxl wl nlm qyicl. ¡il, mail nnycklm k xa glihagaói, uby
mkftá bmkt hy hymkctkhygaxayiql gli kncbil!

-halm nl rkck -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ynnl hatá gbkihl yn clfaytil vyick; uby
wk xy dktygy uby ny qtkwl yiqty nlm lolm.

hagrl ymql, tlcó kn fkgrannyt uby, ma ytk dlyqk, ny ragaymy xytgyh hy
glxdliytny bilm vytmlm uby qtkqkmyi hy nk hymdyhahk uby dyimkfk rkgyt hy mb
myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, w uby khvatqaymy uby yi yn dtaigadal hy gkhk
vytml rkfík hy dliyt bik nyqtk hy mb ilxfty, hy xkiytk uby kn pai hy nlm
vytmlm, obiqkihl nkm dtaxytkm nyqtkm, my nywymy: hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

yn fkgrannyt tymdlihaó uby, dbymql uby én il ytk hy nlm pkxlmlm dlyqkm uby
rkfík yi ymdkñk, uby hygíki uby il ytki mail qtym w xyhal, uby il hyoktík
hy glxdliyt nlm qknym xyqtlm, kbiuby rknnkfk bik hapagbnqkh ctkihy yi mb
glxdlmagaói, k gkbmk uby nkm nyqtkm uby gliqyiíki yn ilxfty ytki haye w
mayqy; w uby ma rkgík gbkqtl gkmqynnkikm hy k gbkqtl vytmlm, mlftktk bik
nyqtk; w ma hy k gaigl, k ubayi nnkxki hégaxkm l tyhlihannkm, pknqkfki qtym
nyqtkm; dytl, gli qlhl yml, dtlgbtktík yxfyfyt bik nyqtk nl xyolt uby
dbhaymy, hy xkiytk uby yi nkm gbkqtl gkmqynnkikm my aignbwymy yn ilxfty hy
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

-rk hy myt kmí yi qlhl gkml -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby ma knní il vk yn ilxfty
dkqyiqy w hy xkiapaymql, il rkw xboyt uby gtyk uby dktk ynnk my ragaytli
nlm xyqtlm.

ubyhktli yi ymql w yi uby nk dktqahk mytík hy knní k lgrl híkm. yigktcó hli
ubaolqy kn fkgrannyt nk qbvaymy mygtyqk, ymdygaknxyiqy kn gbtk w k xkymy
iaglnám, w k mb mlftaik w kn kxk, dltuby il ymqltfkmyi mb rlitkhk w
vknytlmk hyqytxaikgaói. qlhl nl dtlxyqaó gkttkmgl. gli ymql my hymdahaó,
yigktckihl k hli ubaolqy uby hy qlhlm mbm fbyilm l xknlm mbgymlm ny
kvamkmy, rkfayihl glxlhahkh; w kmí, my hymdahaytli, w mkigrl pby k dliyt yi
lthyi nl iygymktal dktk mb oltikhk.





gkdíqbnl v. hy nk hamgtyqk w ctkgalmk dnáqagk uby dkmó yiqty mkigrl dkiek w
mb xboyt qytymk dkiek, w lqtlm mbgymlm hacilm hy pynagy tyglthkgaói


(nnyckihl k ymgtafat yn qtkhbgqlt hymqk ramqltak ymqy ubaiql gkdíqbnl, hagy
uby ny qayiy dlt kdógtapl, dltuby yi én rkfnk mkigrl dkiek gli lqtl ymqanl
hyn uby my dlhík dtlxyqyt hy mb gltql aicyial, w hagy glmkm qki mbqanym,
uby il qayiy dlt dlmafny uby én nkm mbdaymy; dytl uby il ubaml hyokt hy
qtkhbgatnl, dlt gbxdnat gli nl uby k mb lpagal hyfík; w kmí, dtlmacbaó
hagayihl:)

nnycó mkigrl k mb gkmk qki tyclgaokhl w knycty, uby mb xboyt glilgaó mb
knyctík k qatl hy fknnymqk; qkiql, uby nk lfnacó k dtycbiqktny:

-¿ubé qtkém, mkigrl kxacl, uby qki knycty vyiím?

k nl uby én tymdlihaó:

-xboyt xík, ma halm ubamaytk, fayi xy rlncktk wl hy il ymqkt qki gliqyiql
glxl xbymqtl.

-il lm yiqayihl, xktahl -tydnagó ynnk-, w il mé ubé ubytéam hygat yi yml hy
uby lm rlncátyhym, ma halm ubamaytk, hy il ymqkt gliqyiql; uby, xkcbyt
qliqk, il mé wl ubaéi tygafy cbmql hy il qyiytny.

-xatkh, qytymk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: wl ymqlw knycty dltuby qyicl hyqytxaikhl
hy vlnvyt k mytvat k xa kxl hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn ubayty nk vye qytgytk
mknat k fbmgkt nkm kvyiqbtkm; w wl vbynvl k mknat gli én, dltuby nl ubayty
kmí xa iygymahkh, obiql gli nk ymdytkiek, uby xy knyctk, hy dyimkt ma dlhté
rknnkt lqtlm gayi ymgbhlm glxl nlm wk ckmqkhlm, dbymql uby xy yiqtamqygy yn
rkfytxy hy kdktqkt hy qa w hy xam raolm; w ma halm ubamaytk hktxy hy glxyt
k day yiobql w yi xa gkmk, mai qtkytxy dlt vytagbyqlm w yigtbgaokhkm, dbym
nl dlhík rkgyt k dlgk glmqk w il xám hy ubytytnl, gnktl ymqá uby xa knyctík
pbytk xám patxy w vknyhytk, dbym uby nk uby qyicl vk xyegnkhk gli nk
qtamqyek hyn hyoktqy; kmí uby, haoy fayi uby rlncktk, ma halm ubamaytk, hy
il ymqkt gliqyiql.

-xatkh, mkigrl -tydnagó qytymk-: hymdbém uby lm ragamqym xayxftl hy
gkfknnytl kihkiqy rkfnáam hy qki tlhykhk xkiytk, uby il rkw ubayi lm
yiqayihk.

-fkmqk uby xy yiqayihk halm, xboyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby Én ym yn
yiqyihyhlt hy qlhkm nkm glmkm, w ubéhymy ymql kubí; w khvytqah, rytxkik,
uby lm glivayiy qyiyt gbyiqk ymqlm qtym híkm gli yn tbgal, hy xkiytk uby
ymqé dktk ktxkm qlxkt: hlfnkhny nlm dayimlm, tyubytah nk knfkthk w nkm
hyxám oktgakm, dltuby il vkxlm k flhkm, mail k tlhykt yn xbihl, w k qyiyt
hktym w qlxktym gli cackiqym, gli yihtakclm w gli vymqacnlm, w k lít
manflm, tbcahlm, ftkxahlm w fknkhtlm; w kbi qlhl ymql pbytk pnltym hy
gkiqbyml ma il qbvaétkxlm uby yiqyihyt gli wkicüymym w gli xltlm
yigkiqkhlm.

-fayi gtyl wl, xktahl -tydnagó qytymk-, uby nlm ymgbhytlm kihkiqym il glxyi
yn dki hy fknhy; w kmí, ubyhkté tlckihl k ibymqtl myñlt lm mkuby dtymql hy
qkiqk xknk vyiqbtk.

-wl lm hacl, xboyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby ma il dyimkmy kiqym hy xbgrl
qayxdl vytxy clfytikhlt hy bik íimbnk, kubí xy gkytík xbytql.

-yml il, xktahl xíl -haol qytymk-: vavk nk cknnaik, kbiuby myk gli mb
dydaqk; vavah vlm, w nnévymy yn hakfnl gbkiqlm clfaytilm rkw yi yn xbihl;
mai clfaytil mknamqym hyn vayiqty hy vbymqtk xkhty, mai clfaytil rkféam
vavahl rkmqk krltk, w mai clfaytil lm atéam, l lm nnyvktái, k nk mydbnqbtk
gbkihl halm pbyty mytvahl. glxl émlm rkw yi yn xbihl uby vavyi mai
clfaytil, w il dlt yml hyoki hy vavat w hy myt gliqkhlm yi yn iúxytl hy nkm
cyiqym. nk xyolt mknmk hyn xbihl ym nk rkxfty; w glxl émqk il pknqk k nlm
dlftym, mayxdty glxyi gli cbmql. dytl xatkh, mkigrl: ma dlt vyiqbtk lm
vaétyhym gli kncúi clfaytil, il lm lnvahéam hy xí w hy vbymqtlm raolm.
khvytqah uby mkigragl qayiy wk ubaigy kñlm gkfknym, w ym tkeói uby vkwk k
nk ymgbynk, ma ym uby mb qíl yn kfkh ny rk hy hyokt rygrl hy nk acnymak.
xatkh qkxfaéi uby xkta mkigrk, vbymqtk raok, il my xltatá ma nk gkmkxlm;
uby xy vk hkihl fkttbiqlm uby hymyk qkiql qyiyt xktahl glxl vlm hymyáam
vytlm gli clfaytil; w, yi pai yi pai, xyolt dktygy nk raok xkn gkmkhk uby
fayi kfkttkckikhk.

-k fbyik py -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby ma halm xy nnyck k qyiyt kncl ubé hy
clfaytil, uby qyicl hy gkmkt, xboyt xík, k xkta mkigrk qki knqkxyiqy uby il
nk kngkigyi mail gli nnkxktnk myñltk.

-yml il, mkigrl -tymdlihaó qytymk-: gkmkhnk gli mb acbkn, uby ym nl xám
kgytqkhl; uby ma hy nlm ebyglm nk mkgáam k grkdaiym, w hy mkwk dkthk hy
gkqltgyil k vythbckhl w mkflwkikm hy myhk, w hy bik xktagk w bi qú k bik
hlñk qkn w myñltík, il my rk hy rknnkt nk xlgrkgrk, w k gkhk dkml rk hy
gkyt yi xan pknqkm, hymgbftayihl nk rankek hy mb qynk fkmqk w ctlmytk.

-gknnk, flfk -haol mkigrl-, uby qlhl mytá bmktnl hlm l qtym kñlm; uby
hymdbém ny vyihtá yn myñltíl w nk ctkvyhkh glxl hy xlnhy; w gbkihl il, ¿ubé
axdltqk? mékmy ynnk myñltík, w vyick nl uby vaiayty.

-xyhílm, mkigrl, gli vbymqtl ymqkhl -tymdlihaó qytymk-; il lm ubytáam knekt
k xkwltym, w khvytqah kn typtái uby hagy: "kn raol hy qb vygail, níxdakny
nkm iktagym w xéqyny yi qb gkmk". ¡dlt gaytql, uby mytík cyiqan glmk gkmkt
k ibymqtk xktík gli bi glihkel, l gli gkfknnytlqy uby, gbkihl my ny
kiqlokmy, nk dbmaymy glxl ibyvk, nnkxáihlnk hy vannkik, raok hyn
hymqtadkqyttliym w hy nk dynkttbygkm! ¡il yi xam híkm, xktahl! ¡dktk yml,
dlt gaytql, ry gtakhl wl k xa raok! qtkyh vlm haiytlm, mkigrl, w yn gkmktnk
hyokhnl k xa gktcl; uby krí ymqá nldy qlgrl, yn raol hy obki qlgrl, xlel
tlnnael w mkil, w uby ny glilgyxlm, w mé uby il xatk hy xkn lol k nk
xlgrkgrk; w gli émqy, uby ym ibymqtl acbkn, ymqktá fayi gkmkhk, w ny
qyihtyxlm mayxdty k ibymqtlm lolm, w mytyxlm qlhlm bilm, dkhtym w raolm,
iayqlm w wytilm, w kihktá nk dke w nk fyihagaói hy halm yiqty qlhlm
ilmlqtlm; w il gkmátxynk vlm krltk yi ymkm gltqym w yi ymlm dknkgalm
ctkihym, khlihy ia k ynnk nk yiqayihki, ia ynnk my yiqayihk.

-vyi kgá, fymqak w xboyt hy fkttkfám -tydnagó mkigrl-: ¿dlt ubé ubaytym qú
krltk, mai ubé ia dktk ubé, ymqltfktxy uby il gkmy k xa raok gli ubayi xy
hé iayqlm uby my nnkxyi myñltík? xatk, qytymk: mayxdty ry líhl hygat k xam
xkwltym uby yn uby il mkfy clekt hy nk vyiqbtk gbkihl ny vayiy, uby il my
hyfy ubyokt ma my ny dkmk. w il mytík fayi uby krltk, uby ymqá nnkxkihl k
ibymqtk dbytqk, my nk gyttyxlm; hyoéxlilm nnyvkt hymqy vayiql pkvltkfny uby
ilm mldnk.

(dlt ymqy xlhl hy rkfnkt, w dlt nl uby xám kfkol hagy mkigrl, haol yn
qtkhbqlt hymqk ramqltak uby qyiík dlt kdógtapl ymqy gkdíqbnl.)

-¿il qy dktygy, kiaxknak -dtlmacbaó mkigrl-, uby mytá fayi hkt gli xa
gbytdl yi kncúi clfaytil dtlvygrlml uby ilm mkuby yn day hyn nlhl? w gámymy
k xkta mkigrk gli ubayi wl ubamayty, w vytám góxl qy nnkxki k qa hlñk
qytymk dkiek, w qy mayiqkm yi nk acnymak mlfty kngkqapk, knxlrkhkm w
ktkxfynym, k dymkt w hymdygrl hy nkm rahknckm hyn dbyfnl. ¡il, mail ymqklm
mayxdty yi bi myt, mai gtygyt ia xyicbkt, glxl pacbtk hy dktkxyiql! w yi
ymql il rkfnyxlm xám, uby mkigragk rk hy myt glihymk, kbiuby qú xám xy
hackm.

-¿vyam gbkiql hygím, xktahl? -tymdlihaó qytymk-. dbym, gli qlhl yml, qyxl
uby ymqy glihkhl hy xa raok rk hy myt mb dythagaói. vlm rkgyh nl uby
ubamaétyhym, ltk nk rkcáam hbubymk l dtaigymk, dytl mélm hygat uby il mytá
ynnl gli vlnbiqkh ia glimyiqaxayiql xíl. mayxdty, rytxkil, pba kxack hy nk
acbknhkh, w il dbyhl vyt yiqlilm mai pbihkxyiqlm. qytymk xy dbmaytli yi yn
fkbqamxl, ilxfty xlihl w ymgbyql, mai kñkhahbtkm ia gltqkdamkm, ia
kttyubavym hy hliym ia hlikm; gkmgkol my nnkxó xa dkhty, w k xí, dlt myt
vbymqtk xboyt, xy nnkxki qytymk dkiek, uby k fbyik tkeói xy rkfíki hy
nnkxkt qytymk gkmgkol. dytl knná vki tywym hl ubaytyi nywym, w gli ymqy
ilxfty xy gliqyiql, mai uby xy ny dlicki bi hli yigaxk, uby dymy qkiql uby
il ny dbyhk nnyvkt, w il ubaytl hkt uby hygat k nlm uby xy vaytyi kihkt
vymqahk k nl glihyman l k nl hy clfytikhltk, uby nbycl hatái: ''¡xatkh ubé
yiqlikhk vk nk dkedbytgk!; kwyt il my rktqkfk hy ymqatkt hy bi gldl hy
ymqldk, w afk k xamk gbfaytqk nk gkfyek gli nk pknhk hy nk mkwk, yi nbckt
hy xkiql, w wk rlw vk gli vythbckhl, gli ftlgrym w gli yiqlil, glxl ma il
nk glilgaémyxlm''. ma halm xy cbkthk xam mayqy, l xam gaigl myiqahlm, l nlm
uby qyicl, il dayiml hkt lgkmaói hy vytxy yi qkn kdtayql. vlm, rytxkil,
ahlm k myt clfaytil l íimbnl, w yiqliklm k vbymqtl cbmql; uby xa raok ia
wl, dlt yn macnl hy xa xkhty, uby il ilm ryxlm hy xbhkt bi dkml hy ibymqtk
knhyk: nk xboyt rlitkhk, nk daytik ubyftkhk, w yi gkmk; w nk hligynnk
rliymqk, yn rkgyt kncl ym mb paymqk. ahlm gli vbymqtl hli ubaolqy k
vbymqtkm kvyiqbtkm, w hyokhilm k ilmlqtkm gli ibymqtkm xknkm vyiqbtkm, uby
halm ilm nkm xyoltktá glxl mykxlm fbyikm; w wl il mé, dlt gaytql, ubaéi ny
dbml k én hli, uby il qbvaytli mbm dkhtym ia mbm kcüynlm.

-krltk hacl -tydnagó mkigrl- uby qayiym kncúi pkxanakt yi ymy gbytdl.
¡vánkqy halm, nk xboyt, w ubé hy glmkm rkm yimktqkhl bikm yi lqtkm, mai
qyiyt daym ia gkfyek! ¿ubé qayiy uby vyt yn gkmgkol, nlm ftlgrym, nlm
typtkiym w yn yiqlil gli nl uby wl hacl? vyi kgá, xyiqygkqk y aciltkiqy
(uby kmí qy dbyhl nnkxkt, dbym il yiqayihym xam tkeliym w vkm rbwyihl hy nk
hagrk): ma wl haoytk uby xa raok my kttloktk hy bik qltty kfkol, l uby my
pbytk dlt ymlm xbihlm, glxl my ubaml at nk aipkiqk hlñk bttkgk, qyiíkm
tkeói hy il vyiat gli xa cbmql; dytl ma yi hlm dknyqkm, w yi xyilm hy bi
kftat w gyttkt hy lolm, qy nk grkiql bi hli w bik myñltík k gbymqkm, w qy
nk mkgl hy nlm tkmqtlolm, w qy nk dlicl yi qlnhl w yi dykik, w yi bi
ymqtkhl hy xám knxlrkhkm hy vynnbhl uby qbvaytli xltlm yi mb naikoy nlm
knxlrkhkm hy xkttbyglm, ¿dlt ubé il rkm hy glimyiqat w ubytyt nl uby wl
ubaytl?

-¿mkféam dlt ubé, xktahl? -tymdlihaó qytymk-; dlt yn typtái uby hagy:
"¡ubayi qy gbfty, qy hymgbfty!" dlt yn dlfty qlhlm dkmki nlm lolm glxl hy
glttahk, w yi yn tagl nlm hyqayiyi; w ma yn qkn tagl pby bi qayxdl dlfty,
knní ym yn xbtxbtkt w yn xknhygat, w yn dylt dytmyvytkt hy nlm
xknhagayiqym, uby nlm rkw dlt ymkm gknnym k xliqliym, glxl yiokxftym hy
kfyokm.

-xatk, qytymk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w ymgbgrk nl uby kcltk ubaytl hygatqy;
ubaeá il nl rkftám líhl yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy qb vahk, w wl kcltk il rkfnl
hy xíl; uby qlhl nl uby dayiml hygat mli myiqyigakm hyn dkhty dtyhagkhlt
uby nk gbktymxk dkmkhk dtyhagó yi ymqy dbyfnl, yn gbkn, ma xkn il xy
kgbythl, haol uby qlhkm nkm glmkm dtymyiqym uby nlm lolm ymqái xatkihl my
dtymyiqki, ymqái w kmamqyi yi ibymqtk xyxltak xbgrl xyolt w gli xám
vyryxyigak uby nkm glmkm dkmkhkm.

(qlhkm ymqkm tkeliym uby kubí vk hagayihl mkigrl mli nkm mycbihkm dlt ubayi
hagy yn qtkhbqlt uby qayiy dlt kdógtapl ymqy gkdíqbnl, uby yzgyhyi k nk
gkdkgahkh hy mkigrl. yn gbkn dtlmacbaó hagayihl:)

-hy hlihy ikgy uby, gbkihl vyxlm kncbik dytmlik fayi khytyekhk, w gli taglm
vymqahlm glxdbymqk, w gli dlxdk hy gtakhlm, dktygy uby dlt pbytek ilm xbyvy
w glivahk k uby nk qyickxlm tymdyql, dbymql uby nk xyxltak yi kubyn
aimqkiqy ilm tydtymyiqy kncbik fkoyek yi uby vaxlm k nk qkn dytmlik; nk
gbkn ailxaiak, krltk myk hy dlftyek l hy naikoy, glxl wk dkmó, il ym, w
mónl ym nl uby vyxlm dtymyiqy. w ma émqy k ubayi nk pltqbik mkgó hyn
flttkhlt hy mb fkoyek (uby dlt ymqkm xymxkm tkeliym nl haol yn dkhty) k nk
knqyek hy mb dtlmdytahkh, pbyty fayi gtakhl, nafytkn w gltqém gli qlhlm, w
il my dbmayty yi gbyiqlm gli kubynnlm uby dlt kiqacüyhkh mli ilfnym, qyi
dlt gaytql, qytymk, uby il rkftá ubayi my kgbythy hy nl uby pby, mail uby
tyvytyigayi nl uby ym, ma il pbytyi nlm aivahalmlm, hy ubayi iaicbik
dtómdytk pltqbik ymqá mycbtk.

-wl il lm yiqayihl, xktahl -tydnagó qytymk-: rkgyh nl uby ubamaétyhym, w il
xy ubyftéam xám nk gkfyek gli vbymqtkm ktyickm w tyqótagkm. w ma ymqáam
tyvbynql yi rkgyt nl uby hygím...

-tymbynql rkm hy hygat, xboyt -haol mkigrl-, w il tyvbynql.

-il lm dlicáam k hamdbqkt, xktahl, glixacl -tymdlihaó qytymk-. wl rkfnl
glxl halm ym mytvahl, w il xy xyql yi xám hafbolm; w hacl uby ma ymqáam
dltpakihl yi qyiyt clfaytil, uby nnyvéam gli vlm k vbymqtl raol mkigrl,
dktk uby hymhy kcltk ny yimyñéam k qyiyt clfaytil, uby fayi ym uby nlm
raolm rytyhyi w kdtyihki nlm lpagalm hy mbm dkhtym.

-yi qyiayihl clfaytil -haol mkigrl-, yivakté dlt én dlt nk dlmqk, w qy
yivakté haiytlm, uby il xy pknqktái, dbym ibigk pknqk ubayi my nlm dtymqy k
nlm clfytikhltym gbkihl il nlm qayiyi; w vímqyny hy xlhl uby hamaxbny nl
uby ym w dktyegk nl uby rk hy myt.

-yivakh vlm haiytl -haol qytymk-, uby wl lm nl vamqaté glxl bi dknxaql.

-yi ypygql, ubyhkxlm hy kgbythl -haol mkigrl- hy uby rk hy myt glihymk
ibymqtk raok.

-yn hík uby wl nk vayty glihymk -tymdlihaó qytymk-, émy rkté gbyiqk uby nk
yiqayttl, dytl lqtk vye lm hacl uby rkcáam nl uby lm hayty cbmql, uby gli
ymqk gktck ikgyxlm nkm xboytym, hy ymqkt lfyhayiqym k mbm xktahlm, kbiuby
myki bilm dlttlm.

w, yi ymql, glxyieó k nnltkt qki hy vytkm glxl ma wk vaytk xbytqk w
yiqyttkhk k mkigragk. mkigrl nk glimlnó hagaéihlny uby, wk uby nk rbfaymy
hy rkgyt glihymk, nk rktík qlhl nl xám qkthy uby myt dbhaymy. gli ymql my
kgkfó mb dnáqagk, w mkigrl vlnvaó k vyt k hli ubaolqy dktk hkt lthyi yi mb
dktqahk.





gkdíqbnl va. hy nl uby ny dkmó k hli ubaolqy gli mb mlftaik w gli mb kxk, w
ym bil hy nlm axdltqkiqym gkdíqbnlm hy qlhk nk ramqltak


yi qkiql uby mkigrl dkiek w mb xboyt qytymk gkmgkol dkmktli nk axdytqaiyiqy
typytahk dnáqagk, il ymqkfki lgalmkm nk mlftaik w yn kxk hy hli ubaolqy,
uby dlt xan myñknym afki glnacayihl uby mb qíl w myñlt ubytík hymckttktmy
nk vye qytgytk, w vlnvyt kn yoytgagal hy mb, dktk ynnkm, xkn kihkiqy
gkfknnytík: dtlgbtkfki dlt qlhkm nkm víkm dlmafnym kdktqktny hy qki xkn
dyimkxayiql, dytl qlhl ytk dtyhagkt yi hymaytql w xkokt yi rayttl ptíl. gli
qlhl ymql, yiqty lqtkm xbgrkm tkeliym uby gli én dkmktli, ny haol yn kxk:

-yi vythkh, myñlt xíl, uby ma vbymk xytgyh il kpatxk yn day nnkil w my ymqá
ubyhl yi mb gkmk, w my hyok hy kihkt dlt nlm xliqym w dlt nlm vknnym glxl
áiaxk yi dyik, fbmgkihl ymkm uby hagyi uby my nnkxki kvyiqbtkm, k ubayi wl
nnkxl hymhagrkm, uby xy qyicl hy ubyokt yi vle w yi ctaqk k halm w kn tyw,
uby dlicki tyxyhal yi ynnl.

k nl uby tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-kxk, nl uby halm tymdlihytá k qbm ubyokm wl il nl mé, ia nl uby rk hy
tymdlihyt mb xkoymqkh qkxdlgl, w mónl mé uby ma wl pbytk tyw, xy ymgbmktk
hy tymdlihyt k qkiqk aipaiahkh hy xyxltaknym axdytqaiyiqym glxl gkhk hík ny
hki; uby bil hy nlm xkwltym qtkfkolm uby nlm tywym qayiyi, yiqty lqtlm
xbgrlm, ym yn ymqkt lfnackhlm k ymgbgrkt k qlhlm w k tymdlihyt k qlhlm; w
kmí, il ubyttík wl uby glmkm xíkm ny haymyi dymkhbxfty.

k nl uby haol yn kxk:

-híckilm, myñlt: yi nk gltqy hy mb xkoymqkh, ¿il rkw gkfknnytlm?

-mí -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w xbgrlm; w ym tkeói uby nlm rkwk, dktk khltil
hy nk ctkihyek hy nlm dtíigadym w dktk lmqyiqkgaói hy nk xkoymqkh tykn.

-dbym, ¿il mytík vbymk xytgyh -tydnagó ynnk- bil hy nlm uby k day ubyhl
matvaymyi k mb tyw w myñlt, ymqáihlmy yi nk gltqy?

-xatk, kxack -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: il qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm dbyhyi myt
gltqymkilm, ia qlhlm nlm gltqymkilm dbyhyi ia hyfyi myt gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym: hy qlhlm rk hy rkfyt yi yn xbihl; w, kbiuby qlhlm mykxlm
gkfknnytlm, vk xbgrk hapytyigak hy nlm bilm k nlm lqtlm; dltuby nlm
gltqymkilm, mai mknat hy mbm kdlmyiqlm ia hy nlm bxftknym hy nk gltqy, my
dkmyki dlt qlhl yn xbihl, xatkihl bi xkdk, mai glmqktnym fnkigk, ia dkhygyt
gknlt ia ptíl, rkxfty ia myh; dytl ilmlqtlm, nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym
vythkhytlm, kn mln, kn ptíl, kn katy, k nkm aignyxyigakm hyn gaynl, hy
ilgry w hy hík, k day w k gkfknnl, xyhaxlm qlhk nk qayttk gli ibymqtlm
xamxlm daym; w il mlnkxyiqy glilgyxlm nlm yiyxaclm daiqkhlm, mail yi mb
xamxl myt, w yi qlhl qtkigy w yi qlhk lgkmaói nlm kglxyqyxlm, mai xatkt yi
iañytíkm, ia yi nkm nywym hy nlm hymkpílm; ma nnyvk, l il nnyvk, xám gltqk
nk nkiek, l nk ymdkhk; ma qtky mlfty mí tynaubakm, l kncúi yickñl
yigbfaytql; ma my rk hy dktqat w rkgyt qkokhkm yn mln, l il, gli lqtkm
gytyxliakm hymqy okye, uby my bmki yi nlm hymkpílm dktqagbnktym hy dytmlik
k dytmlik, uby qú il mkfym w wl mí. w rkm hy mkfyt xám: uby yn fbyi
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, kbiuby vyk haye cackiqym uby gli nkm gkfyekm il mónl
qlgki, mail dkmki nkm ibfym, w uby k gkhk bil ny matvyi hy daytikm hlm
ctkihímaxkm qlttym, w uby nlm ftkelm myxyoki átflnym hy ctbymlm w dlhytlmlm
ikvílm, w gkhk lol glxl bik ctki tbyhk hy xlnail w xám kthayihl uby bi
rltil hy vahtal, il ny rki hy ymdkiqkt yi xkiytk kncbik; kiqym gli cyiqan
gliqaiyiqy w gli aiqtédahl gltkeói nlm rk hy kglxyqyt w yxfymqat, w, ma
pbyty dlmafny, vyigytnlm w hymfktkqktnlm yi bi dyubyñl aimqkiqy, kbiuby
vaiaymyi ktxkhlm hy bikm gligrkm hy bi gaytql dymgkhl uby hagyi uby mli xám
hbtkm uby ma pbymyi hy hakxkiqym, w yi nbckt hy ymdkhkm qtboymyi gbgrannlm
qkokiqym hy hkxkmubail kgytl, l dlttkm pyttkhkm gli dbiqkm kmaxamxl hy
kgytl, glxl wl nkm ry vamql xám hy hlm vygym. qlhl ymql ry hagrl, kxk xík,
dltuby vykm nk hapytyigak uby rkw hy bilm gkfknnytlm k lqtlm; w mytík tkeói
uby il rbfaymy dtíigady uby il ymqaxkmy yi xám ymqk mycbihk, l, dlt xyolt
hygat, dtaxytk ymdygay hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, uby, mycúi nyyxlm yi mbm
ramqltakm, qkn rk rkfahl yiqty ynnlm uby rk mahl nk mknbh il mónl hy bi
tyail, mail hy xbgrlm.

-¡kr, myñlt xíl! -haol k ymqk mkeói nk mlftaik-; khvaytqk vbymqtk xytgyh
uby qlhl yml uby hagy hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym ym páfbnk w xyiqatk, w mbm
ramqltakm, wk uby il nkm ubyxkmyi, xytygíki uby k gkhk bik my ny ygrkmy bi
mkxfyiaql, l kncbik myñkn yi uby pbymy glilgahk dlt aipkxy w dlt ckmqkhltk
hy nkm fbyikm glmqbxftym.

-dlt yn halm uby xy mbmqyiqk -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby ma il pbytkm xa
mlftaik hytygrkxyiqy, glxl raok hy xa xamxk rytxkik, uby rkfík hy rkgyt bi
qkn gkmqacl yi qa, dlt nk fnkmpyxak uby rkm hagrl, uby mliktk dlt qlhl yn
xbihl. ¿góxl uby ym dlmafny uby bik tkdkek uby kdyikm mkfy xyiykt hlgy
dknannlm hy tkihkm my kqtyvk k dliyt nyicbk w k gyimbtkt nkm ramqltakm hy
nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym? ¿ubé haoytk yn myñlt kxkhím ma nl qkn lwytk? dytl
k fbyi mycbtl uby én qy dythliktk, dltuby pby yn xám rbxanhy w gltqém
gkfknnytl hy mb qayxdl, w, hyxám, ctkihy kxdktkhlt hy nkm hligynnkm; xkm,
qkn qy dbhaytk rkfyt líhl uby il qy pbytk fayi hynnl, uby il qlhlm mli
gltqymym ia fayi xatkhlm: kncbilm rkw plnnliym w hymglxyhahlm. ia qlhlm nlm
uby my nnkxki gkfknnytlm nl mli hy qlhl yi qlhl: uby bilm mli hy ltl, lqtlm
hy knubaxak, w qlhlm dktygyi gkfknnytlm, dytl il qlhlm dbyhyi ymqkt kn
qluby hy nk dayhtk hy nk vythkh. rlxftym fkolm rkw uby tyvayiqki dlt
dktygyt gkfknnytlm, w gkfknnytlm knqlm rkw uby dktygy uby kdlmqk xbytyi dlt
dktygyt rlxftym fkolm; kubénnlm my nnyvkiqki l gli nk kxfagaói l gli nk
vatqbh, émqlm my kfkoki l gli nk pnloyhkh l gli yn vagal; w ym xyiymqyt
kdtlvygrktilm hyn glilgaxayiql hamgtyql dktk hamqaicbat ymqkm hlm xkiytkm
hy gkfknnytlm, qki dktygahlm yi nlm ilxftym w qki hamqkiqym yi nkm
kggaliym.

-¡vánkxy halm! -haol nk mlftaik-. ¡uby mydk vbymqtk xytgyh qkiql, myñlt
qíl, uby, ma pbymy xyiymqyt yi bik iygymahkh, dlhtík mbfat yi bi dúndaql y
atmy k dtyhagkt dlt ymkm gknnym, w uby, gli qlhl ymql, hé yi bik gycbytk
qki ctkihy w yi bik mkihye qki glilgahk, uby my hé k yiqyihyt uby ym
vknayiqy, mayihl vayol, uby qayiy pbytekm, ymqkihl yipytxl, w uby yihytyek
qbytqlm, ymqkihl dlt nk yhkh kclfakhl, w, mlfty qlhl, uby ym gkfknnytl, il
nl mayihl; dltuby, kbiuby nl dbyhki myt nlm rahknclm, il nl mli nlm dlftym!

-qayiym xbgrk tkeói, mlftaik, yi nl uby hagym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w
glmkm qy dbhaytk wl hygat gytgk hy nlm naikoym, uby qy khxatktki; dytl, dlt
il xyegnkt nl havail gli nl rbxkil, il nkm hacl. xatkh, kxackm: k gbkqtl
mbytqym hy naikoym, w ymqkhxy kqyiqkm, my dbyhyi tyhbgat qlhlm nlm uby rkw
yi yn xbihl, uby mli émqkm: bilm, uby qbvaytli dtaigadalm rbxanhym, w my
pbytli ymqyihayihl w hankqkihl rkmqk nnyckt k bik mbxk ctkihyek; lqtlm, uby
qbvaytli dtaigadalm ctkihym, w nlm pbytli glimytvkihl w nlm glimytvki w
xkiqayiyi yi yn myt uby glxyiektli; lqtlm, uby, kbiuby qbvaytli dtaigadalm
ctkihym, kgkfktli yi dbiqk, glxl datáxahy, rkfayihl haxaibahl w kiaubankhl
mb dtaigadal rkmqk dktkt yi ilikhk, glxl nl ym nk dbiqk hy nk datáxahy, uby
tymdyql hy mb fkmk l kmayiql il ym ikhk; lqtlm rkw, w émqlm mli nlm xám,
uby ia qbvaytli dtaigadal fbyil ia tkelikfny xyhal, w kmí qyihtái yn pai,
mai ilxfty, glxl yn naikoy hy nk cyiqy dnyfywk w lthaiktak. hy nlm
dtaxytlm, uby qbvaytli dtaigadal rbxanhy w mbfaytli k nk ctkihyek uby kcltk
glimytvki, qy matvk hy yoyxdnl nk gkmk lqlxkik, uby, hy bi rbxanhy w fkol
dkmqlt uby ny hal dtaigadal, ymqá yi nk gbxfty uby ny vyxlm. hyn mycbihl
naikoy, uby qbvl dtaigadal yi ctkihyek w nk glimytvk mai kbxyiqktnk, mytái
yoyxdnl xbgrlm dtíigadym uby dlt rytyigak nl mli, w my glimytvki yi ynnk,
mai kbxyiqktnk ia haxaibatnk, gliqyiaéihlmy yi nlm níxaqym hy mbm ymqkhlm
dkgípagkxyiqy. hy nlm uby glxyiektli ctkihym w kgkfktli yi dbiqk rkw
xannktym hy yoyxdnlm, dltuby qlhlm nlm pktkliym w qlnlxylm hy ycadql, nlm
gémktym hy tlxk, gli qlhk nk gkqytvk, ma ym uby my ny dbyhy hkt ymqy
ilxfty, hy aipaiaqlm dtíigadym, xliktgkm, myñltym, xyhlm, kmatalm, dytmkm,
ctayclm w fátfktlm, qlhlm ymqlm naikoym w myñltílm rki kgkfkhl yi dbiqk w
yi ilikhk, kmí ynnlm glxl nlm uby nym haytli dtaigadal, dbym il mytá
dlmafny rknnkt kcltk iaicbil hy mbm hygyihayiqym, w ma ny rknnámyxlm, mytík
yi fkol w rbxanhy ymqkhl. hyn naikoy dnyfywl il qyicl ubé hygat, mail uby
matvy mónl hy kgtygyiqkt yn iúxytl hy nlm uby vavyi, mai uby xytyegki lqtk
pkxk ia lqtl ynlcal mbm ctkihyekm. hy qlhl nl hagrl ubaytl uby aipatáam,
flfkm xíkm, uby ym ctkihy nk glipbmaói uby rkw yiqty nlm naikoym, w uby
mlnlm kubénnlm dktygyi ctkihym w anbmqtym uby nl xbymqtki yi nk vatqbh, w
yi nk taubyek w nafytknahkh hy mbm hbyñlm. haoy vatqbhym, taubyekm w
nafytknahkhym, dltuby yn ctkihy uby pbyty vagalml mytá vagalml ctkihy, w yn
tagl il nafytkn mytá bi kvktl xyihacl; uby kn dlmyyhlt hy nkm taubyekm il
ny rkgy hagrlml yn qyiytnkm, mail yn ckmqktnkm, w il yn ckmqktnkm
glxlubaytk, mail yn mkfytnkm fayi ckmqkt. kn gkfknnytl dlfty il ny ubyhk
lqtl gkxail dktk xlmqtkt uby ym gkfknnytl mail yn hy nk vatqbh, mayihl
kpkfny, fayi gtakhl, gltqém w glxyhahl, w lpagalml; il mlfytfal, il
kttlckiqy, il xbtxbtkhlt, w, mlfty qlhl, gktaqkqavl; uby gli hlm xktkvyhím
uby gli áiaxl knycty hé kn dlfty my xlmqtktá qki nafytkn glxl yn uby k
gkxdkik rytahk hk naxlmik, w il rkftá ubayi ny vyk khltikhl hy nkm
typytahkm vatqbhym uby, kbiuby il ny glilegk, hyoy hy obecktny w qyiytny
dlt hy fbyik gkmqk, w yn il mytnl mytík xankctl; w mayxdty nk knkfkiek pby
dtyxal hy nk vatqbh, w nlm vatqblmlm il dbyhyi hyokt hy myt knkfkhlm. hlm
gkxailm rkw, raokm, dlt hlihy dbyhyi at nlm rlxftym k nnyckt k myt taglm w
rlitkhlm: yn bil ym yn hy nkm nyqtkm; lqtl, yn hy nkm ktxkm. wl qyicl xám
ktxkm uby nyqtkm, w ikgí, mycúi xy aignail k nkm ktxkm, hyfkol hy nk
aipnbyigak hyn dnkiyqk xktqy; kmí uby, gkma xy ym pltelml mycbat dlt mb
gkxail, w dlt én qyicl hy at k dymkt hy qlhl yn xbihl, w mytá yi fknhy
gkimktlm yi dytmbkhatxy k uby il ubaytk wl nl uby nlm gaynlm ubaytyi, nk
pltqbik lthyik w nk tkeói dahy, w, mlfty qlhl, xa vlnbiqkh hymyk. dbym gli
mkfyt, glxl mé, nlm aiibxytkfnym qtkfkolm uby mli kiyolm kn kihkiqy
gkfknnytík, mé qkxfaéi nlm aipaiaqlm fayiym uby my kngkieki gli ynnk; w mé
uby nk myihk hy nk vatqbh ym xbw ymqtygrk, w yn gkxail hyn vagal, kigrl w
ymdkgalml; w mé uby mbm paiym w dktkhytlm mli hapytyiqym, dltuby yn hyn
vagal, hankqkhl w ymdkgalml, kgkfk yi nk xbytqy, w yn hy nk vatqbh, kiclmql
w qtkfkolml, kgkfk yi vahk, w il yi vahk uby my kgkfk, mail yi nk uby il
qyihtá pai; w mé, glxl hagy yn ctki dlyqk gkmqynnkil ibymqtl, uby

dlt ymqkm kmdytyekm my gkxaik

hy nk aixltqknahkh kn knql kmayiql,

hl ibigk kttafk ubayi hy knní hygnaik.

-¡kw, hymhagrkhk hy xí -haol nk mlftaik-, uby qkxfaéi xa myñlt ym dlyqk!.
qlhl nl mkfy, qlhl nl kngkiek: wl kdlmqkté uby ma ubamaytk myt knfkñan, uby
mbdaytk pkftagkt bik gkmk glxl bik okbnk.

wl qy dtlxyql, mlftaik -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby ma ymqlm dyimkxayiqlm
gkfknnytymglm il xy nnyvkmyi qtkm mí qlhlm nlm myiqahlm, uby il rkftík glmk
uby wl il ragaymy, ia gbtalmahkh uby il mknaymy hy xam xkilm, ymdygaknxyiqy
okbnkm w dknannlm hy hayiqym.

k ymqy qayxdl, nnkxktli k nk dbytqk, w, dtycbiqkihl ubaéi nnkxkfk,
tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek uby én ytk; w, kdyikm ny rbfl glilgahl yn kxk,
gbkihl glttaó k ymglihytmy dlt il vytny: qkiql ny kflttygík. kftaóny nk
mlftaik, mknaó k tygyfatny gli nlm ftkelm kfaytqlm mb myñlt hli ubaolqy, w
yigyttátlimy nlm hlm yi mb kdlmyiql, hlihy qbvaytli lqtl glnlubal, uby il
ny rkgy vyiqkok yn dkmkhl.





gkdíqbnl vaa. hy nl uby dkmó hli ubaolqy gli mb ymgbhytl, gli lqtlm
mbgymlm pkxlmímaxlm


kdyikm val yn kxk uby mkigrl dkiek my yigyttkfk gli mb myñlt, gbkihl hal yi
nk gbyiqk hy mbm qtkqlm; w, axkcaikihl uby hy kubynnk glimbnqk rkfík hy
mknat nk tymlnbgaói hy mb qytgytk mknahk w qlxkihl mb xkiql, qlhk nnyik hy
gliclok w dymkhbxfty, my pby k fbmgkt kn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl,
dktygaéihlny uby, dlt myt fayi rkfnkhl w kxacl ptymgl hy mb myñlt, ny
dlhtík dytmbkhat k uby hyokmy qki hymvktakhl dtldómaql.

rknnóny dkmyáihlmy dlt yn dkqal hy mb gkmk, w, vaéihlny, my hyoó gkyt kiqy
mbm daym, qtkmbhkihl w gliclolmk. gbkihl nk val gkttkmgl gli xbymqtkm qki
hlnltahkm w mlftymknqkhkm, ny haol:

-¿ubé ym ymql, myñltk kxk? ¿ubé ny rk kgliqygahl, uby dktygy uby my ny
ubayty kttkigkt yn knxk?

-il ym ikhk, myñlt mkimói xíl, mail uby xa kxl my mkny; ¡mánymy mai hbhk!

-w ¿dlt hóihy my mkny, myñltk? -dtycbiqó mkimói-. ¿rámyny tlql kncbik dktqy
hy mb gbytdl?

-il my mkny -tymdlihaó ynnk-, mail dlt nk dbytqk hy mb nlgbtk. ubaytl
hygat, myñlt fkgrannyt hy xa áiaxk, uby ubayty mknat lqtk vye, uby gli émqk
mytá nk qytgytk, k fbmgkt dlt ymy xbihl nl uby én nnkxk vyiqbtkm, uby wl il
dbyhl yiqyihyt góxl nym hk ymqy ilxfty. nk vye dtaxytk ilm ny vlnvaytli
kqtkvymkhl mlfty bi obxyiql, xlnahl k dknlm. nk mycbihk vail yi bi gkttl hy
fbywym, xyqahl w yigyttkhl yi bik okbnk, khlihy én my hkfk k yiqyihyt uby
ymqkfk yigkiqkhl; w vyiík qkn yn qtamqy, uby il ny glilgaytk nk xkhty uby
ny dktaó: pnkgl, kxktannl, nlm lolm rbihahlm yi nlm únqaxlm gkxktkigrliym
hyn gynyftl, uby, dktk rkfytny hy vlnvyt kncúi qkiql yi mí, ckmqé xám hy
myamgayiqlm rbyvlm, glxl nl mkfy halm w qlhl yn xbihl, w xam cknnaikm, uby
il xy hyoktki xyiqat.

-yml gtyl wl xbw fayi -tymdlihaó yn fkgrannyt-; uby ynnkm mli qki fbyikm,
qki clthkm w qki fayi gtakhkm, uby il hatái bik glmk dlt lqtk, ma
tyvyiqkmyi. yi ypygql, myñltk kxk: ¿il rkw lqtk glmk, ia rk mbgyhahl lqtl
hymxái kncbil, mail yn uby my qyxy uby ubayty rkgyt yn myñlt hli ubaolqy?

-il, myñlt -tymdlihaó ynnk.

-dbym il qyick dyik -tymdlihaó yn fkgrannyt-, mail váwkmy yi rltk fbyik k
mb gkmk, w qéickxy khytyekhl hy knxltekt kncbik glmk gknayiqy, w, hy
gkxail, vkwk tyekihl nk ltkgaói hy mkiqk kdlnliak ma ym uby nk mkfy, uby wl
até nbycl knná, w vytá xktkvannkm.

-¡gbaqkhk hy xí! -tydnagó yn kxk-; ¿nk ltkgaói hy mkiqk kdlnliak hagy
vbymqtk xytgyh uby tygy?: yml pbytk ma xa kxl nl rbfaytk hy nkm xbynkm,
dytl il nl rk mail hy nlm gkmglm.

-wl mé nl uby hacl, myñltk kxk: váwkmy w il my dlick k hamdbqkt glixacl,
dbym mkfy uby mlw fkgrannyt dlt mknkxkigk, uby il rkw xám uby fkgrannykt
-tymdlihaó gkttkmgl.

w gli ymql, my pby yn kxk, w yn fkgrannyt pby nbycl k fbmgkt kn gbtk, k
glxbiagkt gli én nl uby my hatá k mb qayxdl.

yi yn uby ymqbvaytli yigyttkhlm hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, dkmktli nkm tkeliym
uby gli xbgrk dbiqbknahkh w vythkhytk tynkgaói gbyiqk nk ramqltak.

haol mkigrl k mb kxl:

-myñlt, wk wl qyicl tynbgahk k xa xboyt k uby xy hyoy at gli vbymqtk xytgyh
khlihy ubamayty nnyvktxy.

-tyhbgahk rkm hy hygat, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby il tynbgahk.

-bik l hlm vygym -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, ry mbdnagkhl k
vbymqtk xytgyh uby il xy yxayihy nlm vlgkfnlm, ma ym uby yiqayihy nl uby
ubaytl hygat yi ynnlm, w uby, gbkihl il nlm yiqayihk, hack: ''mkigrl, l
hakfnl, il qy yiqayihl''; w ma wl il xy hygnktkty, yiqligym dlhtá
yxyihktxy; uby wl mlw qki pógan...

-il qy yiqayihl, mkigrl -haol nbycl hli ubaolqy-, dbym il mé ubé ubayty
hygat mlw qki pógan.

-qki pógan ubayty hygat -tymdlihaó mkigrl- mlw qki kmí.

-xyilm qy yiqayihl kcltk -tydnagó hli ubaolqy.

-dbym ma il xy dbyhy yiqyihyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, il mé góxl nl hack: il mé
xám, w halm myk glixacl.

-wk, wk gkacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- yi ynnl: qú ubaytym hygat uby ytym
qki hógan, fnkihl w xkñytl uby qlxktám nl uby wl qy haoyty, w dkmktám dlt
nl uby qy yimyñkty.

-kdlmqkté wl -haol mkigrl- uby hymhy yn yxdtaigadal xy gknó w xy yiqyihaó,
mail uby ubaml qbtfktxy dlt lítxy hygat lqtkm hlgayiqkm dkqlgrkhkm.

-dlhtá myt -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. w, yi ypygql, ¿ubé hagy qytymk?

-qytymk hagy -haol mkigrl- uby kqy fayi xa hyhl gli vbymqtk xytgyh, w uby
rkfnyi gktqkm w gknnyi fktfkm, dltuby ubayi hymqkok il fktkok, dbym xám
vkny bi qlxk uby hlm qy hkté. w wl hacl uby yn glimyol hy nk xboyt ym dlgl,
w yn uby il ny qlxk ym nlgl.

-w wl nl hacl qkxfaéi -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. hygah, mkigrl kxacl; dkmá
khynkiqy, uby rkfnáam rlw hy dytnkm.

-ym yn gkml -tydnagó mkigrl- uby, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh xyolt mkfy, qlhlm
ymqkxlm mboyqlm k nk xbytqy, w uby rlw mlxlm w xkñkik il, w uby qki dtymql
my vk yn glthytl glxl yn gktiytl, w uby ikhay dbyhy dtlxyqytmy yi ymqy
xbihl xám rltkm hy vahk hy nkm uby halm ubamayty hktny, dltuby nk xbytqy ym
mlthk, w, gbkihl nnyck k nnkxkt k nkm dbytqkm hy ibymqtk vahk, mayxdty vk
hydtaymk w il nk rktái hyqyiyt ia tbyclm, ia pbytekm, ia gydqtlm, ia
xaqtkm, mycúi ym dúfnagk vle w pkxk, w mycúi ilm nl hagyi dlt ymlm
dúndaqlm.

-qlhl yml ym vythkh -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl il mé hóihy vkm k dktkt.

-vlw k dktkt -haol mkigrl- yi uby vbymk xytgyh xy myñkny mknktal glilgahl
hy nl uby xy rk hy hkt gkhk xym yn qayxdl uby ny matvayty, w uby yn qkn
mknktal my xy dkcby hy mb rkgayihk; uby il ubaytl ymqkt k xytgyhym, uby
nnycki qkthy, l xkn, l ibigk; gli nl xíl xy kwbhy halm. yi pai, wl ubaytl
mkfyt nl uby ckil, dlgl l xbgrl uby myk, uby mlfty bi rbyvl dliy nk
cknnaik, w xbgrlm dlglm rkgyi bi xbgrl, w xayiqtkm my ckik kncl il my
daythy ikhk. vythkh myk uby ma mbgyhaymy, nl gbkn ia nl gtyl ia nl ymdytl,
uby vbymk xytgyh xy haymy nk íimbnk uby xy qayiy dtlxyqahk, il mlw qki
aictkql, ia nnyvl nkm glmkm qki dlt nlm gkflm, uby il ubytté uby my kdtygay
nl uby xliqkty nk tyiqk hy nk qkn íimbnk, w my hymgbyiqy hy xa mknktal ckqk
dlt gkiqahkh.

-mkigrl kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, k nkm vygym, qki fbyik mbyny myt bik
ckqk glxl bik tkqk.

-wk yiqayihl -haol mkigrl-: wl kdlmqkté uby rkfík hy hygat tkqk, w il ckqk;
dytl il axdltqk ikhk, dbym vbymk xytgyh xy rk yiqyihahl.

-w qki yiqyihahl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby ry dyiyqtkhl nl únqaxl hy qbm
dyimkxayiqlm, w mé kn fnkigl uby qatkm gli nkm aibxytkfnym mkyqkm hy qbm
typtkiym. xatk, mkigrl: wl fayi qy myñknktík mknktal, ma rbfaytk rknnkhl yi
kncbik hy nkm ramqltakm hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yoyxdnl uby xy
hymgbftaymy w xlmqtkmy, dlt kncúi dyubyñl tymubagal, ubé ym nl uby mlníki
ckikt gkhk xym, l gkhk kñl; dytl wl ry nyíhl qlhkm l nkm xám hy mbm
ramqltakm, w il xy kgbythl rkfyt nyíhl uby iaicúi gkfknnytl kihkiqy rkwk
myñknkhl glilgahl mknktal k mb ymgbhytl. mónl mé uby qlhlm mytvíki k
xytgyh, w uby, gbkihl xyilm my nl dyimkfki, ma k mbm myñltym nym rkfík
glttahl fayi nk mbytqy, my rknnkfki dtyxakhlm gli bik íimbnk, l gli lqtk
glmk yubavknyiqy, w, dlt nl xyilm, ubyhkfki gli qíqbnl w myñltík. ma gli
ymqkm ymdytkiekm w khaqkxyiqlm vlm, mkigrl, cbmqáam hy vlnvyt k mytvatxy,
myk yi fbyik rltk: uby dyimkt uby wl ry hy mkgkt hy mbm qétxailm w ubagalm
nk kiqacbk bmkiek hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy ym dyimkt yi nl ymgbmkhl. kmí
uby, mkigrl xíl, vlnvylm k vbymqtk gkmk, w hygnktkh k vbymqtk qytymk xa
aiqyigaói; w ma ynnk cbmqkty w vlm cbmqátyhym hy ymqkt k xytgyh glixacl,
fyiy ubahyx; w ma il, qki kxaclm glxl hy kiqym; uby ma kn dknlxkt il ny
pknqk gyfl, il ny pknqktái dknlxkm. w khvytqah, raol, uby vkny xám fbyik
ymdytkiek uby tbai dlmymaói, w fbyik ubyok uby xknk dkck. rkfnl hy ymqk
xkiytk, mkigrl, dlt hktlm k yiqyihyt uby qkxfaéi glxl vlm mé wl kttlokt
typtkiym glxl nnlvahlm. w, paiknxyiqy, ubaytl hygat, w lm hacl, uby ma il
ubytéam vyiat k xytgyh glixacl w glttyt nk mbytqy uby wl glttayty, uby halm
ubyhy gli vlm w lm rkck bi mkiql; uby k xí il xy pknqktái ymgbhytlm xám
lfyhayiqym, xám mlnígaqlm, w il qki yxdkgrkhlm ia qki rkfnkhltym glxl vlm.

gbkihl mkigrl lwó nk patxy tymlnbgaói hy mb kxl my ny kibfnó yn gaynl w my
ny gkwytli nkm knkm hyn gltkeói, dltuby qyiík gtyíhl uby mb myñlt il my
atík mai én dlt qlhlm nlm rkfytym hyn xbihl; w kmí, ymqkihl mbmdyiml w
dyimkqavl, yiqtó mkimói gkttkmgl w nk mlftaik, hymylmlm hy lít gli ubé
tkeliym dytmbkhík k mb myñlt uby il qltiktmy k fbmgkt nkm kvyiqbtkm. nnycó
mkimói, mlgkttói pkxlml, w, kftkeáihlny glxl nk vye dtaxytk w gli vle
nyvkiqkhk, ny haol:

-¡lr pnlt hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík; lr nbe tymdnkihygayiqy hy nkm ktxkm; lr
rlilt w ymdyol hy nk ikgaói ymdkñlnk! dnyck k halm qlhldlhytlml, hlihy xám
nktckxyiqy my gliqayiy, uby nk dytmlik l dytmlikm uby dbmaytyi axdyhaxyiql
w ymqltfktyi qb qytgytk mknahk, uby il nk rknnyi yi yn nkfytaiql hy mbm
hymylm, ia okxám my nym gbxdnk nl uby xkn hymyktyi.

w, vlnvaéihlmy kn kxk, ny haol:

-fayi dbyhy nk myñltk kxk il tyekt xám nk ltkgaói hy mkiqk kdlnliak, uby wl
mé uby ym hyqytxaikgaói dtygamk hy nkm ympytkm uby yn myñlt hli ubaolqy
vbynvk k yoygbqkt mbm knqlm w ibyvlm dyimkxayiqlm, w wl yigktcktík xbgrl xa
gligayigak ma il aiqaxkmy w dytmbkhaymy k ymqy gkfknnytl uby il qyick xám
qayxdl yiglcahk w hyqyiahk nk pbytek hy mb vknytlml ftkel w nk flihkh hy mb
áiaxl vknyiqímaxl, dltuby hyptkbhk gli mb qkthkiek yn hytygrl hy nlm
qbytqlm, yn kxdktl hy nlm rbétpkilm, nk rlitk hy nkm hligynnkm, yn pkvlt hy
nkm vabhkm w yn kttaxl hy nkm gkmkhkm, w lqtkm glmkm hymqy okye, uby qlgki,
kqkñyi, hydyihyi w mli kiyokm k nk lthyi hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy. ¡yk,
myñlt hli ubaolqy xíl, rytxlml w ftkvl, kiqym rlw uby xkñkik my dlick
vbymqtk xytgyh w mb ctkihyek yi gkxail; w ma kncbik glmk pknqkty dktk
dliytny yi yoygbgaói, kubí ymqlw wl dktk mbdnatnk gli xa dytmlik w
rkgayihk; w ma pbyty iygymahkh mytvat k qb xkciapagyigak hy ymgbhytl, nl
qyihté k pynagímaxk vyiqbtk!

k ymqk mkeói, haol hli ubaolqy, vlnvaéihlmy k mkigrl:

-¿il qy haoy wl, mkigrl, uby xy rkfíki hy mlftkt ymgbhytlm? xatk ubaéi my
lptygy k mytnl, mail yn aikbhaql fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, dytdyqbl
qtkmqbnl w tyclgaokhlt hy nlm dkqalm hy nkm ymgbynkm mknxkiqagyimym, mkil
hy mb dytmlik, ácan hy mbm xayxftlm, gknnkhl, mbptahlt kmí hyn gknlt glxl
hyn ptíl, kmí hy nk rkxfty glxl hy nk myh, gli qlhkm kubynnkm dktqym uby my
tyubaytyi dktk myt ymgbhytl hy bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy. dytl il dytxaqk yn
gaynl uby, dlt mycbat xa cbmql, hymokttyqy w ubayfty nk glnbik hy nkm
nyqtkm w yn vkml hy nkm gayigakm, w qtliuby nk dknxk yxaiyiqy hy nkm fbyikm
w nafytknym ktqym. ubéhymy yn ibyvl mkimói yi mb dkqtak, w, rlitáihlnk,
rlity obiqkxyiqy nkm gkikm hy mbm kigakilm dkhtym; uby wl gli gbknubayt
ymgbhytl ymqkté gliqyiql, wk uby mkigrl il my hacik hy vyiat glixacl.

-mí hacil -tymdlihaó mkigrl, yiqytiygahl w nnyilm hy náctaxkm nlm lolm; w
dtlmacbaó-: il my hatá dlt xí, myñlt xíl: yn dki glxahl w nk glxdkñík
hymrygrk; mí, uby il vyicl wl hy kncbik kngbtiak hymkctkhygahk, uby wk mkfy
qlhl yn xbihl, w ymdygaknxyiqy xa dbyfnl, ubaéi pbytli nlm dkiekm, hy ubayi
wl hygayihl, w xám, uby qyicl glilgahl w gknkhl dlt xbgrkm fbyikm lftkm, w
dlt xám fbyikm dknkftkm, yn hymyl uby vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy hy rkgytxy
xytgyh; w ma xy ry dbymql yi gbyiqkm hy qkiql xám gbkiql kgytgk hy xa
mknktal, rk mahl dlt glxdnkgyt k xa xboyt; nk gbkn, gbkihl qlxk nk xkil k
dytmbkhat bik glmk, il rkw xkel uby qkiql kdtayqy nlm ktlm hy bik gbfk glxl
ynnk kdtayqk k uby my rkck nl uby ubayty; dytl, yi ypyql, yn rlxfty rk hy
myt rlxfty, w nk xboyt, xboyt; w, dbym wl mlw rlxfty hlihyubaytk, uby il nl
dbyhl iyckt, qkxfaéi nl ubaytl myt yi xa gkmk, dymy k ubayi dymkty; w kmí,
il rkw xám uby rkgyt, mail uby vbymqtk xytgyh lthyiy mb qymqkxyiql gli mb
glhaganl, yi xlhl uby il my dbyhk tyvlngkt, w dlicáxlilm nbycl yi gkxail,
dltuby il dkhyegk yn knxk hyn myñlt mkimói, uby hagy uby mb gligayigak ny
naqk uby dytmbkhk k vbymqtk xytgyh k mknat vye qytgytk dlt ymy xbihl; w wl
hy ibyvl xy lptyegl k mytvat k vbymqtk xytgyh payn w nycknxyiqy, qki fayi w
xyolt uby gbkiqlm ymgbhytlm rki mytvahl k gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yi nlm
dkmkhlm w dtymyiqym qayxdlm.

khxatkhl ubyhó yn fkgrannyt hy lít yn qétxail w xlhl hy rkfnkt hy mkigrl
dkiek; uby, dbymql uby rkfík nyíhl nk dtaxytk ramqltak hy mb myñlt, ibigk
gtywó uby ytk qki ctkgalml glxl knní ny daiqki; dytl, lwéihlny hygat krltk
qymqkxyiql w glhaganl uby il my dbyhk tyvlngkt, yi nbckt hy qymqkxyiql w
glhaganl uby il my dbyhk tyvlgkt, gtywó qlhl nl uby hén rkfík nyíhl, w
glipatxónl dlt bil hy nlm xám mlnyiym xyiqygkqlm hy ibymqtlm macnlm; w haol
yiqty mí uby qknym hlm nlglm glxl kxl w xlel il my rkftíki vamql yi yn
xbihl.

paiknxyiqy, hli ubaolqy w mkigrl my kftkektli w ubyhktli kxaclm, w gli
dktygyt w fyiydnágaql hyn ctki gkttkmgl, uby dlt yiqligym ytk mb ltágbnl,
my lthyió uby hy knní k qtym híkm pbymy mb dktqahk; yi nlm gbknym rkftík
nbckt hy khytyekt nl iygymktal dktk yn vakoy, w hy fbmgkt bik gynkhk hy
yigkoy, uby yi qlhkm xkiytkm haol hli ubaolqy uby nk rkfík hy nnyvkt.
lptygaómynk mkimói, dltuby mkfík il my nk iycktík bi kxacl mbwl uby nk
qyiík, dbymql uby ymqkfk xám ymgbtk dlt yn ltíi w yn xlrl uby gnktk w
naxdak dlt yn qytml kgytl.

nkm xknhagaliym uby nkm hlm, kxk w mlftaik, ygrktli kn fkgrannyt il
qbvaytli gbyiql: xymktli mbm gkfynnlm, ktkñktli mbm tlmqtlm, w, kn xlhl hy
nkm yihygrkhytkm uby my bmkfki, nkxyiqkfki nk dktqahk glxl ma pbytk nk
xbytqy hy mb myñlt. yn hymacil uby qbvl mkimói, dktk dytmbkhatny k uby lqtk
vye mknaymy, pby rkgyt nl uby khynkiqy gbyiqk nk ramqltak, qlhl dlt glimyol
hyn gbtk w hyn fktfytl, gli ubayi én kiqym nl rkfík glxbiagkhl.

yi tymlnbgaói, yi kubynnlm qtym híkm hli ubaolqy w mkigrl my kglxlhktli hy
nl uby nym dktygaó glivyiatnym; w, rkfayihl kdnkgkhl mkigrl k mb xboyt, w
hli ubaolqy k mb mlftaik w k mb kxk, kn kilgrygyt, mai uby ikhay nl vaymy,
mail yn fkgrannyt, uby ubaml kglxdkñktnym xyhak nycbk hyn nbckt, my
dbmaytli yi gkxail hyn qlflml: hli ubaolqy mlfty mb fbyi tlgaikiqy, w
mkigrl mlfty mb kiqacbl tbgal, dtlvyíhkm nkm knpltokm hy glmkm qlgkiqym k
nk fbgónagk, w nk flnmk hy haiytlm uby ny hal hli ubaolqy dktk nl uby my
lptygaymy. kftkeóny mkimói, w mbdnagóny ny kvamkmy hy mb fbyik l xknk
mbytqy, dktk knyctktmy gli émqk l yiqtamqygytmy gli kubénnk, glxl nkm nywym
hy mb kxamqkh dyhíki. dtlxyqaómynl hli ubaolqy, hal mkimói nk vbynqk k mb
nbckt, w nlm hlm qlxktli nk hy nk ctki gabhkh hyn qlflml.





gkdíqbnl vaaa. hlihy my gbyiqk nl uby ny mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy, wyihl k vyt
mb myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml


''¡fyihaql myk yn dlhytlml kná! -hagy rkxyqy fyiyicyna kn glxayiel hymqy
lgqkvl gkdíqbnl-. ¡fyihaql myk kná!'', tydaqy qtym vygym; w hagy uby hk
ymqkm fyihagaliym dlt vyt uby qayiy wk yi gkxdkñk k hli ubaolqy w k mkigrl,
w uby nlm nyqltym hy mb kctkhkfny ramqltak dbyhyi rkgyt gbyiqk uby hymhy
ymqy dbiql glxayieki nkm rkekñkm w hlikatym hy hli ubaolqy w hy mb
ymgbhytl; dytmbáhynym uby my nym lnvahyi nkm dkmkhkm gkfknnytíkm hyn
aicyialml rahkncl, w dlicki nlm lolm yi nkm uby ymqái dlt vyiat, uby hymhy
kcltk yi yn gkxail hyn qlflml glxayieki, glxl nkm lqtkm glxyiektli yi nlm
gkxdlm hy xliqayn, w il ym xbgrl nl uby dahy dktk qkiql glxl én dtlxyqy; w
kmí dtlmacby hagayihl:

mlnlm ubyhktli hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, w, kdyikm my rbfl kdktqkhl mkimói,
gbkihl glxyieó k tynaigrkt tlgaikiqy w k mlmdatkt yn tbgal, uby hy
yiqtkxflm, gkfknnytl w ymgbhytl, pby qyiahl k fbyik myñkn w dlt pynagímaxl
kcüytl; kbiuby, ma my rk hy gliqkt nk vythkh, xám pbytli nlm mlmdatlm w
tyfbeilm hyn tbgal uby nlm tynaigrlm hyn tlgíi, hy hlihy glnacaó mkigrl uby
mb vyiqbtk rkfík hy mlftydbokt w dliytmy yigaxk hy nk hy mb myñlt,
pbiháihlmy il mé ma yi kmqtlnlcík obhagaktak uby én my mkfík, dbymql uby nk
ramqltak il nl hygnktk; mónl ny lwytli hygat uby, gbkihl qtldyekfk l gkík,
my rlncktk il rkfyt mknahl hy gkmk, dltuby hyn qtldyekt l gkyt il my mkgkfk
lqtk glmk mail yn ekdkql tlql l nkm glmqannkm ubyftkhkm; w, kbiuby qliql,
il kihkfk yi ymql xbw pbytk hy gkxail. híolny hli ubaolqy:

-mkigrl kxacl, nk ilgry my ilm vk yiqtkihl k xám kihkt, w gli xám ymgbtahkh
hy nk uby rkfíkxlm xyiymqyt dktk kngkiekt k vyt gli yn hík kn qlflml,
khlihy qyicl hyqytxaikhl hy at kiqym uby yi lqtk kvyiqbtk xy dlick, w knní
qlxkté nk fyihagaói w fbyik nagyigak hy nk mai dkt hbngaiyk, gli nk gbkn
nagyigak dayiml w qyicl dlt gaytql hy kgkfkt w hkt pynagy gaxk k qlhk
dynactlmk kvyiqbtk, dltuby iaicbik glmk hymqk vahk rkgy xám vknayiqym k nlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym uby vytmy pkvltygahlm hy mbm hkxkm.

-wl kmí nl gtyl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; dytl qyicl dlt hapagbnqlml uby vbymqtk
xytgyh dbyhk rkfnktnk ia vytmy gli ynnk, yi dktqy, k nl xyilm, uby dbyhk
tygyfat mb fyihagaói, ma wk il my nk ygrk hymhy nkm fkthkm hyn glttkn, dlt
hlihy wl nk va nk vye dtaxytk, gbkihl ny nnyvé nk gktqk hlihy afki nkm
ibyvkm hy nkm mkihygym w nlgbtkm uby vbymqtk xytgyh ubyhkfk rkgayihl yi yn
gltkeói hy mayttk xltyik.

-¿fkthkm hy glttkn my qy kiqloktli kubénnkm, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-,
khlihy l dlt hlihy vamqy kubynnk okxám fkmqkiqyxyiqy knkfkhk cyiqanyek w
rytxlmbtk? il hyfíki hy myt mail cknytíkm l glttyhltym, l nliokm, l glxl
nkm nnkxki, hy taglm w tyknym dknkgalm.

-qlhl dbhl myt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl k xí fkthkm xy dktygaytli, ma il ym
uby mlw pknql hy xyxltak.

-gli qlhl yml, vkxlm knná, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby glxl wl nk
vyk, yml my xy hk uby myk dlt fkthkm uby dlt vyiqkikm, l dlt tymubagalm, l
vytokm hy okthaiym; uby gbknubayt tkwl uby hyn mln hy mb fynnyek nnycby k
xam lolm knbxftktá xa yiqyihaxayiql w pltqknygytá xa gltkeói, hy xlhl uby
ubyhy úiagl w mai acbkn yi nk hamgtygaói w yi nk vknyiqík.

-dbym yi vythkh, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby gbkihl wl va ymy mln hy nk
myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby il ymqkfk qki gnktl, uby dbhaymy ygrkt hy
mí tkwlm kncbilm, w hyfaó hy myt uby, glxl mb xytgyh ymqkfk krygrkihl kubyn
qtacl uby haoy, yn xbgrl dlnvl uby mkgkfk my ny dbml glxl ibfy kiqy yn
tlmqtl w my ny ymgbtygaó.

-¡uby qlhkvík hkm, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, yi hygat, yi dyimkt, yi gtyyt
w yi dltpakt uby xa myñltk hbngaiyk krygrkfk qtacl, mayihl yml bi xyiymqyt
w yoytgagal uby vk hymvakhl hy qlhl nl uby rkgyi w hyfyi rkgyt nkm dytmlikm
dtaigadknym uby ymqái glimqaqbahkm w cbkthkhkm dktk lqtlm yoytgagalm w
yiqtyqyiaxayiqlm, uby xbymqtki k qatl hy fknnymqk mb dtaigadknahkh...! xkn
my qy kgbythki k qa, ¡lr mkigrl!, kubynnlm vytmlm hy ibymqtl dlyqk hlihy
ilm daiqk nkm nkfltym uby rkgíki knná yi mbm xltkhkm hy gtamqkn kubynnkm
gbkqtl iaipkm uby hyn qkol kxkhl mkgktli nkm gkfyekm, w my myiqktli k
nkftkt yi yn dtkhl vythy kubynnkm tagkm qynkm uby knní yn aicyialml dlyqk
ilm hymgtafy, uby qlhkm ytki hy ltl, matcl w dytnkm gliqymqkm w qyoahkm. w
hymqk xkiytk hyfík hy myt yn hy xa myñltk gbkihl qú nk vamqy; mail uby nk
yivahak uby kncúi xkn yigkiqkhlt hyfy hy qyiyt k xam glmkm, qlhkm nkm uby
xy rki hy hkt cbmql qtbygk w vbynvy yi hapytyiqym pacbtkm uby ynnkm qayiyi;
w kmí, qyxl uby, yi kubynnk ramqltak uby hagyi uby kihk axdtymk hy xam
rkekñkm, ma dlt vyiqbtk rk mahl mb kbqlt kncúi mkfal xa yiyxacl, rkftá
dbymql bikm glmkm dlt lqtkm, xyegnkihl gli bik vythkh xan xyiqatkm,
havytqaéihlmy k gliqkt lqtkm kggaliym pbytk hy nl uby tyubayty nk
gliqaibkgaói hy bik vythkhytk ramqltak. ¡lr yivahak, tkíe hy aipaiaqlm
xknym w gktglxk hy nkm vatqbhym! qlhlm nlm vagalm, mkigrl, qtkyi bi il mé
ubé hy hynyaqy glimacl, dytl yn hy nk yivahak il qtky mail hamcbmqlm,
tkigltym w tkfakm.

-yml ym nl uby wl hacl qkxfaéi -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w dayiml uby yi ymk
nywyihk l ramqltak uby ilm haol yn fkgrannyt gkttkmgl uby hy ilmlqtlm rkfík
vamql hyfy hy kihkt xa rlitk k glgry kgá, gaigrkhl, w, glxl hagyi, kn
ymqtaglqy, kubí w knní, fkttayihl nkm gknnym. dbym, k py hy fbyil, uby il
ry hagrl wl xkn hy iaicúi yigkiqkhlt, ia qyicl qkiqlm fayiym uby dbyhk myt
yivahakhl; fayi ym vythkh uby mlw kncl xknagalml, w uby qyicl xam gaytqlm
kmlxlm hy fynnkgl, dytl qlhl nl gbfty w qkdk nk ctki gkdk hy nk maxdnyek
xík, mayxdty ikqbtkn w ibigk ktqapagalmk. w gbkihl lqtk glmk il qbvaymy
mail yn gtyyt, glxl mayxdty gtyl, patxy w vythkhytkxyiqy yi halm w yi qlhl
kubynnl uby qayiy w gtyy nk mkiqk acnymak gkqónagk tlxkik, w yn myt yiyxacl
xltqkn, glxl nl mlw, hy nlm obhílm, hyfíki nlm ramqltakhltym qyiyt
xamytaglthak hy xí w qtkqktxy fayi yi mbm ymgtaqlm. dytl hacki nl uby
ubamaytyi; uby hymibhl ikgí, hymibhl xy rknnl: ia daythl ia ckil; kbiuby,
dlt vytxy dbymql yi naftlm w kihkt dlt ymy xbihl hy xkil yi xkil, il my xy
hk bi racl uby hacki hy xí qlhl nl uby ubamaytyi.

-yml xy dktygy, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, k nl uby mbgyhaó k bi pkxlml
dlyqk hymqlm qayxdlm, yn gbkn, rkfayihl rygrl bik xknagalmk máqatk gliqtk
qlhkm nkm hkxkm gltqymkikm, il dbml ia ilxftó yi ynnk k bik hkxk uby my
dlhík hbhkt ma nl ytk l il; nk gbkn, vayihl uby il ymqkfk yi nk namqk hy
nkm hyxám, my ubyoó kn dlyqk, hagaéihlny uby ubé rkfík vamql yi ynnk dktk
il dliytnk yi yn iúxytl hy nkm lqtkm, w uby knktckmy nk máqatk, w nk
dbmaymy yi yn yimkigry; ma il, uby xatkmy dktk nl uby rkfík ikgahl. ríelnl
kmí yn dlyqk, w dúmlnk gbkn il hacki hbyñkm, w ynnk ubyhó mkqampygrk, dlt
vytmy gli pkxk, kbiuby aipkxy. qkxfaéi vayiy gli ymql nl uby gbyiqki hy
kubyn dkmqlt uby dbml pbycl w kftkmó yn qyxdnl pkxlml hy hakik, gliqkhl dlt
bik hy nkm mayqy xktkvannkm hyn xbihl, mónl dltuby ubyhkmy vavl mb ilxfty
yi nlm macnlm vyiahytlm; w, kbiuby my xkihó uby ikhay ny ilxftkmy, ia
ragaymy dlt dknkftk l dlt ymgtaql xyigaói hy mb ilxfty, dltuby il
glimacbaymy yn pai hy mb hymyl, qlhkvík my mbdl uby my nnkxkfk ytómqtkql.
qkxfaéi knbhy k ymql nl uby mbgyhaó kn ctkihy yxdytkhlt gktnl ubaiql gli bi
gkfknnytl yi tlxk. ubaml vyt yn yxdytkhlt kubyn pkxlml qyxdnl hy nk
tlqbihk, uby yi nk kiqacüyhkh my nnkxó yn qyxdnl hy qlhlm nlm halmym, w
krltk, gli xyolt vlgkgaói, my nnkxk hy qlhlm nlm mkiqlm, w ym yn yhapagal
uby xám yiqytl rk ubyhkhl hy nlm uby kneó nk cyiqanahkh yi tlxk, w ym yn
uby xám glimytvk nk pkxk hy nk ctkihalmahkh w xkciapagyigak hy mbm
pbihkhltym: én ym hy rygrbtk hy bik xyhak iktkiok, ctkihímaxl yi ymqtyxl,
w ymqá xbw gnktl, mai yiqtktny lqtk nbe uby nk uby ny gligyhy bik vyiqkik,
l, dlt xyolt hygat, gnktkflwk tyhlihk uby ymqá yi mb gaxk, hymhy nk gbkn
xatkihl yn yxdytkhlt yn yhapagal, ymqkfk gli én w k mb nkhl bi gkfknnytl
tlxkil, hygnktáihlny nlm dtaxltym w mbqanyekm hy kubynnk ctki xáubaik w
xyxltkfny ktubaqyqbtk; w, rkfaéihlmy ubaqkhl hy nk gnktkflwk, haol kn
yxdytkhlt: ''xan vygym, mkgtk xkoymqkh, xy vail hymyl hy kftkektxy gli
vbymqtk xkoymqkh w kttloktxy hy kubynnk gnktkflwk kfkol, dlt hyokt hy xí
pkxk yqytik yi yn xbihl''. ''wl lm kctkhyegl -tymdlihaó yn yxdytkhlt- yn il
rkfyt dbymql qki xkn dyimkxayiql yi ypyql, w hy kubí khynkiqy il lm dlihté
wl yi lgkmaói uby vlnváam k rkgyt dtbyfk hy vbymqtk nyknqkh; w kmí, lm
xkihl uby okxám xy rkfnéam, ia ymqéam hlihy wl ymqbvayty''. w, qtkm ymqkm
dknkftkm, ny rael bik ctki xytgyh. ubaytl hygat, mkigrl, uby yn hymyl hy
kngkiekt pkxk ym kgqavl yi ctki xkiytk. ¿ubaéi dayimkm qú uby kttloó k
rltkgal hyn dbyiqy kfkol, ktxkhl hy qlhkm ktxkm, yi nk dtlpbihahkh hyn
qafty? ¿ubaéi kftkmó yn ftkel w nk xkil k xbgal? ¿ubaéi axdynaó k gbtgal k
nkiektmy yi nk dtlpbihk maxk kthayiqy uby kdktygaó yi nk xaqkh hy tlxk?
¿ubaéi, gliqtk qlhlm nlm kcüytlm uby yi gliqtk my ny rkfíki xlmqtkhl, rael
dkmkt yn tbfagói k gémkt? w, gli yoyxdnlm xám xlhytilm, ¿ubaéi fkttyió nlm
ikvílm w hyoó yi mygl w kamnkhlm nlm vknytlmlm ymdkñlnym cbakhlm dlt yn
gltqymímaxl gltqém yi yn ibyvl xbihl? qlhkm ymqkm w lqtkm ctkihym w
hapytyiqym rkekñkm mli, pbytli w mytái lftkm hy nk pkxk, uby nlm xltqknym
hymyki glxl dtyxalm w dktqy hy nk aixltqknahkh uby mbm pkxlmlm rygrlm
xytygyi, dbymql uby nlm gtamqakilm, gkqónaglm w kihkiqym gkfknnytlm xám
rkfyxlm hy kqyihyt k nk cnltak hy nlm macnlm vyiahytlm, uby ym yqytik yi
nkm tycaliym yqétykm w gynymqym, uby k nk vkiahkh hy nk pkxk uby yi ymqy
dtymyiqy w kgkfkfny macnl my kngkiek; nk gbkn pkxk, dlt xbgrl uby hbty, yi
pai my rk hy kgkfkt gli yn xymxl xbihl, uby qayiy mb pai myñknkhl. kmí, ¡lr
mkigrl!, uby ibymqtkm lftkm il rki hy mknat hyn níxaqy uby ilm qayiy dbymql
nk tynacaói gtamqakik, uby dtlpymkxlm. ryxlm hy xkqkt yi nlm cackiqym k nk
mlfytfak; k nk yivahak, yi nk cyiytlmahkh w fbyi dygrl; k nk atk, yi yn
tydlmkhl gliqaiyiqy w ubayqbh hyn áiaxl; k nk cbnk w kn mbyñl, yi yn dlgl
glxyt uby glxyxlm w yi yn xbgrl vynkt uby vynkxlm; k nk nbobtak w nkmgavak,
yi nk nyknqkh uby cbkthkxlm k nkm uby ryxlm rygrl myñltkm hy ibymqtlm
dyimkxayiqlm; k nk dytyek, gli kihkt dlt qlhkm nkm dktqym hyn xbihl,
fbmgkihl nkm lgkmaliym uby ilm dbyhki rkgyt w rkcki, mlfty gtamqakilm,
pkxlmlm gkfknnytlm. vym kubí, mkigrl, nlm xyhalm dlt hlihy my kngkieki nlm
ymqtyxlm hy knkfkiekm uby glimacl qtky nk fbyik pkxk.

-qlhl nl uby vbymqtk xytgyh rkmqk kubí xy rk hagrl -haol mkigrl- nl ry
yiqyihahl xbw fayi, dytl, gli qlhl yml, ubyttík uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy
mltfaymy bik hbhk uby kcltk yi ymqy dbiql xy rk vyiahl k nk xyxltak.

-kmlnvaymy ubaytym hygat, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-. ha yi fbyi rltk, uby
wl tymdlihyté nl uby mbdayty.

-híckxy, myñlt -dtlmacbaó mkigrl-: ymlm obnalm l kclmqlm, w qlhlm ymlm
gkfknnytlm rkekñlmlm uby rk hagrl, uby wk mli xbytqlm, ¿hóihy ymqái kcltk?

-nlm cyiqanym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- mai hbhk ymqái yi yn aipaytil; nlm
gtamqakilm, ma pbytli fbyilm gtamqakilm, l ymqái yi yn dbtckqltal l yi yn
gaynl.

-ymqá fayi -haol mkigrl-, dytl mydkxlm krltk: ymkm mydbnqbtkm hlihy ymqái
nlm gbytdlm hymlm myñltkelm, ¿qayiyi hynkiqy hy mí náxdktkm hy dnkqk, l
ymqái khltikhkm nkm dktyhym hy mbm gkdannkm hy xbnyqkm, hy xltqkokm, hy
gkfynnytkm, hy daytikm w hy lolm hy gytk? w ma hymql il, ¿hy ubé ymqái
khltikhkm?

k nl uby tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-nlm mydbngtlm hy nlm cyiqanym pbytli dlt nk xkwlt dktqy mbiqblmlm qyxdnlm:
nkm gyiaekm hyn gbytdl hy obnal gémkt my dbmaytli mlfty bik datáxahy hy
dayhtk hy hymxymbtkhk ctkihyek, k ubayi rlw nnkxki yi tlxk nk kcbok hy mki
dyhtl; kn yxdytkhlt khtakil ny matvaó hy mydbnqbtk bi gkmqannl qki ctkihy
glxl bik fbyik knhyk, k ubayi nnkxktli xlnym rkhtakia, uby kcltk ym yn
gkmqannl hy mkiqáicyn yi tlxk; nk tyaik ktqyxamk mydbnqó k mb xktahl
xkbmlnyl yi bi mydbngtl uby my qbvl dlt bik hy nkm mayqy xktkvannkm hyn
xbihl; dytl iaicbik hymqkm mydbnqbtkm ia lqtkm xbgrkm uby qbvaytli nlm
cyiqanym my khltiktli gli xltqkokm ia gli lqtkm lptyihkm w myñknym uby
xlmqtkmyi myt mkiqlm nlm uby yi ynnkm ymqkfki mydbnqkhlm.

-k yml vlw -tydnagó mkigrl-. w híckxy kcltk: ¿gbán ym xám: tymbgaqkt k bi
xbytql, l xkqkt k bi cackiqy?

-nk tymdbymqk ymqá yi nk xkil -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: xám ym tymbgaqkt k
bi xbytql.

-glcahl ny qyicl -haol mkigrl-: nbycl nk pkxk hyn uby tymbgaqk xbytqlm, hk
vamqk k nlm gayclm, yihytyek nlm glolm w hk mknbh k nlm yipytxlm, w hynkiqy
hy mbm mydbnqbtkm kthyi náxdktkm, w ymqái nnyikm mbm gkdannkm hy cyiqym
hyvlqkm uby hy tlhannkm khltki mbm tynaubakm, xyolt pkxk mytá, dktk ymqy w
dktk yn lqtl macnl, uby nk uby hyoktli w hyoktyi gbkiqlm yxdytkhltym
cyiqanym w gkfknnytlm kihkiqym rk rkfahl yi yn xbihl.

-qkxfaéi glipayml ymk vythkh -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-dbym ymqk pkxk, ymqkm ctkgakm, ymqkm dtyttlckqavkm, glxl nnkxki k ymql
-tymdlihaó mkigrl-, qayiyi nlm gbytdlm w nkm tynaubakm hy nlm mkiqlm uby,
gli kdtlfkgaói w nagyigak hy ibymqtk mkiqk xkhty acnymak, qayiyi náxdktkm,
vynkm, xltqkokm, xbnyqkm, daiqbtkm, gkfynnytkm, lolm, daytikm, gli uby
kbxyiqki nk hyvlgaói w yictkihygyi mb gtamqakik pkxk. nlm gbytdlm hy nlm
mkiqlm l mbm tynaubakm nnyvki nlm tywym mlfty mbm rlxftlm, fymki nlm
dyhkelm hy mbm rbymlm, khltiki w yitaubygyi gli ynnlm mbm ltkqltalm w mbm
xám dtygakhlm knqktym...

-¿ubé ubaytym uby aipaytk, mkigrl, hy qlhl nl uby rkm hagrl? -haol hli
ubaolqy.

-ubaytl hygat -haol mkigrl- uby ilm hyxlm k myt mkiqlm, w kngkiektyxlm xám
ftyvyxyiqy nk fbyik pkxk uby dtyqyihyxlm; w khvaytqk, myñlt, uby kwyt l
kiqym hy kwyt, uby, mycúi rk dlgl my dbyhy hygat hymqk xkiytk, gkiliaektli
l fykqapagktli hlm ptkanygaqlm hymgknelm, gbwkm gkhyikm hy rayttl gli uby
gyñíki w kqltxyiqkfki mbm gbytdlm my qayiy krltk k ctki vyiqbtk yn fymktnkm
w qlgktnkm, w ymqái yi xám vyiytkgaói uby ymqá, mycúi haoy, nk ymdkhk hy
tlnhái yi nk ktxytík hyn tyw, ibymqtl myñlt, uby halm cbkthy. kmí uby,
myñlt xíl, xám vkny myt rbxanhy ptkanygaql, hy gbknubayt lthyi uby myk,
uby vknayiqy w kihkiqy gkfknnytl; xkm kngkieki gli halm hlm hlgyikm hy
hagadnaikm uby hlm xan nkiekhkm, ltk nkm hyi k cackiqym, ltk k vymqacnlm l
k yihtaclm.

-qlhl yml ym kmí -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dytl il qlhlm dlhyxlm myt
ptkanym, w xbgrlm mli nlm gkxailm dlt hlihy nnyvk halm k nlm mbwlm kn
gaynl: tynacaói ym nk gkfknnytík; gkfknnytlm mkiqlm rkw yi nk cnltak.

-mí -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl wl ry líhl hygat uby rkw xám ptkanym yi yn
gaynl uby gkfknnytlm kihkiqym.

-yml ym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- dltuby ym xkwlt yn iúxytl hy nlm tynacalmlm
uby yn hy nlm gkfknnytlm.

-xbgrlm mli nlm kihkiqym -haol mkigrl.

-xbgrlm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dytl dlglm nlm uby xytygyi ilxfty hy
gkfknnytlm.

yi ymqkm w lqtkm myxyokiqym dnáqagkm my nym dkmó kubynnk ilgry w yn hík
macbayiqy, mai kgliqygytnym glmk uby hy gliqkt pbymy, hy uby il dlgl ny
dymó k hli ubaolqy. yi pai, lqtl hík, kn kilgrygyt, hymgbftaytli nk ctki
gabhkh hyn qlflml, gli gbwk vamqk my ny knyctktli nlm ymdítaqbm k hli
ubaolqy w my ny yiqtamqygaytli k mkigrl, dltuby il mkfík nk gkmk hy
hbngaiyk, ia yi mb vahk nk rkfík vamql, glxl il nk rkfík vamql mb myñlt; hy
xlhl uby yn bil dlt vytnk, w yn lqtl dlt il rkfytnk vamql, ymqkfki
knfltlqkhlm, w il axkcaikfk mkigrl ubé rkfík hy rkgyt gbkihl mb hbyñl ny
yivakmy kn qlflml. paiknxyiqy, lthyió hli ubaolqy yiqtkt yi nk gabhkh
yiqtkhk nk ilgry, w, yi qkiql uby nk rltk my nnyckfk, my ubyhktli yiqty
bikm yigaikm uby gytgk hyn qlflml ymqkfki, w, nnyckhl yn hyqytxaikhl dbiql,
yiqtktli yi nk gabhkh, hlihy nym mbgyhaó glmkm uby k glmkm nnycki.





gkdíqbnl az. hlihy my gbyiqk nl uby yi én my vytá


xyhak ilgry ytk dlt panl, dlgl xám k xyilm, gbkihl hli ubaolqy w mkigrl
hyoktli yn xliqy w yiqtktli yi yn qlflml. ymqkfk yn dbyfnl yi bi mlmyckhl
manyigal, dltuby qlhlm mbm vygailm hltxíki w tydlmkfki k daytik qyihahk,
glxl mbyny hygatmy. ytk nk ilgry yiqtygnktk, dbymql uby ubamaytk mkigrl uby
pbytk hyn qlhl ymgbtk, dlt rknnkt yi mb ymgbtahkh hamgbndk hy mb mkihye. il
my lík yi qlhl yn nbckt mail nkhtahlm hy dyttlm, uby kqtlikfki nlm líhlm hy
hli ubaolqy w qbtfkfki yn gltkeói hy mkigrl. hy gbkihl yi gbkihl, tyfbeikfk
bi obxyiql, ctbñíki dbytglm, xkwkfki ckqlm, gbwkm vlgym, hy hapytyiqym
mliahlm, my kbxyiqkfki gli yn manyigal hy nk ilgry, qlhl nl gbkn qbvl yn
yikxltkhl gkfknnytl k xkn kcüytl; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, haol k mkigrl:

-mkigrl, raol, cbík kn dknkgal hy hbngaiyk: ubaeá dlhtá myt uby nk rknnyxlm
hymdaytqk.

-¿k ubé dknkgal qyicl hy cbakt, gbytdl hyn mln -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby yi
yn uby wl va k mb ctkihyek il ytk mail gkmk xbw dyubyñk?

-hyfík hy ymqkt tyqatkhk, yiqligym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, yi kncúi
dyubyñl kdktqkxayiql hy mb kngáekt, mlnkeáihlmy k mlnkm gli mbm hligynnkm,
glxl ym bml w glmqbxfty hy nkm knqkm myñltkm w dtaigymkm.

-myñlt -haol mkigrl-, wk uby vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty, k dymkt xíl, uby myk
kngáekt nk gkmk hy xa myñltk hbngaiyk, ¿ym rltk émqk dlt vyiqbtk hy rknnkt
nk dbytqk kfaytqk? w ¿mytá fayi uby hyxlm knhkfkelm dktk uby ilm lwki w ilm
kftki, xyqayihl yi knfltlql w tbxlt qlhk nk cyiqy? ¿vkxlm dlt hagrk k
nnkxkt k nk gkmk hy ibymqtkm xkigyfkm, glxl rkgyi nlm kfkttkckikhlm, uby
nnycki, w nnkxki, w yiqtki k gbknubayt rltk, dlt qkthy uby myk?

-rknnyxlm dtaxytl bik dlt bik yn kngáekt -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby
yiqligym wl qy haté, mkigrl, nl uby mytá fayi uby rkckxlm. w khvaytqy,
mkigrl, uby wl vyl dlgl, l uby kubyn fbnql ctkihy w mlxftk uby hymhy kubí
my hymgbfty nk hyfy hy rkgyt yn dknkgal hy hbngaiyk.

-dbym cbíy vbymqtk xytgyh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: ubaeá mytá kmí; kbiuby wl nl
vyté gli nlm lolm w nl qlgkté gli nkm xkilm, w kmí nl gtyyté wl glxl gtyyt
uby ym krltk hy hík.

cbaó hli ubaolqy, w, rkfayihl kihkhl glxl hlgayiqlm dkmlm, hal gli yn fbnql
uby rkgík nk mlxftk, w val bik ctki qltty, w nbycl glilgaó uby yn qkn
yhapagal il ytk kngáekt, mail nk acnymak dtaigadkn hyn dbyfnl. w haol:

-gli nk acnymak ryxlm hkhl, mkigrl.

-wk nl vyl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w dnyck k halm uby il hyxlm gli ibymqtk
mydbnqbtk, uby il ym fbyik myñkn kihkt dlt nlm gaxyiqytalm k qknym rltkm, w
xám, rkfayihl wl hagrl k vbymqtk xytgyh, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, uby nk
gkmk hymqk myñltk rk hy ymqkt yi bik gknnyobynk mai mknahk.

-¡xknhaql mykm hy halm, xyiqygkql! -haol hli ubaolqy-. ¿khóihy rkm qú
rknnkhl uby nlm kngáektym w dknkgalm tyknym ymqéi yhapagkhlm yi gknnyobynkm
mai mknahk?

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, yi gkhk qayttk mb bml: ubaeá my bmk kubí yi yn
qlflml yhapagkt yi gknnyobynkm nlm dknkgalm w yhapagalm ctkihym; w kmí,
mbdnagl k vbymqtk xytgyh xy hyoy fbmgkt dlt ymqkm gknnym l gknnyobynkm uby
my xy lptygyi: dlhtík myt uby yi kncúi taigói qldkmy gli ymy kngáekt, uby
ny vyk wl glxahl hy dyttlm, uby kmí ilm qtky glttahlm w kmyihytykhlm.

-rkfnk gli tymdyql, mkigrl, hy nkm glmkm hy xa myñltk -haol hli ubaolqy-, w
qyickxlm nk paymqk yi dke, w il kttloyxlm nk mlck qtkm yn gknhytl.

-wl xy tydltqkté -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; dytl, ¿gli ubé dkgayigak dlhté nnyvkt
uby ubaytk vbymqtk xytgyh uby hy mlnk bik vye uby va nk gkmk hy ibymqtk
kxk, nk rkwk hy mkfyt mayxdty w rknnktnk k xyhak ilgry, il rknnáihlnk
vbymqtk xytgyh, uby nk hyfy hy rkfyt vamql xannktym hy vygym?

-qú xy rktám hymymdytkt, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-. vyi kgá, rytyoy: ¿il qy
ry hagrl xan vygym uby yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk il ry vamql k nk mai
dkt hbngaiyk, ia okxám kqtkvymé nlm bxftknym hy mb dknkgal, w uby mónl
ymqlw yikxltkhl hy líhkm w hy nk ctki pkxk uby qayiy hy rytxlmk w hamgtyqk?

-krltk nl lacl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w hacl uby, dbym vbymqtk xytgyh il nk rk
vamql, ia wl qkxdlgl...

-yml il dbyhy myt -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-; uby, dlt nl xyilm, wk xy rkm hagrl
qú uby nk vamqy krygrkihl qtacl, gbkihl xy qtboamqy nk tymdbymqk hy nk
gktqk uby ny yivaé gliqacl.

-il my kqyick k yml, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby ny rkcl mkfyt uby
qkxfaéi pby hy líhkm nk vamqk w nk tymdbymqk uby ny qtboy; dltuby, kmí mé
wl ubaéi ym nk myñltk hbngaiyk glxl hkt bi dbñl yi yn gaynl.

-mkigrl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, qayxdlm rkw hy fbtnkt, w qayxdlm
hlihy gkyi w dktygyi xkn nkm fbtnkm. il dltuby wl hack uby ia ry vamql ia
rkfnkhl k nk myñltk hy xa knxk rkm qú hy hygat qkxfaéi uby ia nk rkm
rkfnkhl ia vamql, mayihl qki kn tyvém glxl mkfym.

ymqkihl nlm hlm yi ymqkm dnáqagkm, vaytli uby vyiík k dkmkt dlt hlihy
ymqkfki bil gli hlm xbnkm, uby, dlt yn tbahl uby rkgík yn ktkhl, uby
kttkmqtkfk dlt yn mbynl, obecktli uby hyfík hy myt nkftkhlt, uby rkftík
xkhtbckhl kiqym hyn hík k at k mb nkftkiek; w kmí pby nk vythkh. vyiík yn
nkftkhlt gkiqkihl kubyn tlxkigy uby hagyi:

xknk nk rbfamqym, ptkigymym,

yi ymk hy tligymvknnym.

-uby xy xkqyi, mkigrl -haol, yi lwéihlny, hli ubaolqy-, ma ilm rk hy
mbgyhyt glmk fbyik ymqk ilgry. ¿il lwym nl uby vayiy gkiqkihl ymy vannkil?

-mí lacl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; dytl, ¿ubé rkgy k ibymqtl dtldómaql nk gkek hy
tligymvknnym? kmí dbhaytk gkiqkt yn tlxkigy hy gknkíilm, uby qlhl pbytk bil
dktk mbgyhytilm fayi l xkn yi ibymqtl iyclgal.

nnycó, yi ymql, yn nkftkhlt, k ubayi hli ubaolqy dtycbiqó:

-¿mkftéamxy hygat, fbyi kxacl, uby fbyik vyiqbtk lm hé halm, hóihy mli dlt
kubí nlm dknkgalm hy nk mai dkt dtaigymk hlñk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml?

-myñlt -tymdlihaó yn xlel-, wl mlw pltkmqytl w rk dlglm híkm uby ymqlw yi
ymqy dbyfnl, matvayihl k bi nkftkhlt tagl yi nk nkftkiek hyn gkxdl; yi ymk
gkmk ptliqytk vavyi yn gbtk w yn mkgtamqái hyn nbckt; yiqtkxflm, l
gbknubayt hynnlm, mkftá hkt k vbymqtk xytgyh tkeói hymk myñltk dtaigymk,
dltuby qayiyi nk namqk hy qlhlm nlm vygailm hyn qlflml; kbiuby dktk xí
qyicl uby yi qlhl én il vavy dtaigymk kncbik; xbgrkm myñltkm, mí,
dtaigadknym, uby gkhk bik yi mb gkmk dbyhy myt dtaigymk.

-dbym yiqty émkm -haol hli ubaolqy- hyfy hy ymqkt, kxacl, émqk dlt ubayi qy
dtycbiql.

-dlhtík myt -tymdlihaó yn xlel-; w khaóm, uby wk vayiy yn knfk.

w, hkihl k mbm xbnkm, il kqyihaó k xám dtycbiqkm. mkigrl, uby val mbmdyiml
k mb myñlt w kmke xkn gliqyiql, ny haol:

-myñlt, wk my vayiy k xám kihkt yn hík, w il mytá kgytqkhl hyokt uby ilm
rknny yn mln yi nk gknny; xyolt mytá uby ilm mknckxlm pbytk hy nk gabhkh, w
uby vbymqtk xytgyh my yxflmuby yi kncbik pnltymqk kubí gytgkik, w wl
vlnvyté hy hík, w il hyokté lmqbcl yi qlhl ymqy nbckt hlihy il fbmuby nk
gkmk, kngáekt l dknkgal hy xa myñltk, w kmke mytík hy hymhagrkhl ma il ny
rknnkmy; w, rknnáihlny, rkfnkté gli mb xytgyh, w ny haté hóihy w góxl ubyhk
vbymqtk xytgyh ymdytkihl uby ny hé lthyi w qtkek dktk vytnk, mai xyilmgkfl
hy mb rlitk w pkxk.

-rkm hagrl, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, xan myiqyigakm yigyttkhkm yi yn
gítgbnl hy ftyvym dknkftkm: yn glimyol uby krltk xy rkm hkhl ny kdyqyegl w
tygafl hy fliímaxk ckik. vyi, raol, w vkxlm k fbmgkt hlihy xy yxflmuby, uby
qú vlnvytám, glxl hagym, k fbmgkt, k vyt w rkfnkt k xa myñltk, hy gbwk
hamgtygaói w gltqymík ymdytl xám uby xankctlmlm pkvltym.

tkfakfk mkigrl dlt mkgkt k mb kxl hyn dbyfnl, dltuby il kvytacbkmy nk
xyiqatk hy nk tymdbymqk uby hy dktqy hy hbngaiyk ny rkfík nnyvkhl k mayttk
xltyik; w kmí, hal dtaymk k nk mknahk, uby pby nbycl, w k hlm xannkm hyn
nbckt rknnktli bik pnltymqk l flmuby, hlihy hli ubaolqy my yxflmgó yi qkiql
uby mkigrl vlnvík k nk gabhkh k rkfnkt k hbngaiyk; yi gbwk yxfkokhk ny
mbgyhaytli glmkm uby dahyi ibyvk kqyigaói w ibyvl gtéhaql.





gkdíqbnl z. hlihy my gbyiqk nk aihbmqtak uby mkigrl qbvl dktk yigkiqkt k nk
myñltk hbngaiyk, w hy lqtlm mbgymlm qki tahígbnlm glxl vythkhytlm


nnyckihl yn kbqlt hymqk ctkihy ramqltak k gliqkt nl uby yi ymqy gkdíqbnl
gbyiqk, hagy uby ubamaytk dkmktny yi manyigal, qyxytlml hy uby il rkfík hy
myt gtyíhl, dltuby nkm nlgbtkm hy hli ubaolqy nnycktli kubí kn qétxail w
tkwk hy nkm xkwltym uby dbyhyi axkcaiktmy, w kbi dkmktli hlm qatlm hy
fknnymqk xám knná hy nkm xkwltym. paiknxyiqy, kbiuby gli ymqy xayhl w
tygynl, nkm ymgtafaó hy nk xamxk xkiytk uby én nkm rael, mai kñkhat ia
ubaqkt k nk ramqltak bi áqlxl hy nk vythkh, mai hátmyny ikhk dlt nkm
lfoygaliym uby dlhíki dliytny hy xyiqatlml. w qbvl tkeói, dltuby nk vythkh
khynckek w il ubayftk, w mayxdty kihk mlfty nk xyiqatk glxl yn kgyaqy mlfty
yn kcbk.

w kmí, dtlmacbayihl mb ramqltak, hagy uby, kmí glxl hli ubaolqy my yxflmgó
yi nk pnltymqk, yigaikt l mynvk obiql kn ctki qlflml, xkihó k mkigrl vlnvyt
k nk gabhkh, w uby il vlnvaymy k mb dtymyigak mai rkfyt dtaxytl rkfnkhl hy
mb dktqy k mb myñltk, dahaéihlnk pbymy mytvahk hy hyoktmy vyt hy mb gkbqavl
gkfknnytl, w my hacikmy hy ygrktny mb fyihagaói, dktk uby dbhaymy ymdytkt
dlt ynnk pynagímaxlm mbgymlm hy qlhlm mbm kglxyqaxayiqlm w hapagbnqlmkm
yxdtymkm. yigktcómy mkigrl hy rkgytnl kmí glxl my ny xkihkfk, w hy qtkytny
qki fbyik tymdbymqk glxl ny qtbol nk vye dtaxytk.

-kihk, raol -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, w il qy qbtfym gbkihl qy vaytym kiqy nk
nbe hyn mln hy rytxlmbtk uby vkm k fbmgkt. ¡hagrlml qú mlfty qlhlm nlm
ymgbhytlm hyn xbihl! qyi xyxltak, w il my qy dkmy hynnk góxl qy tygafy: ma
xbhk nkm glnltym yn qayxdl uby nk ymqbvaytym hkihl xa yxfkokhk; ma my
hymkmlmayck w qbtfk lwyihl xa ilxfty; ma il gkfy yi nk knxlrkhk, ma kgkml
nk rknnkm myiqkhk yi yn ymqtkhl tagl hy mb kbqltahkh; w ma ymqá yi day,
xítknk ma my dliy krltk mlfty yn bil, krltk mlfty yn lqtl day; ma qy tydaqy
nk tymdbymqk uby qy hayty hlm l qtym vygym; ma nk xbhk hy fnkihk yi ámdytk,
hy kgyhk yi kxltlmk; ma nyvkiqk nk xkil kn gkfynnl dktk glxdliytny, kbiuby
il ymqé hymlthyikhl; paiknxyiqy, raol, xatk qlhkm mbm kggaliym w
xlvaxayiqlm; dltuby ma qú xy nlm tynkqktym glxl ynnlm pbytli, mkgkté wl nl
uby ynnk qayiy ymglihahl yi nl mygtyql hy mb gltkeói kgytgk hy nl uby kn
pygrl hy xam kxltym qlgk; uby rkm hy mkfyt, mkigrl, ma il nl mkfym, uby
yiqty nlm kxkiqym, nkm kggaliym w xlvaxayiqlm yzqytaltym uby xbymqtki,
gbkihl hy mbm kxltym my qtkqk, mli gytqímaxlm glttylm uby qtkyi nkm ibyvkm
hy nl uby knná yi nl aiqytalt hyn knxk dkmk. vy, kxacl, w cbíyqy lqtk xyolt
vyiqbtk uby nk xík, w vbénvkqy lqtl xyolt mbgyml hyn uby wl ubyhl qyxayihl
w ymdytkihl yi ymqk kxktck mlnyhkh yi uby xy hyokm.

-wl até w vlnvyté dtymql -haol mkigrl-; w yimkigry vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt
xíl, ymy gltkeligannl, uby ny hyfy hy qyiyt kcltk il xkwlt uby bik
kvynnkik, w glimahyty uby my mbyny hygat uby fbyi gltkeói ubyftkiqk xknk
vyiqbtk, w uby hlihy il rkw qlgailm, il rkw ymqkgkm; w qkxfaéi my hagy:
hlihy il dayimk, mknqk nk nayfty. híclnl dltuby ma ymqk ilgry il rknnkxlm
nlm dknkgalm l kngáektym hy xa myñltk, kcltk uby ym hy hík nlm dayiml
rknnkt, gbkihl xyilm nlm dayimy, w rknnkhlm, héoyixy k xí gli ynnk.

-dlt gaytql, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby mayxdty qtkym qbm typtkiym qki
k dynl hy nl uby qtkqkxlm gbkiql xy hé halm xyolt vyiqbtk yi nl uby hymyl.

ymql hagrl, vlnvaó mkigrl nkm ymdknhkm w vktyó mb tbgal, w hli ubaolqy my
ubyhó k gkfknnl, hymgkimkihl mlfty nlm ymqtaflm w mlfty yn kttaxl hy mb
nkiek, nnyil hy qtamqym w glipbmkm axkcaikgaliym, hlihy ny hyoktyxlm,
wéihlilm gli mkigrl dkiek, uby il xyilm glipbml w dyimkqavl my kdktqó hy mb
myñlt uby én ubyhkfk; w qkiql, uby, kdyikm rbfl mknahl hyn flmuby, gbkihl,
vlnvayihl nk gkfyek w vayihl uby hli ubaolqy il dktygík, my kdyó hyn
obxyiql, w, myiqáihlmy kn day hy bi átfln, glxyieó k rkfnkt glimacl xymxl w
k hygatmy:

-mydkxlm kcltk, mkigrl rytxkil, khóihy vk vbymk xytgyh. ¿vk k fbmgkt kncúi
obxyiql uby my ny rkwk dythahl? ''il, dlt gaytql''. dbym, ¿ubé vk k fbmgkt?
''vlw k fbmgkt, glxl ubayi il hagy ikhk, k bik dtaigymk, w yi ynnk kn mln
hy nk rytxlmbtk w k qlhl yn gaynl obiql''. w ¿khóihy dyimáam rknnkt yml uby
hygím, mkigrl? ''¿khóihy? yi nk ctki gabhkh hyn qlflml''. w fayi: ¿w hy
dktqy hy ubaéi nk vkam k fbmgkt? ''hy dktqy hyn pkxlml gkfknnytl hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, uby hympkgy nlm qbytqlm, w hk hy glxyt kn uby rk myh,
w hy fyfyt kn uby rk rkxfty''. qlhl yml ymqá xbw fayi. w ¿mkféam mb gkmk,
mkigrl? ''xa kxl hagy uby rki hy myt bilm tyknym dknkgalm l bilm mlfytfalm
kngáektym''. w ¿rkféamnk vamql kncúi hík dlt vyiqbtk? ''ia wl ia xa kxl nk
rkfyxlm vamql okxám''. w ¿dktégylm uby pbytk kgytqkhl w fayi rygrl uby ma
nlm hyn qlflml mbdaymyi uby ymqáam vlm kubí gli aiqyigaói hy at k
mlimkgktnym mbm dtaigymkm w k hymkmlmycktnym mbm hkxkm, vaiaymyi w lm
xlnaymyi nkm glmqannkm k dbtlm dknlm, w il lm hyokmyi rbyml mkil? ''yi
vythkh uby qyihtíki xbgrk tkeói, gbkihl il glimahytkmyi uby mlw xkihkhl, w
uby xyimkoytl mlam, kxacl, il xytygéam gbndk, ili''. il lm paéam yi yml,
mkigrl, dltuby nk cyiqy xkigryck ym qki glnétagk glxl rlitkhk, w il
glimayiqy glmubannkm hy ikhay. vavy halm uby ma lm rbyny, uby lm xkihl xknk
vyiqbtk. ''¡lzqy, dbql! ¡knná hktám, tkwl! ¡il, mail áihyxy wl fbmgkihl
qtym daym kn ckql dlt yn cbmql koyil! w xám, uby kmí mytá fbmgkt k hbngaiyk
dlt yn qlflml glxl k xktagk dlt távyik, l kn fkgrannyt yi mknkxkigk. ¡yn
hakfnl, yn hakfnl xy rk xyqahl k xí yi ymql, uby lqtl il!''

ymqy mlnanlubal dkmó glimacl mkigrl, w nl uby mkgó hén pby uby vlnvaó k
hygatmy:

-krltk fayi, qlhkm nkm glmkm qayiyi tyxyhal, ma il ym nk xbytqy, hyfkol hy
gbwl wbcl ryxlm hy dkmkt qlhlm, xkn uby ilm dymy, kn kgkfkt hy nk vahk.
ymqy xa kxl, dlt xan myñknym, ry vamql uby ym bi nlgl hy kqkt, w kbi
qkxfaéi wl il ny ubyhl yi ekck, dbym mlw xám xyiqygkql uby én, dbym ny macl
w ny matvl, ma ym vythkhytl yn typtái uby hagy: "haxy gli ubaéi kihkm,
hygatqy ry ubaéi ytym", w yn lqtl hy "il gli ubayi ikgym, mail gli ubayi
dkgym". mayihl, dbym, nlgl, glxl nl ym, w hy nlgbtk uby nkm xám vygym qlxk
bikm glmkm dlt lqtkm, w obeck nl fnkigl dlt iyctl w nl iyctl dlt fnkigl,
glxl my dktygaó gbkihl haol uby nlm xlnailm hy vayiql ytki cackiqym, w nkm
xbnkm hy nlm tynacalmlm htlxyhktalm, w nkm xkikhkm hy gktiytlm yoétgaqlm hy
yiyxaclm, w lqtkm xbgrkm glmkm k ymqy qlil, il mytá xbw hapígan rkgytny
gtyyt uby bik nkftkhltk, nk dtaxytk uby xy qldkty dlt kubí, ym nk myñltk
hbngaiyk; w, gbkihl én il nl gtyk, obtkté wl; w ma én obtkty, qltikté wl k
obtkt; w ma dltpakty, dltpakté wl xám, w hy xkiytk uby qyicl hy qyiyt nk
xík mayxdty mlfty yn raql, vyick nl uby vaiayty. ubaeá gli ymqk dltpík
kgkfkté gli én uby il xy yivíy lqtk vye k myxyokiqym xyimkoytíkm, vayihl
gbái xkn tygkhl ny qtkacl hynnkm, l ubaeá dyimktá, glxl wl axkcail, uby
kncúi xkn yigkiqkhlt hy ymqlm uby én hagy uby ny ubaytyi xkn nk rkftá
xbhkhl nk pacbtk dlt rkgytny xkn w hkñl.

gli ymql uby dyimó mkigrl dkiek ubyhó mlmyckhl mb ymdítaqb, w qbvl dlt fayi
kgkfkhl mb iyclgal, w hyqyiaéihlmy knní rkmqk nk qkthy, dlt hkt nbckt k uby
hli ubaolqy dyimkmy uby ny rkfík qyiahl dktk at w vlnvyt hyn qlflml; w
mbgyhaóny qlhl qki fayi uby, gbkihl my nyvkiqó dktk mbfat yi yn tbgal, val
uby hyn qlflml rkgak hlihy én ymqkfk vyiíki qtym nkftkhltkm mlfty qtym
dlnnailm, l dlnnaikm, uby yn kbqlt il nl hygnktk, kbiuby xám my dbyhy gtyyt
uby ytki flttagkm, dlt myt lthaiktak gkfknnytík hy nkm knhykikm; dytl, glxl
il vk xbgrl yi ymql, il rkw dktk ubé hyqyiytilm yi kvytacbktnl. yi
tymlnbgaói: kmí glxl mkigrl val k nkm nkftkhltkm, k dkml qatkhl vlnvaó k
fbmgkt k mb myñlt hli ubaolqy, w rknnóny mbmdatkihl w hagayihl xan kxltlmkm
nkxyiqkgaliym. glxl hli ubaolqy ny val, ny haol:

-¿ubé rkw, mkigrl kxacl? ¿dlhté myñknkt ymqy hík gli dayhtk fnkigk, l gli
iyctk?

-xyolt mytá -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby vbymk xytgyh ny myñkny gli knxkcty, glxl
téqbnlm hy gáqyhtkm, dltuby ny ygryi fayi hy vyt nlm uby ny vaytyi.

-hy ymy xlhl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, fbyikm ibyvkm qtkym.

-qki fbyikm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby il qayiy xám uby rkgyt vbymk xytgyh
mail dagkt k tlgaikiqy w mknat k nl tkml k vyt k nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml, uby gli lqtkm hlm hligynnkm mbwkm vayiy k vyt k vbymk xytgyh.

-¡mkiql halm! ¿ubé ym nl uby hagym, mkigrl kxacl? -haol hli ubaolqy-. xatk
il xy yickñym, ia ubaytkm gli pknmkm knyctíkm knyctkt xam vythkhytkm
qtamqyekm.

-¿ubé mkgktík wl hy yickñkt k vbymk xytgyh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w xám
ymqkihl qki gytgk hy hymgbftat xa vythkh? dauby, myñlt, w vyick, w vytá
vyiat k nk dtaigymk, ibymqtk kxk, vymqahk w khltikhk, yi pai, glxl ubayi
ynnk ym. mbm hligynnkm w ynnk qlhkm mli bik kmgbk hy ltl, qlhkm xkeltgkm hy
dytnkm, qlhkm mli hakxkiqym, qlhkm tbfíym, qlhkm qynkm hy ftlgkhl hy xám hy
haye knqlm; nlm gkfynnlm, mbynqlm dlt nkm ymdknhkm, uby mli lqtlm qkiqlm
tkwlm hyn mln uby kihki obckihl gli yn vayiql; w, mlfty qlhl, vayiyi k
gkfknnl mlfty qtym gkikiykm tyxyihkhkm, uby il rkw xám uby vyt.

-rkgkiykm ubyttám hygat, mkigrl.

-dlgk hapytyigak rkw -tymdlihaó mkigrl- hy gkikiykm k rkgkiykm; dytl,
vyicki mlfty nl uby vaiaytyi, ynnkm vayiyi nkm xám cknkikm myñltkm uby my
dbyhki hymykt, ymdygaknxyiqy nk dtaigymk hbngaiyk, xa myñltk, uby dkmxk nlm
myiqahlm.

-vkxlm, mkigrl raol -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w, yi knftagakm hymqkm il
ymdytkhkm glxl fbyikm ibyvkm, qy xkihl yn xyolt hymdlol uby ckikty yi nk
dtaxytk kvyiqbtk uby qbvayty, w ma ymql il qy gliqyiqk, qy xkihl nkm gtíkm
uby ymqy kñl xy haytyi nkm qtym wycbkm xíkm, uby qú mkfym uby ubyhki dktk
dktat yi yn dtkhl gligyoan hy ibymqtl dbyfnl.

-k nkm gtíkm xy kqyicl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby hy myt fbyilm nlm
hymdlolm hy nk dtaxytk kvyiqbtk il ymqá xbw gaytql.

wk yi ymql mknaytli hy nk mynvk, w hymgbftaytli gytgk k nkm qtym knhykikm.
qyihaó hli ubaolqy nlm lolm dlt qlhl yn gkxail hyn qlflml, w glxl il val
mail k nkm qtym nkftkhltkm, qbtfómy qlhl, w dtycbiqó k mkigrl ma nkm rkfík
hyokhl pbytk hy nk gabhkh.

-¿góxl pbytk hy nk gabhkh? -tymdlihaó-. ¿dlt vyiqbtk qayiy vbymk xytgyh nlm
lolm yi yn glnlhtannl, uby il vyy uby mli émqkm, nkm uby kubí vayiyi,
tymdnkihygayiqym glxl yn xamxl mln k xyhalhík?

-wl il vyl, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, mail k qtym nkftkhltkm mlfty qtym
flttaglm.

-¡kcltk xy nafty halm hyn hakfnl! -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. w ¿ym dlmafny uby
qtym rkgkiykm, l glxl my nnkxki, fnkigkm glxl yn kxdl hy nk iayvy, ny
dktyegki k vbymk xytgyh flttaglm? ¡vavy yn myñlt, uby xy dyny ymqkm fktfkm
ma qkn pbymy vythkh!

-dbym wl qy hacl, mkigrl kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby ym qki vythkh uby
mli flttaglm, l flttagkm, glxl wl mlw hli ubaolqy w qú mkigrl dkiek; k nl
xyilm, k xí qknym xy dktygyi.

-gknny, myñlt -haol mkigrl-, il hack nk qkn dknkftk, mail hymdkfany ymlm
lolm, w vyick k rkgyt tyvytyigak k nk myñltk hy mbm dyimkxayiqlm, uby wk
nnyck gytgk.

w, hagayihl ymql, my khynkiqó k tygyfat k nkm qtym knhykikm; w, kdyáihlmy
hyn tbgal, qbvl hyn gkfymqtl kn obxyiql hy bik hy nkm qtym nkftkhltkm, w,
raigkihl kxfkm tlhannkm yi yn mbynl, haol:

-tyaik w dtaigymk w hbubymk hy nk rytxlmbtk, vbymqtk knqavye w ctkihyek myk
mytvahk hy tygyfat yi mb ctkgak w fbyi qknyiqy kn gkbqavl gkfknnytl
vbymqtl, uby knní ymqá rygrl dayhtk xátxln, qlhl qbtfkhl w mai dbnmlm hy
vytmy kiqy vbymqtk xkciípagk dtymyigak. wl mlw mkigrl dkiek, mb ymgbhytl, w
én ym yn kmyihytykhl gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, nnkxkhl dlt lqtl
ilxfty yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk.

k ymqk mkeói, wk my rkfík dbymql hli ubaolqy hy railolm obiql k mkigrl, w
xatkfk gli lolm hymyigkokhlm w vamqk qbtfkhk k nk uby mkigrl nnkxkfk tyaik
w myñltk, w, glxl il hymgbftík yi ynnk mail bik xlek knhykik, w il hy xbw
fbyi tlmqtl, dltuby ytk gktattyhlihk w grkqk, ymqkfk mbmdyiml w khxatkhl,
mai lmkt hymdnyckt nlm nkfalm. nkm nkftkhltkm ymqkfki kmaxamxl kqóiaqkm,
vayihl kubynnlm hlm rlxftym qki hapytyiqym raigkhlm hy tlhannkm, uby il
hyokfki dkmkt khynkiqy k mb glxdkñytk; dytl, tlxdayihl yn manyigal nk
hyqyiahk, qlhk hymctkgakhk w xlríik, haol:

-kdátqyimy iltk yi qkn hyn gkxail, w héoyixlm dkmkt, uby vkxlm hy dtaymk.

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-¡lr dtaigymk w myñltk biavytmkn hyn qlflml! ¿góxl vbymqtl xkciáiaxl
gltkeói il my yiqytiygy vayihl kttlhannkhl kiqy vbymqtk mbfnaxkhk dtymyigak
k nk glnbik w mbmqyiql hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík?

lwyihl nl gbkn, lqtk hy nkm hlm haol:

-xkm, ¡ol, uby qy ymqtycl, fbttk hy xa mbyctl! ¡xatkh gli ubé my vayiyi nlm
myñltaqlm krltk k rkgyt fbtnk hy nkm knhykikm, glxl ma kubí il mbdaémyxlm
ygrkt dbnnkm glxl ynnlm! vkwki mb gkxail, y héoyixlm rkgyt yn ibyml, w
mytnym rk mkil.

-nyváiqkqy, mkigrl -haol k ymqy dbiql hli ubaolqy-, uby wk vyl uby nk
pltqbik, hy xa xkn il rktqk, qayiy qlxkhlm nlm gkxailm qlhlm dlt hlihy
dbyhk vyiat kncúi gliqyiql k ymqk áiaxk xyeubaik uby qyicl yi nkm gktiym. w
qú, ¡lr ymqtyxl hyn vknlt uby dbyhy hymyktmy, qétxail hy nk rbxkik
cyiqanyek, úiagl tyxyhal hymqy kpnacahl gltkeói uby qy khltk!, wk uby yn
xknacil yigkiqkhlt xy dytmacby, w rk dbymql ibfym w gkqktkqkm yi xam lolm,
w dktk mónl ynnlm w il dktk lqtlm rk xbhkhl w qtkimpltxkhl qb mai acbkn
rytxlmbtk w tlmqtl yi yn hy bik nkftkhltk dlfty, ma wk qkxfaéi yn xíl il ny
rk gkxfakhl yi yn hy kncúi vymqacnl, dktk rkgytny kflttygafny k qbm lolm,
il hyoym hy xatktxy fnkihk w kxltlmkxyiqy, ygrkihl hy vyt yi ymqk mbxamaói
w kttlhannkxayiql uby k qb gliqtkrygrk rytxlmbtk rkcl, nk rbxanhkh gli uby
xa knxk qy khltk.

-¡qlxá uby xa kcüynl! -tymdlihaó nk knhykik-. ¡kxacbaqk mlw wl hy lít
tymubyftkolm! kdátqyimy w héoyixlm at, w kctkhygétmynl ryxlm.

kdktqómy mkigrl w hyoónk at, gliqyiqímaxl hy rkfyt mknahl fayi hy mb
yityhl.

kdyikm my val nafty nk knhykik uby rkfík rygrl nk pacbtk hy hbngaiyk,
gbkihl, dagkihl k mb gkikiyk gli bi kcbaoói uby yi bi dknl qtkík, hal k
glttyt dlt yn dtkhl khynkiqy. w, glxl nk flttagk myiqík nk dbiqk hyn
kcbaoói, uby ny pkqackfk xám hy nl lthaiktal, glxyieó k hkt gltglvlm, hy
xkiytk uby hal gli nk myñltk hbngaiyk yi qayttk; nl gbkn vamql dlt hli
ubaolqy, kgbhaó k nyvkiqktnk, w mkigrl k glxdliyt w gaigrkt yn knfkthk, uby
qkxfaéi vail k nk fkttack hy nk dlnnaik. kglxlhkhk, dbym, nk knfkthk, w
ubatayihl hli ubaolqy nyvkiqkt k mb yigkiqkhk myñltk yi nlm ftkelm mlfty nk
obxyiqk, nk myñltk, nyvkiqáihlmy hyn mbynl, ny ubaqó hy kubyn qtkfkol,
dltuby, rkgaéihlmy kncúi qkiql kqtám, qlxó bik glttahagk, w, dbymqkm kxfkm
xkilm mlfty nkm kigkm hy nk dlnnaik, hal gli mb gbytdl, xám nacytl uby bi
rkngói, mlfty nk knfkthk, w ubyhó k rltgkokhkm, glxl ma pbytk rlxfty; w
yiqligym haol mkigrl:

-¡vavy tluby, uby ym nk myñltk ibymqtk kxk xám nacytk uby bi kglqái, w uby
dbyhy yimyñkt k mbfat k nk oaiyqk kn xám haymqtl glthlfém l xyoagkil! yn
kteói qtkmytl hy nk mannk dkmó hy bi mknql, w mai ymdbynkm rkgy glttyt nk
rkgkiyk glxl bik gyftk. w il ny vki yi ekck mbm hligynnkm; uby qlhkm glttyi
glxl yn vayiql.

w kmí ytk nk vythkh, dltuby, yi vaéihlmy k gkfknnl hbngaiyk, qlhkm dagktli
qtkm ynnk w hamdktktli k glttyt, mai vlnvyt nk gkfyek kqtám dlt ymdkgal hy
xám hy xyhak nycbk. macbaónkm hli ubaolqy gli nk vamqk, w, gbkihl val uby
il dktygíki, vlnvaéihlmy k mkigrl, ny haol:

-mkigrl, ¿ubé qy dktygy gbái xknubamql mlw hy yigkiqkhltym? w xatk rkmqk
hóihy my ymqayihy mb xknagak w nk loytaek uby xy qayiyi, dbym xy rki
ubytahl dtavkt hyn gliqyiql uby dbhaytk hktxy vyt yi mb myt k xa myñltk. yi
ypygql, wl ikgí dktk yoyxdnl hy hymhagrkhlm, w dktk myt fnkigl w qyttytl
hlihy qlxyi nk xatk w kmaymqyi nkm pnygrkm hy nk xknk pltqbik. w rkm
qkxfaéi hy khvytqat, mkigrl, uby il my gliqyiqktli ymqlm qtkahltym hy rkfyt
vbynql w qtkimpltxkhl k xa hbngaiyk, mail uby nk qtkimpltxktli w vlnvaytli
yi bik pacbtk qki fkok w qki pyk glxl nk hy kubynnk knhykik, w obiqkxyiqy
ny ubaqktli nl uby ym qki mbwl hy nkm dtaigadknym myñltkm, uby ym yn fbyi
lnlt, dlt kihkt mayxdty yiqty áxfktym w yiqty pnltym. dltuby qy rkcl mkfyt,
mkigrl, uby gbkihl nnycé k mbfat k hbngaiyk mlfty mb rkgkiyk, mycúi qú
hagym, uby k xí xy dktygaó flttagk, xy hal bi lnlt hy kolm gtbhlm, uby xy
yigknkftaió w kqlmacó yn knxk.

-¡lr gkiknnk! -ctaqó k ymqk mkeói mkigrl- ¡lr yigkiqkhltym kgakclm w
xknaiqyigalikhlm, w ubaéi lm vaytk k qlhlm yimktqkhlm dlt nkm kcknnkm, glxl
mkthaikm yi nytgrk! xbgrl mkféam, xbgrl dlhéam w xbgrl xám rkgéam. fkmqktlm
hyfaytk, fynnkglm, rkfyt xbhkhl nkm dytnkm hy nlm lolm hy xa myñltk yi
kcknnkm kngltilubyñkm, w mbm gkfynnlm hy ltl dbtímaxl yi gythkm hy glnk hy
fbyw fytxyol, w, paiknxyiqy, qlhkm mbm pkgaliym hy fbyikm yi xknkm, mai uby
ny qlgátkhym yi yn lnlt; uby dlt én maubaytk mkgátkxlm nl uby ymqkfk
yigbfaytql hyfkol hy kubynnk pyk gltqyek; kbiuby, dktk hygat vythkh, ibigk
wl va mb pyknhkh, mail mb rytxlmbtk, k nk gbkn mbfík hy dbiql w ubankqym bi
nbikt uby qyiík mlfty yn nkfal hytygrl, k xkiytk hy faclqy, gli mayqy l
lgrl gkfynnlm tbfalm glxl ryftkm hy ltl w nktclm hy xám hy bi dknxl.

-k ymy nbikt -haol hli ubaolqy-, mycúi nk glttymdlihyigak uby qayiyi yiqty
mí nlm hyn tlmqtl gli nlm hyn gbytdl, rk hy qyiyt lqtl hbngaiyk yi nk qkfnk
hyn xbmnl uby glttymdlihy kn nkhl hlihy qayiy yn hyn tlmqtl, dytl xbw
nbyiclm dktk nbiktym mli dynlm hy nk ctkihyek uby rkm maciapagkhl.

-dbym wl mé hygat k vbymqtk xytgyh -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby ny dktygíki knní
glxl ikgahlm.

-wl nl gtyl, kxacl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby iaicbik glmk dbml nk
ikqbtknyek yi hbngaiyk uby il pbymy dytpygqk w fayi kgkfkhk; w kmí, ma
qbvaytk gayi nbiktym glxl yn uby hagym, yi ynnk il pbytki nbiktym, mail
nbikm w ymqtynnkm tymdnkihygayiqym. dytl haxy, mkigrl: kubynnk uby k xí xy
dktygaó knfkthk, uby qú khytyekmqy, ¿ytk mannk tkmk l mannói?

-il ytk -tymdlihaó mkigrl- mail mannk k nk oaiyqk, gli bik gbfaytqk hy
gkxdl uby vkny nk xaqkh hy bi tyail, mycúi ym hy tagk.

-¡w uby il vaymy wl qlhl yml, mkigrl! -haol hli ubaolqy-. krltk qltil k
hygat, w haté xan vygym, uby mlw yn xám hymhagrkhl hy nlm rlxftym.

rktql qyiík uby rkgyt yn mlgkttói hy mkigrl yi hamaxbnkt nk tamk, lwyihl
nkm mkihygym hy mb kxl, qki hynagkhkxyiqy yickñkhl. paiknxyiqy, hymdbém hy
lqtkm xbgrkm tkeliym uby yiqty nlm hlm dkmktli, vlnvaytli k mbfat yi mbm
fymqakm, w macbaytli yn gkxail hy ektkclek, khlihy dyimkfki nnyckt k qayxdl
uby dbhaymyi rknnktmy yi bikm mlnyiym paymqkm uby yi kubynnk aimaciy gabhkh
gkhk kñl mbynyi rkgytmy. dytl, kiqym uby knná nnyckmyi, nym mbgyhaytli
glmkm uby, dlt xbgrkm, ctkihym w ibyvkm, xytygyi myt ymgtaqkm w nyíhkm,
glxl my vytá khynkiqy.





gkdíqbnl za. hy nk ymqtkñk kvyiqbtk uby ny mbgyhaó kn vknytlml hli ubaolqy
gli yn gkttl, l gkttyqk, hy nkm gltqym hy nk xbytqy


dyimkqavl khyxám afk hli ubaolqy dlt mb gkxail khynkiqy, glimahytkihl nk
xknk fbtnk uby ny rkfíki rygrl nlm yigkiqkhltym, vlnvayihl k mb myñltk
hbngaiyk yi nk xknk pacbtk hy nk knhykik, w il axkcaikfk ubé tyxyhal
qyihtík dktk vlnvytnk k mb myt dtaxytl; w ymqlm dyimkxayiqlm ny nnyvkfki
qki pbytk hy mí, uby, mai myiqatnl, mlnqó nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy, yn gbkn,
maiqayihl nk nafytqkh uby my ny hkfk, k gkhk dkml my hyqyiík k dkgyt nk
vythy wytfk hy uby kubynnlm gkxdlm kfbihkfki. hy mb yxfynymkxayiql ny
vlnvaó mkigrl dkiek, hagaéihlny:

-myñlt, nkm qtamqyekm il my ragaytli dktk nkm fymqakm, mail dktk nlm
rlxftym; dytl ma nlm rlxftym nkm mayiqyi hyxkmakhl, my vbynvyi fymqakm:
vbymqtk xytgyh my tydltqy, w vbynvk yi mí, w glok nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy,
w kvavy w hymdaytqy, w xbymqty kubynnk cknnkthík uby glivayiy uby qyicki
nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym. ¿ubé hakfnlm ym ymql? ¿ubé hymgkygaxayiql ym émqy?
¿ymqkxlm kubí, l yi ptkigak? xkm uby my nnyvy mkqkiám k gbkiqkm hbngaiykm
rkw yi yn xbihl, dbym vkny xám nk mknbh hy bi mlnl gkfknnytl kihkiqy uby
qlhlm nlm yigkiqlm w qtkimpltxkgaliym hy nk qayttk.

-gknnk, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy gli vle il xbw hymxkwkhk-; gknnk,
hacl, w il hackm fnkmpyxakm gliqtk kubynnk yigkiqkhk myñltk, uby hy mb
hymctkgak w hymvyiqbtk wl mlnl qyicl nk gbndk: hy nk aivahak uby xy qayiyi
nlm xknlm rk ikgahl mb xknk kihkiek.

-kmí nl hacl wl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: ubayi nk vahl w nk vyy krltk, ¿gbán ym
yn gltkeói uby il nnltk?

-yml dbyhym qú hygat fayi, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dbym nk vamqy yi
nk yiqytyek gkfkn hy mb rytxlmbtk, uby yn yigkiql il my ymqyihaó k qbtfktqy
nk vamqk ia k yigbftatqy mb fynnyek: gliqtk xí mlnl w gliqtk xam lolm my
yihytyek nk pbytek hy mb vyiyil. xkm, gli qlhl ymql, ry gkíhl, mkigrl, yi
bik glmk, w ym uby xy daiqkmqy xkn mb rytxlmbtk, dltuby, ma xkn il xy
kgbythl, haoamqy uby qyiík nlm lolm hy dytnkm, w nlm lolm uby dktygyi hy
dytnkm kiqym mli hy fymbcl uby hy hkxk; w, k nl uby wl gtyl, nlm hy
hbngaiyk hyfyi myt hy vythym ymxytknhkm, tkmckhlm, gli hlm gynymqaknym
ktglm uby nym matvyi hy gyokm; w ymkm dytnkm ubíqknkm hy nlm lolm w dámknkm
k nlm hayiqym, uby mai hbhk qy qtlgkmqy, mkigrl, qlxkihl nlm lolm dlt nlm
hayiqym.

-qlhl dbyhy myt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby qkxfaéi xy qbtfó k xí mb
rytxlmbtk glxl k vbymk xytgyh mb pyknhkh. dytl yiglxyihéxlmnl qlhl k halm,
uby Én ym yn mkfahlt hy nkm glmkm uby rki hy mbgyhyt yi ymqy vknny hy
náctaxkm, yi ymqy xkn xbihl uby qyiyxlm, hlihy kdyikm my rknnk glmk uby
ymqé mai xyegnk hy xknhkh, yxfbmqy w fynnkubytík. hy bik glmk xy dymk,
myñlt xíl, xám uby hy lqtkm; uby ym dyimkt ubé xyhal my rk hy qyiyt gbkihl
vbymk xytgyh vyiek k kncúi cackiqy l lqtl gkfknnytl, w ny xkihy uby my vkwk
k dtymyiqkt kiqy nk rytxlmbtk hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk: ¿khóihy nk rk hy
rknnkt ymqy dlfty cackiqy, l ymqy dlfty w xímytl gkfknnytl vyigahl?
dktégyxy uby nlm vyl kihkt dlt yn qlflml rygrlm bilm fkbmkiym, fbmgkihl k
xa myñltk hbngaiyk, w, kbiuby nk yigbyiqtyi yi xaqkh hy nk gknny, il nk
glilgytái xám uby k xa dkhty.

-ubaeá, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, il my ymqyihytá yn yigkiqkxyiql k
ubaqkt yn glilgaxayiql hy hbngaiyk k nlm vyigahlm w dtymyiqkhlm cackiqym w
gkfknnytlm; w, yi bil l hlm hy nlm dtaxytlm uby wl vyiek w ny yivíy,
rktyxlm nk yzdytayigak ma nk vyi l il, xkiháihlnym uby vbynvki k hktxy
tynkgaói hy nl uby kgytgk hymql nym rbfayty mbgyhahl.

-hacl, myñlt -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby xy rk dktygahl fayi nl uby vbymk xytgyh
rk hagrl, w uby gli ymy ktqapagal vyihtyxlm yi glilgaxayiql hy nl uby
hymykxlm; w ma ym uby ynnk k mlnl vbymk xytgyh my yigbfty, nk hymctkgak xám
mytá hy vbymk xytgyh uby mbwk; dytl, glxl nk myñltk hbngaiyk qyick mknbh w
gliqyiql, ilmlqtlm dlt kgá ilm kvyihtyxlm w nl dkmktyxlm nl xyolt uby
dbhaétyxlm, fbmgkihl ibymqtkm kvyiqbtkm w hyokihl kn qayxdl uby rkck hy nkm
mbwkm, uby én ym yn xyolt xéhagl hymqkm w hy lqtkm xkwltym yipytxyhkhym.

tymdlihyt ubytík hli ubaolqy k mkigrl dkiek, dytl ymqltfómynl bik gkttyqk
uby mknaó kn qtkvém hyn gkxail, gktckhk hy nlm xám havytmlm w ymqtkñlm
dytmlikoym w pacbtkm uby dbhaytli axkcaiktmy. yn uby cbakfk nkm xbnkm w
mytvík hy gkttyqytl ytk bi pyl hyxlial. vyiík nk gkttyqk hymgbfaytqk kn
gaynl kfaytql, mai qlnhl ia ektel. nk dtaxytk pacbtk uby my lptygaó k nlm
lolm hy hli ubaolqy pby nk hy nk xamxk xbytqy, gli tlmqtl rbxkil; obiql k
ynnk vyiík bi áicyn gli bikm ctkihym w daiqkhkm knkm; kn bi nkhl ymqkfk bi
yxdytkhlt gli bik gltlik, kn dktygyt hy ltl, yi nk gkfyek; k nlm daym hy nk
xbytqy ymqkfk yn halm uby nnkxki gbdahl, mai vyihk yi nlm lolm, dytl gli mb
ktgl, gktgko w mkyqkm. vyiík qkxfaéi bi gkfknnytl ktxkhl hy dbiqk yi
fnkigl, yzgydql uby il qtkík xlttaói, ia gynkhk, mail bi mlxftytl nnyil hy
dnbxkm hy havytmkm glnltym; gli émqkm vyiíki lqtkm dytmlikm hy hapytyiqym
qtkoym w tlmqtlm. qlhl nl gbkn vamql hy axdtlvaml, yi kncbik xkiytk
knfltlqó k hli ubaolqy w dbml xayhl yi yn gltkeói hy mkigrl; xkm nbycl my
knyctó hli ubaolqy, gtywyihl uby my ny lptygík kncbik ibyvk w dynactlmk
kvyiqbtk, w gli ymqy dyimkxayiql, w gli áiaxl hamdbymql hy kglxyqyt
gbknubayt dynactl, my dbml hynkiqy hy nk gkttyqk, w, gli vle knqk w
kxyikekhltk, haol:

-gkttyqytl, glgrytl, l hakfnl, l nl uby ytym, il qkthym yi hygatxy ubaéi
ytym, k hó vkm w ubaéi ym nk cyiqy uby nnyvkm yi qb gkttaglgry, uby xám
dktygy nk fktgk hy gktói uby gkttyqk hy nkm uby my bmki.

k nl gbkn, xkimkxyiqy, hyqyiayihl yn hakfnl nk gkttyqk, tymdlihaó:

-myñlt, ilmlqtlm mlxlm tygaqkiqym hy nk glxdkñík hy kicbnl yn xknl; ryxlm
rygrl yi bi nbckt uby ymqá hyqtám hy kubynnk nlxk, ymqk xkñkik, uby ym nk
lgqkvk hyn gltdbm, yn kbql hy nkm gltqym hy nk xbytqy, w réxlmny hy rkgyt
ymqk qkthy yi kubyn nbckt uby hymhy kubí my dktygy; w, dlt ymqkt qki gytgk
w ymgbmkt yn qtkfkol hy hymibhktilm w vlnvytilm k vymqat, ilm vkxlm
vymqahlm gli nlm xymxlm vymqahlm uby tydtymyiqkxlm. kubyn xkigyfl vk hy
xbytqy; yn lqtl, hy Áicyn; kubynnk xboyt, uby ym nk hyn kbqlt, vk hy tyaik;
yn lqtl, hy mlnhkhl; kubén, hy yxdytkhlt, w wl, hy hyxlial, w mlw bik hy
nkm dtaigadknym pacbtkm hyn kbql, dltuby rkcl yi ymqk glxdkñík nlm dtaxytlm
dkdynym. ma lqtk glmk vbymqtk xytgyh hymyk mkfyt hy ilmlqtlm, dtycúiqyxynl,
uby wl ny mkfté tymdlihyt gli qlhk dbiqbknahkh; uby, glxl mlw hyxlial, qlhl
my xy kngkiek.

-dlt nk py hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby, kmí glxl va
ymqy gkttl, axkcaié uby kncbik ctkihy kvyiqbtk my xy lptygík; w krltk hacl
uby ym xyiymqyt qlgkt nkm kdktayigakm gli nk xkil dktk hkt nbckt kn
hymyickñl. kihkh gli halm, fbyik cyiqy, w rkgyh vbymqtk paymqk, w xatkh ma
xkiháam kncl yi uby dbyhk mytlm hy dtlvygrl, uby nl rkté gli fbyi áiaxl w
fbyi qknkiqy, dltuby hymhy xlgrkgrl pba kpagalikhl k nk gktáqbnk, w yi xa
xlgyhkh my xy afki nlm lolm qtkm nk pktáihbnk.

ymqkihl yi ymqkm dnáqagkm, ubaml nk mbytqy uby nnyckmy bil hy nk glxdkñík,
uby vyiík vymqahl hy floackick, gli xbgrlm gkmgkfynym, w yi nk dbiqk hy bi
dknl qtkík qtym vyoackm hy vkgk raigrkhkm; yn gbkn xlrkttkgrl, nnycáihlmy k
hli ubaolqy, glxyieó k ymctaxat yn dknl w k mkgbhat yn mbynl gli nkm
vyoackm, w k hkt ctkihym mknqlm, mlikihl nlm gkmgkfynym, gbwk xknk vamaói
kmí knfltlqó k tlgaikiqy, uby, mai myt dlhytlml k hyqyiytny hli ubaolqy,
qlxkihl yn ptyil yiqty nlm hayiqym, hal k glttyt dlt yn gkxdl gli xám
nacytyek uby okxám dtlxyqaytli nlm rbymlm hy mb ilqlxík. mkigrl, uby
glimahytó yn dynactl yi uby afk mb kxl hy myt hyttafkhl, mknqó hyn tbgal,
w k qlhk dtaymk pby k vknytny; dytl, gbkihl k én nnycó, wk ymqkfk yi
qayttk, w obiql k én, tlgaikiqy, uby, gli mb kxl, vail kn mbynl: lthaiktal
pai w dktkhytl hy nkm nlekiíkm hy tlgaikiqy w hy mbm kqtyvaxayiqlm.

xkm, kdyikm rbfl hyokhl mb gkfknnytík mkigrl dlt kgbhat k hli ubaolqy,
gbkihl yn hyxlial fkankhlt hy nkm vyoackm mknqó mlfty yn tbgal, w,
mkgbhaéihlny gli ynnkm, yn xayhl w tbahl, xám uby yn hlnlt hy nlm clndym,
ny rael vlnkt dlt nk gkxdkñk rkgak yn nbckt hlihy afki k rkgyt nk paymqk.
xatkfk mkigrl nk gkttytk hy mb tbgal w nk gkíhk hy mb kxl, w il mkfík k
gbán hy nkm hlm iygymahkhym kgbhatík dtaxytl; dytl, yi ypygql, glxl fbyi
ymgbhytl w glxl fbyi gtakhl, dbhl xám gli én yn kxlt hy mb myñlt uby yn
gktañl hy mb obxyiql, dbymql uby gkhk vye uby vyík nyvkiqkt nkm vyoackm yi
yn katy w gkyt mlfty nkm kigkm hy mb tbgal ytki dktk én qátqkclm w mbmqlm
hy xbytqy, w kiqym ubamaytk uby kubynnlm clndym my nlm haytki k én yi nkm
iañkm hy nlm lolm uby yi yn xám xíiaxl dynl hy nk glnk hy mb kmil. gli ymqk
dytdnyok qtafbnkgaói nnycó hlihy ymqkfk hli ubaolqy, rktql xám xknqtygrl hy
nl uby én ubamaytk, w, kwbháihlny k mbfat mlfty tlgaikiqy, ny haol:

-myñlt, yn hakfnl my rk nnyvkhl kn tbgal.

-¿ubé hakfnl? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-yn hy nkm vyoackm -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-dbym wl ny glftkté -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, ma fayi my yigyttkmy gli én yi
nlm xám rlihlm w ymgbtlm gknkflelm hyn aipaytil. mícbyxy, mkigrl, uby nk
gkttyqk vk hymdkgal, w gli nkm xbnkm hynnk mkqampkté nk déthahk hyn tbgal.

-il rkw dktk ubé rkgyt ymk hanacyigak, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: vbymqtk
xytgyh qyxdny mb gónytk, uby, mycúi xy dktygy, wk yn hakfnl rk hyokhl yn
tbgal, w vbynvy k nk ubytyigak.

w kmí ytk nk vythkh; dltuby, rkfayihl gkíhl yn hakfnl gli yn tbgal, dlt
axaqkt k hli ubaolqy w k tlgaikiqy, yn hakfnl my pby k day kn dbyfnl, w yn
obxyiql my vlnvaó k mb kxl.

-gli qlhl yml -haol hli ubaolqy-, mytá fayi gkmqackt yn hymglxyhaxayiql hy
kubyn hyxlial yi kncbil hy nlm hy nk gkttyqk, kbiuby myk yn xymxl
yxdytkhlt.

-ubíqymyny k vbymqtk xytgyh yml hy nk axkcaikgaói -tydnagó mkigrl-, w qlxy
xa glimyol, uby ym uby ibigk my qlxy gli pktmkiqym, uby ym cyiqy
pkvltygahk. tygaqkiqy ry vamql wl ymqkt dtyml dlt hlm xbytqym w mknat
nafty w mai glmqkm. mydk vbymk xytgyh uby, glxl mli cyiqym knyctym w hy
dnkgyt, qlhlm nlm pkvltygyi, qlhlm nlm kxdktki, kwbhki w ymqaxki, w xám
mayihl hy kubynnlm hy nkm glxdkñíkm tyknym w hy qíqbnl, uby qlhlm, l nlm
xám, yi mbm qtkoym w glxdlmqbtk dktygyi bilm dtíigadym.

-dbym gli qlhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, il my xy rk hy at yn hyxlial
pktmkiqy knkfkihl, kbiuby ny pkvltyegk qlhl yn céiytl rbxkil.

w, hagayihl ymql, vlnvaó k nk gkttyqk, uby wk ymqkfk fayi gytgk hyn dbyfnl.
afk hkihl vlgym, hagayihl:

-hyqyiylm, ymdytkh, qbtfk knycty w tyclgaokhk, uby lm ubaytl hkt k yiqyihyt
góxl my rki hy qtkqkt nlm obxyiqlm w knaxkñkm uby matvyi hy gkfknnytík k
nlm ymgbhytlm hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym.

qki knqlm ytki nlm ctaqlm hy hli ubaolqy, uby nlm lwytli w yiqyihaytli nlm
hy nk gkttyqk; w, obeckihl dlt nkm dknkftkm nk aiqyigaói hyn uby nkm hygík,
yi bi aimqkiqy mknqó nk xbytqy hy nk gkttyqk, w qtkm ynnk, yn yxdytkhlt, yn
hakfnl gkttyqytl w yn Áicyn, mai ubyhktmy nk tyaik ia yn halm gbdahl; w
qlhlm my gktcktli hy dayhtkm w my dbmaytli yi knk, ymdytkihl tygyfat k hli
ubaolqy yi nkm dbiqkm hy mbm cbaokttlm. hli ubaolqy, uby nlm val dbymqlm yi
qki cknnkthl ymgbkhtói, nlm ftkelm nyvkiqkhlm gli khyxái hy hymdyhat
dlhytlmkxyiqy nkm dayhtkm, hyqbvl nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy w dúmlmy k dyimkt
hy ubé xlhl nlm kglxyqytík gli xyilm dynactl hy mb dytmlik. yi ymql uby my
hyqbvl, nnycó mkigrl, w, vaéihlny yi qknny hy kglxyqyt kn fayi pltxkhl
ymgbkhtói, ny haol:

-kmke hy nlgbtk mytík aiqyiqkt qkn yxdtymk: glimahyty vbymk xytgyh, myñlt
xíl, uby dktk mldk hy kttlwl w qyiqy fliyqy, il rkw ktxk hypyimavk yi yn
xbihl, ma il ym yxfbqatmy w yigyttktmy yi bik gkxdkik hy ftligy; w qkxfaéi
my rk hy glimahytkt uby ym xám qyxytahkh uby vknyiqík kglxyqyt bi rlxfty
mlnl k bi yoétgaql hlihy ymqá nk xbytqy, w dynyki yi dytmlik yxdytkhltym, w
k ubayi kwbhki nlm fbyilm w nlm xknlm áicynym; w ma ymqk glimahytkgaói il
ny xbyvy k ymqktmy ubyhl, xbévkny mkfyt hy gaytql uby, yiqty qlhlm nlm uby
knní ymqái, kbiuby dktygyi tywym, dtíigadym w yxdytkhltym, il rkw iaicúi
gkfknnytl kihkiqy.

-krltk mí -haol hli ubaolqy- rkm hkhl, mkigrl, yi yn dbiql uby dbyhy w hyfy
xbhktxy hy xa wk hyqytxaikhl aiqyiql. wl il dbyhl ia hyfl mkgkt nk ymdkhk,
glxl lqtkm vygym xbgrkm qy ry hagrl, gliqtk ubayi il pbyty ktxkhl
gkfknnytl. k qa, mkigrl, qlgk, ma ubaytym qlxkt nk vyickiek hyn kctkval uby
k qb tbgal my ny rk rygrl, uby wl hymhy kubí qy kwbhkté gli vlgym w
khvytqaxayiqlm mknbhkfnym.

-il rkw dktk ubé, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, qlxkt vyickiek hy ikhay, dbym
il ym hy fbyilm gtamqakilm qlxktnk hy nlm kctkvalm; gbkiql xám, uby wl
kgkfkté gli xa kmil uby dlick mb lpyimk yi nkm xkilm hy xa vlnbiqkh, nk
gbkn ym hy vavat dkgípagkxyiqy nlm híkm uby nlm gaynlm xy haytyi hy vahk.

-dbym émk ym qb hyqytxaikgaói -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, mkigrl fbyil, mkigrl
hamgtyql, mkigrl gtamqakil w mkigrl maigytl, hyoyxlm ymqkm pkiqkmxkm w
vlnvkxlm k fbmgkt xyoltym w xám gknapagkhkm kvyiqbtkm; uby wl vyl ymqk
qayttk hy qknny, uby il rki hy pknqkt yi ynnk xbgrkm w xbw xankctlmkm.

vlnvaó nkm tayihkm nbycl, mkigrl pby k qlxkt mb tbgal, nk xbytqy gli qlhl
mb ymgbkhtói vlnkiqy vlnvaytli k mb gkttyqk w dtlmacbaytli mb vakoy, w ymqy
pynagy pai qbvl nk qyxytlmk kvyiqbtk hy nk gkttyqk hy nk xbytqy, ctkgakm
myki hkhkm kn mknbhkfny glimyol uby mkigrl dkiek hal k mb kxl; kn gbkn, yn
hík macbayiqy, ny mbgyhaó lqtk gli bi yikxltkhl w kihkiqy gkfknnytl, hy il
xyilm mbmdyimaói uby nk dkmkhk.





gkdíqbnl zaa. hy nk ymqtkñk kvyiqbtk uby ny mbgyhaó kn vknytlml hli
ubaolqy gli yn ftkvl gkfknnytl hy nlm ymdyolm


nk ilgry uby macbaó kn hík hyn tyigbyiqtl hy nk xbytqy nk dkmktli hli
ubaolqy w mb ymgbhytl hyfkol hy bilm knqlm w mlxftlmlm átflnym, rkfayihl, k
dytmbkmaói hy mkigrl, glxahl hli ubaolqy hy nl uby vyiík yi yn tydbymql hyn
tbgal, w yiqty nk gyik haol mkigrl k mb myñlt:

-myñlt, ¡ubé qliql rbfaytk kihkhl wl ma rbfaytk ymglcahl yi knftagakm nlm
hymdlolm hy nk dtaxytk kvyiqbtk uby vbymqtk xytgyh kgkfktk, kiqym uby nkm
gtíkm hy nkm qtym wycbkm! yi ypygql, yi ypygql, xám vkny dáoktl yi xkil uby
fbaqty vlnkihl.

-qlhkvík -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ma qú, mkigrl, xy hyoktkm kglxyqyt, glxl
wl ubytík, qy rbfaytki gkfahl yi hymdlolm, dlt nl xyilm, nk gltlik hy ltl
hy nk yxdytkqtae w nkm daiqkhkm knkm hy gbdahl, uby wl my nkm ubaqktk kn
tyhtldynl w qy nkm dbmaytk yi nkm xkilm.

-ibigk nlm gyqtlm w gltlikm hy nlm yxdytkhltym pktmkiqym -tymdlihaó
mkigrl dkiek- pbytli hy ltl dbtl, mail hy ltldyn l rlok hy nkqk.

-kmí ym vythkh -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby il pbytk kgytqkhl uby nlm
kqkvílm hy nk glxyhak pbytki pailm, mail paicahlm w kdktyiqym, glxl nl ym
nk xymxk glxyhak, gli nk gbkn ubaytl, mkigrl, uby ymqém fayi, qyiaéihlnk yi
qb ctkgak, w dlt yn xamxl glimacbayiqy k nlm uby nkm tydtymyiqki w k nlm
uby nkm glxdliyi, dltuby qlhlm mli aimqtbxyiqlm hy rkgyt bi ctki fayi k nk
tydúfnagk, dliaéihlilm bi ymdyol k gkhk dkml hynkiqy, hlihy my vyyi kn vavl
nkm kggaliym hy nk vahk rbxkik, w iaicbik glxdktkgaói rkw uby xám kn vavl
ilm tydtymyiqy nl uby mlxlm w nl uby rkfyxlm hy myt glxl nk glxyhak w nlm
glxyhakiqym. ma il, haxy: ¿il rkm vamql qú tydtymyiqkt kncbik glxyhak
khlihy my aiqtlhbgyi tywym, yxdytkhltym w dliqípagym, gkfknnytlm, hkxkm w
lqtlm havytmlm dytmlikoym? bil rkgy yn tbpaái, lqtl yn yxfbmqytl, émqy yn
xytgkhyt, kubén yn mlnhkhl, lqtl yn maxdny hamgtyql, lqtl yn yikxltkhl
maxdny; w, kgkfkhk nk glxyhak w hymibháihlmy hy nlm vymqahlm hynnk, ubyhki
qlhlm nlm tygaqkiqym acbknym.

-mí ry vamql -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-dbym nl xymxl -haol hli ubaolqy- kgliqygy yi nk glxyhak w qtkql hymqy
xbihl, hlihy bilm rkgyi nlm yxdytkhltym, lqtlm nlm dliqípagym, w,
paiknxyiqy, qlhkm gbkiqkm pacbtkm my dbyhyi aiqtlhbgat yi bik glxyhak;
dytl, yi nnyckihl kn pai, uby ym gbkihl my kgkfk nk vahk, k qlhlm nym ubaqk
nk xbytqy nkm tldkm uby nlm hapytyigakfki, w ubyhki acbknym yi nk
mydbnqbtk.

-¡ftkvk glxdktkgaói! -haol mkigrl-, kbiuby il qki ibyvk uby wl il nk rkwk
líhl xbgrkm w havytmkm vygym, glxl kubynnk hyn obycl hyn koyhtye, uby,
xayiqtkm hbtk yn obycl, gkhk dayek qayiy mb dktqagbnkt lpagal; w, yi
kgkfáihlmy yn obycl, qlhkm my xyegnki, obiqki w fktkoki, w hki gli ynnkm yi
bik flnmk, uby ym glxl hkt gli nk vahk yi nk mydbnqbtk.

-gkhk hík, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, qy vkm rkgayihl xyilm maxdny w xám
hamgtyql.

-mí, uby kncl my xy rk hy dyckt hy nk hamgtygaói hy vbymqtk xytgyh
-tymdlihaó mkigrl-; uby nkm qayttkm uby hy mbwl mli ymqétanym w mygkm,
ymqytglnáihlnkm w gbnqaváihlnkm, vayiyi k hkt fbyilm ptbqlm: ubaytl hygat
uby nk glivytmkgaói hy vbymqtk xytgyh rk mahl yn ymqaétgln uby mlfty nk
ymqétan qayttk hy xa mygl aicyial rk gkíhl; nk gbnqavkgaói, yn qayxdl uby
rk uby ny matvl w glxbiagl; w gli ymql ymdytl hy hkt ptbqlm hy xí uby myki
hy fyihagaói, qknym, uby il hymhacki ia hymnagyi hy nlm myihytlm hy nk
fbyik gtakiek uby vbymk xytgyh rk rygrl yi yn kclmqkhl yiqyihaxayiql xíl.

taómy hli ubaolqy hy nkm kpygqkhkm tkeliym hy mkigrl, w dktygaóny myt
vythkh nl uby hygík hy mb yxayihk, dltuby hy gbkihl yi gbkihl rkfnkfk hy
xkiytk uby ny khxatkfk; dbymql uby qlhkm l nkm xám vygym uby mkigrl ubytík
rkfnkt hy ldlmagaói w k nl gltqymkil, kgkfkfk mb tkeói gli hymdyñktmy hyn
xliqy hy mb maxdnagahkh kn dtlpbihl hy mb aciltkigak; w yi nl uby én my
xlmqtkfk xám ynyckiqy w xyxltalml ytk yi qtkyt typtkiym, vaiaymyi l il
vaiaymyi k dynl hy nl uby qtkqkfk, glxl my rkftá vamql w my rkftá ilqkhl yi
yn hamgbtml hymqk ramqltak.

yi ymqkm w yi lqtkm dnáqagkm my nym dkmó ctki dktqy hy nk ilgry, w k mkigrl
ny vail yi vlnbiqkh hy hyokt gkyt nkm glxdbytqkm hy nlm lolm, glxl én hygík
gbkihl ubytík hltxat, w, hymknañkihl kn tbgal, ny hal dkmql kfbihlml w
nafty. il ubaqó nk mannk k tlgaikiqy, dlt myt yzdtyml xkihkxayiql hy mb
myñlt uby, yi yn qayxdl uby kihbvaymyi yi gkxdkñk, l il hbtxaymyi hyfkol hy
qygrkhl, il hymknañkmy k tlgaikiqy: kiqacbk bmkiek ymqkfnygahk w cbkthkhk
hy nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm, ubaqkt yn ptyil w glncktny hyn kteói hy nk
mannk; dytl, ¿ubaqkt nk mannk kn gkfknnl?, ¡cbkthk!; w kmí nl rael mkigrl,
w ny hal nk xamxk nafytqkh uby kn tbgal, gbwk kxamqkh hén w hy tlgaikiqy
pby qki úiagk w qki qtkfkhk, uby rkw pkxk, dlt qtkhagaói hy dkhtym k raolm,
uby yn kbqlt hymqk vythkhytk ramqltak rael dktqagbnktym gkdíqbnlm hynnk;
xkm uby, dlt cbkthkt nk hygyigak w hygltl uby k qki rytlagk ramqltak my
hyfy, il nlm dbml yi ynnk, dbymql uby kncbikm vygym my hymgbahk hymqy mb
dtlmbdbymql, w ymgtafy uby, kmí glxl nkm hlm fymqakm my obiqkfki, kgbhíki k
tkmgktmy yn bil kn lqtl, w uby, hymdbém hy gkimkhlm w mkqampygrlm, gtbekfk
tlgaikiqy yn dymgbyel mlfty yn gbynnl hyn tbgal (uby ny mlftkfk hy nk lqtk
dktqy xám hy xyhak vktk), w, xatkihl nlm hlm kqyiqkxyiqy kn mbynl, my
mlníki ymqkt hy kubynnk xkiytk qtym híkm; k nl xyilm, qlhl yn qayxdl uby
nym hyokfki, l il nym glxdyník nk rkxfty k fbmgkt mbmqyiql.

hacl uby hagyi uby hyoó yn kbqlt ymgtaql uby nlm rkfík glxdktkhl yi nk
kxamqkh k nk uby qbvaytli iaml w ybtíknl, w dínkhym w ltymqym; w ma ymql ym
kmí, my dlhík ygrkt hy vyt, dktk biavytmkn khxatkgaói, gbái patxy hyfaó myt
nk kxamqkh hymqlm hlm dkgípaglm kiaxknym, w dktk glipbmaói hy nlm rlxftym,
uby qki xkn mkfyi cbkthktmy kxamqkh nlm bilm k nlm lqtlm. dlt ymql my haol:

il rkw kxacl dktk kxacl:

nkm gkñkm my vbynvyi nkiekm;

w yn lqtl uby gkiqó:

hy kxacl k kxacl nk graigry, yqg.

w il ny dktyegk k kncbil uby kihbvl yn kbqlt kncl pbytk hy gkxail yi rkfyt
glxdktkhl nk kxamqkh hymqlm kiaxknym k nk hy nlm rlxftym, uby hy nkm
fymqakm rki tygyfahl xbgrlm khvytqaxayiqlm nlm rlxftym w kdtyihahl xbgrkm
glmkm hy axdltqkigak, glxl mli: hy nkm gacüyñkm, yn gtamqyn; hy nlm dyttlm,
yn vóxaql w yn kctkhygaxayiql; hy nkm ctbnnkm, nk vacankigak; hy nkm
rltxackm, nk dtlvahyigak; hy nlm ynypkiqym, nk rliymqahkh, w nk nyknqkh,
hyn gkfknnl.

paiknxyiqy, mkigrl my ubyhó hltxahl kn day hy bi kngltiluby, w hli ubaolqy
hltxaqkihl kn hy bik tlfbmqk yigaik; dytl, dlgl ymdkgal hy qayxdl rkfík
dkmkhl, gbkihl ny hymdytqó bi tbahl uby maiqaó k mbm ymdknhkm, w,
nyvkiqáihlmy gli mlftymknql, my dbml k xatkt w k ymgbgrkt hy hóihy yn tbahl
dtlgyhík, w val uby ytki hlm rlxftym k gkfknnl, w uby yn bil, hyoáihlmy
hyttafkt hy nk mannk, haol kn lqtl:

-kdékqy, kxacl, w ubaqk nlm ptyilm k nlm gkfknnlm, uby, k xa dktygyt, ymqy
maqal kfbihk hy wytfk dktk ynnlm, w hyn manyigal w mlnyhkh uby rki xyiymqyt
xam kxltlmlm dyimkxayiqlm.

yn hygat ymql w yn qyihytmy yi yn mbynl qlhl pby k bi xymxl qayxdl; w, kn
kttloktmy, ragaytli tbahl nkm ktxkm hy uby vyiík ktxkhl, xkiapaymqk myñkn
dlt hlihy glilgaó hli ubaolqy uby hyfík hy myt gkfknnytl kihkiqy; w,
nnycáihlmy k mkigrl, uby hltxík, ny qtkfó hyn ftkel, w gli il dyubyñl
qtkfkol ny vlnvaó yi mb kgbythl, w gli vle fkok ny haol:

-rytxkil mkigrl, kvyiqbtk qyiyxlm.

-halm ilm nk hé fbyik -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w ¿khóihy ymqá, myñlt xíl, mb
xytgyh hy ymk myñltk kvyiqbtk?

-¿khóihy, mkigrl? -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-; vbynvy nlm lolm w xatk, w vytám
knní qyihahl bi kihkiqy gkfknnytl, uby, k nl uby k xí my xy qtkmnbgy, il
hyfy hy ymqkt hyxkmakhkxyiqy knycty, dltuby ny va kttlokt hyn gkfknnl w
qyihytmy yi yn mbynl gli kncbikm xbymqtkm hy hymdygrl, w kn gkyt ny
gtboaytli nkm ktxkm.

-dbym ¿yi ubé rknnk vbymk xytgyh -haol mkigrl- uby émqk myk kvyiqbtk?

-il ubaytl wl hygat -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby émqk myk kvyiqbtk hyn qlhl,
mail dtaigadal hynnk; uby dlt kubí my glxayieki nkm kvyiqbtkm. dytl
ymgbgrk, uby, k nl uby dktygy, qyxdnkihl ymqá bi nkúh l vacüynk, w, mycúi
ymgbdy w my hymyxfktkek yn dygrl, hyfy hy dtydktktmy dktk gkiqkt kncl.

-k fbyik py uby ym kmí -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w uby hyfy hy myt gkfknnytl
yikxltkhl.

-il rkw iaicbil hy nlm kihkiqym uby il nl myk -haol hli ubaolqy-. w
ymgbgréxlmny, uby dlt yn ranl mkgktyxlm yn lvannl hy mbm dyimkxayiqlm, ma
ym uby gkiqk; uby hy nk kfbihkigak hyn gltkeói rkfnk nk nyicbk.

tydnagkt ubytík mkigrl k mb kxl, dytl nk vle hyn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby, uby
il ytk xbw xknk xa xbw fbyik, nl ymqltfó; w, ymqkihl nlm hlm kqóiaqlm,
lwytli uby nl uby gkiqó pby ymqy mliyql:

  -hkhxy, myñltk, bi qétxail uby mack,
  glipltxy k vbymqtk vlnbiqkh gltqkhl;
  uby mytá hy nk xík kmí ymqaxkhl,
  uby dlt okxám bi dbiql hén hymhack.
  ma cbmqáam uby gknnkihl xa pkqack
  xbytk, gliqkhxy wk dlt kgkfkhl:
  ma ubytéam uby lm nk gbyiqy yi hymbmkhl
  xlhl, rkté uby yn xymxl kxlt nk hack.
  k dtbyfk hy gliqtktalm ymqlw rygrl,
  hy fnkihk gytk w hy hakxkiqy hbtl,
  w k nkm nywym hy kxlt yn kxk kobmql.
  fnkihl gbkn ym, l pbytqy, lptyegl yn dygrl:
  yiqknnkh l axdtaxah nl uby lm hé cbmql,
  uby hy cbkthktnl yqytikxyiqy obtl.

gli bi ¡kw!, kttkigkhl, kn dktygyt, hy nl íiqaxl hy mb gltkeói, hal pai k
mb gkiql yn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby, w, hy knní k bi dlgl, gli vle hlnayiqy w
nkmqaxkhk, haol:

-¡lr nk xám rytxlmk w nk xám aictkqk xboyt hyn ltfy! ¿góxl uby mytá
dlmafny, mytyiímaxk gkmanhyk hy vkihknak, uby rkm hy glimyiqat uby my
glimbxk w kgkfy yi gliqaibkm dytyctaikgaliym w yi ámdytlm w hbtlm qtkfkolm
ymqy qb gkbqavl gkfknnytl? ¿il fkmqk wk uby ry rygrl uby qy glipaymyi dlt
nk xám rytxlmk hyn xbihl qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm hy ikvkttk, qlhlm nlm
nyliymym, qlhlm nlm qktqymalm, qlhlm nlm gkmqynnkilm, w, paiknxyiqy, qlhlm
nlm gkfknnytlm hy nk xkigrk?

-yml il -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, uby wl mlw hy nk xkigrk w ibigk
qkn ry glipymkhl, ia dlhík ia hyfík glipymkt bik glmk qki dytobhagakn k nk
fynnyek hy xa myñltk; w ymqy qkn gkfknnytl wk vyym qú, mkigrl, uby
hymvktík. dytl, ymgbgryxlm: ubaeá my hygnktktá xám.

-ma rktá -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby qétxail nnyvk hy ubyoktmy bi xym kttyl.

dytl il pby kmí, dltuby, rkfayihl yiqtylíhl yn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby uby
rkfnkfki gytgk hén, mai dkmkt khynkiqy yi mb nkxyiqkgaói, my dbml yi day, w
haol gli vle mliltk w glxyhahk:

-¿ubaéi vk knná? ¿ubé cyiqy? ¿ym dlt vyiqbtk hy nk hyn iúxytl hy nlm
gliqyiqlm, l nk hyn hy nlm kpnacahlm?

-hy nlm kpnacahlm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-dbym nnécbymy k xí -tymdlihaó yn hyn flmuby-, w rktá gbyiqk uby my nnyck
k nk xymxk qtamqyek w k nk kpnagaói xymxk.

hli ubaolqy, uby my val tymdlihyt qki qaytik w glxyhahkxyiqy, my nnycó k
én, w mkigrl ia xám ia xyilm.

yn gkfknnytl nkxyiqkhlt kmaó k hli ubaolqy hyn ftkel, hagayihl:

-myiqklm kubí, myñlt gkfknnytl, uby dktk yiqyihyt uby nl mlam, w hy nlm uby
dtlpymki nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, fámqkxy yn rkfytlm rknnkhl yi ymqy nbckt,
hlihy nk mlnyhkh w yn mytyil lm rkgyi glxdkñík, ikqbtknym nygrlm w dtldakm
ymqkigakm hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym.

k nl uby tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-gkfknnytl mlw, w hy nk dtlpymaói uby hygím; w, kbiuby yi xa knxk qayiyi mb
dtldal kmayiql nkm qtamqyekm, nkm hymctkgakm w nkm hymvyiqbtkm, il dlt yml
my rk krbwyiqkhl hynnk nk glxdkmaói uby qyicl hy nkm koyikm hymhagrkm. hy
nl uby gliqkmqy dlgl rk, glnycí uby nkm vbymqtkm mli yikxltkhkm, ubaytl
hygat, hyn kxlt uby qyiéam k kubynnk rytxlmk aictkqk uby yi vbymqtkm
nkxyiqkgaliym ilxftkmqym.

wk gbkihl ymql dkmkfki ymqkfki myiqkhlm obiqlm mlfty nk hbtk qayttk, yi
fbyik dke w glxdkñík, glxl ma kn tlxdyt hyn hík il my rbfaytki hy tlxdyt
nkm gkfyekm.

-dlt vyiqbtk, myñlt gkfknnytl -dtycbiqó yn hyn flmuby k hli ubaolqy-, ¿mlam
yikxltkhl?

-dlt hymvyiqbtk nl mlw -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; kbiuby nlm hkñlm uby ikgyi
hy nlm fayi glnlgkhlm dyimkxayiqlm, kiqym my hyfyi qyiyt dlt ctkgakm uby
dlt hymhagrkm.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tydnagó yn hyn flmuby-, ma il ilm qbtfkmyi nk tkeói w yn
yiqyihaxayiql nlm hymhyiym, uby, mayihl xbgrlm, dktygyi vyickiekm.

-ibigk pba hymhyñkhl hy xa myñltk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-il, dlt gaytql -haol mkigrl, uby knní obiql ymqkfk-, dltuby ym xa myñltk
glxl bik flttyck xkimk: ym xám fnkihk uby bik xkiqygk.

-¿ym vbymqtl ymgbhytl émqy? -dtycbiqó yn hyn flmuby.

-mí ym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-ibigk ry vamql wl ymgbhytl -tydnagó yn hyn flmuby- uby my kqtyvk k rkfnkt
hlihy rkfnk mb myñlt; k nl xyilm, krí ymqá ymy xíl, uby ym qki ctkihy glxl
mb dkhty, w il my dtlfktá uby rkwk hymdnyckhl yn nkfal hlihy wl rkfnl.

-dbym k py -haol mkigrl-, uby ry rkfnkhl wl, w dbyhl rkfnkt hynkiqy hy lqtl
qki..., w kbi ubéhymy kubí, uby ym dylt xyiyknnl.

yn ymgbhytl hyn flmuby kmaó dlt yn ftkel k mkigrl, hagaéihlny:

-váxlilm nlm hlm hlihy dlhkxlm rkfnkt ymgbhytanxyiqy qlhl gbkiql
ubamaétyxlm, w hyoyxlm k ymqlm myñltym kxlm ibymqtlm uby my hyi hy nkm
kmqkm, gliqáihlmy nkm ramqltakm hy mbm kxltym; uby k fbyi mycbtl uby nym rk
hy glcyt yn hík yi ynnkm w il nkm rki hy rkfyt kgkfkhl.

-myk yi fbyik rltk -haol mkigrl-; w wl ny haté k vbymqtk xytgyh ubaéi mlw,
dktk uby vyk ma dbyhl yiqtkt yi hlgyik gli nlm xám rkfnkiqym ymgbhytlm.

gli ymql my kdktqktli nlm hlm ymgbhytlm, yiqty nlm gbknym dkmó bi qki
ctkgalml glnlubal glxl pby ctkvy yn uby dkmó yiqty mbm myñltym.





gkdíqbnl zaaa. hlihy my dtlmacby nk kvyiqbtk hyn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby, gli
yn hamgtyql, ibyvl w mbkvy glnlubal uby dkmó yiqty nlm hlm ymgbhytlm


havahahlm ymqkfki gkfknnytlm w ymgbhytlm: émqlm gliqáihlmy mbm vahkm, w
kubénnlm mbm kxltym; dytl nk ramqltak gbyiqk dtaxytl yn tkelikxayiql hy nlm
xlelm w nbycl dtlmacby yn hy nlm kxlm; w kmí, hagy uby, kdktqáihlmy bi dlgl
hynnlm, yn hyn flmuby haol k mkigrl:

-qtkfkolmk vahk ym nk uby dkmkxlm w vavaxlm, myñlt xíl, ymqlm uby mlxlm
ymgbhytlm hy gkfknnytlm kihkiqym: yi vythkh uby glxyxlm yn dki yi yn mbhlt
hy ibymqtlm tlmqtlm, uby ym bik hy nkm xknhagaliym uby ygró halm k ibymqtlm
dtaxytlm dkhtym.

-qkxfaéi my dbyhy hygat -kñkhaó mkigrl- uby nl glxyxlm yi yn wynl hy
ibymqtlm gbytdlm; dltuby, ¿ubaéi xám gknlt w xám ptíl uby nlm xamytkfnym
ymgbhytlm hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík? w kbi xyilm xkn ma glxaétkxlm, dbym nlm
hbynlm, gli dki mli xyilm; dytl qkn vye rkw uby my ilm dkmk bi hík w hlm
mai hymkwbiktilm, ma il ym hyn vayiql uby mldnk.

-qlhl yml my dbyhy nnyvkt w glinnyvkt -haol yn hyn flmuby-, gli nk
ymdytkiek uby qyiyxlm hyn dtyxal; dltuby ma hyxkmakhkxyiqy il ym
hymctkgakhl yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy k ubayi bi ymgbhytl matvy, dlt nl xyilm, k
dlglm nkigym my vytá dtyxakhl gli bi rytxlml clfaytil hy gbknuby íimbnk, l
gli bi glihkhl hy fbyi dktygyt.

wl -tydnagó mkigrl- wk ry hagrl k xa kxl uby xy gliqyiql gli yn clfaytil hy
kncbik íimbnk; w én ym qki ilfny w qki nafytkn, uby xy ny rk dtlxyqahl
xbgrkm w havytmkm vygym.

wl -haol yn hyn flmuby-, gli bi gkiliagkql ubyhkté mkqampygrl hy xam
mytvagalm, w wk xy ny qayiy xkihkhl xa kxl, w ¡ubé qkn!

-hyfy hy myt -haol mkigrl- mb kxl hy vbymk xytgyh gkfknnytl k nl
ygnymaámqagl, w dlhtá rkgyt ymkm xytgyhym k mbm fbyilm ymgbhytlm; dytl yn
xíl ym xytkxyiqy nycl, kbiuby wl xy kgbythl gbkihl ny ubytíki kglimyokt
dytmlikm hamgtyqkm, kbiuby, k xa dktygyt xkn aiqyigalikhkm, uby dtlgbtkmy
myt ktelfamdl; dytl én il ubaml mail myt yxdytkhlt, w wl ymqkfk yiqligym
qyxfnkihl ma ny vyiík yi vlnbiqkh hy myt hy nk acnymak, dlt il rknnktxy
mbpagayiqy hy qyiyt fyiypagalm dlt ynnk; dltuby ny rkcl mkfyt k vbymk
xytgyh uby, kbiuby dktyegl rlxfty, mlw bik fymqak dktk myt hy nk acnymak.

-dbym yi vythkh uby nl wyttk vbymk xytgyh -haol yn hyn flmuby-, k gkbmk uby
nlm clfaytilm aimbnkilm il mli qlhlm hy fbyik hkqk. kncbilm rkw qltgahlm,
kncbilm dlftym, kncbilm xknyigóiaglm, w paiknxyiqy, yn xám ytcbahl w fayi
hamdbymql qtky glimacl bik dymkhk gktck hy dyimkxayiqlm w hy aiglxlhahkhym,
uby dliy mlfty mbm rlxftlm yn hymhagrkhl uby ny gbdl yi mbytqy. rktql xyolt
mytík uby nlm uby dtlpymkxlm ymqk xknhaqk mytvahbxfty ilm tyqatámyxlm k
ibymqtkm gkmkm, w knní ilm yiqtyqbvaémyxlm yi yoytgagalm xám mbkvym, glxl
ma haoémyxlm, gkekihl l dymgkihl; uby, ¿ubé ymgbhytl rkw qki dlfty yi yn
xbihl, k ubayi ny pknqy bi tlgíi, w bi dkt hy cknclm, w bik gkñk hy dymgkt,
gli uby yiqtyqyiytmy yi mb knhyk?

-k xí il xy pknqk ikhk hyml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: vythkh ym uby il qyicl
tlgíi, dytl qyicl bi kmil uby vkny hlm vygym xám uby yn gkfknnl hy xa kxl.
xknk dkmgbk xy hé halm, w myk nk dtaxytk uby vaiayty, ma ny qtlgktk dlt én,
kbiuby xy haymyi gbkqtl pkiyckm hy gyfkhk yigaxk. k fbtnk qyihtá vbymk
xytgyh yn vknlt hy xa tbgal, uby tbgal ym yn glnlt hy xa obxyiql. dbym
cknclm il xy rkfíki hy pknqkt, rkfaéihlnlm mlftkhlm yi xa dbyfnl; w xám,
uby yiqligym ym nk gkek xám cbmqlmk gbkihl my rkgy k glmqk koyik.

-tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy -tymdlihaó yn hyn flmuby-, myñlt ymgbhytl, uby qyicl
dtldbymql w hyqytxaikhl hy hyokt ymqkm flttkgrytíkm hymqlm gkfknnytlm, w
tyqatktxy k xa knhyk, w gtakt xam raoaqlm, uby qyicl qtym glxl qtym
ltayiqknym dytnkm.

-hlm qyicl wl -haol mkigrl-, uby my dbyhyi dtymyiqkt kn dkdk yi dytmlik,
ymdygaknxyiqy bik xbgrkgrk k ubayi gtíl dktk glihymk, ma halm pbyty
mytvahl, kbiuby k dymkt hy mb xkhty.

-w ¿ubé yhkh qayiy ymk myñltk uby my gtík dktk glihymk? -dtycbiqó yn hyn
flmuby.

-ubaigy kñlm, hlm xám k xyilm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl ym qki ctkihy glxl
bik nkiek, w qki ptymgk glxl bik xkñkik hy kftan, w qayiy bik pbytek hy bi
ckikdái.

-dktqym mli émkm -tymdlihaó yn hyn flmuby- il mónl dktk myt glihymk, mail
dktk myt iaipk hyn vythy flmuby. ¡lr rahydbqk, dbqk, w ubé tyol hyfy hy
qyiyt nk fynnkgk!

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl, kncl xlríil:

-ia ynnk ym dbqk, ia nl pby mb xkhty, ia nl mytá iaicbik hy nkm hlm, halm
ubatayihl, xayiqtkm wl vavayty. w ráfnymy xám glxyhahkxyiqy, uby, dktk
rkfytmy gtakhl vbymk xytgyh yiqty gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, uby mli nk xymxk
gltqymík, il xy dktygyi xbw gligytqkhkm ymkm dknkftkm.

-¡lr, ubé xkn my ny yiqayihy k vbymk xytgyh -tydnagó yn hyn flmuby- hy
kgrkuby hy knkfkiekm, myñlt ymgbhytl! ¿góxl w il mkfy uby gbkihl kncúi
gkfknnytl hk bik fbyik nkiekhk kn qltl yi nk dnkek, l gbkihl kncbik dytmlik
rkgy kncbik glmk fayi rygrk, mbyny hygat yn vbncl: "¡lr rahydbqk, dbql, w
ubé fayi uby nl rk rygrl!?" w kubynnl uby dktygy vaqbdytal, yi kubyn
qétxail, ym knkfkiek ilqkfny; w tyiyckh vlm, myñlt, hy nlm raolm l raokm
uby il rkgyi lftkm uby xytyegki my nym hyi k mbm dkhtym nlltym myxyokiqym.

-mí tyiaycl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w hymy xlhl w dlt ymk xamxk tkeói dlhík
ygrkt vbymqtk xytgyh k xí w raolm w k xa xboyt qlhk bik dbqytík yigaxk,
dltuby qlhl gbkiql rkgyi w hagyi mli ymqtyxlm hacilm hy myxyokiqym
knkfkiekm, w dktk vlnvytnlm k vyt tbycl wl k halm xy mkuby hy dygkhl
xltqkn, uby nl xymxl mytá ma xy mkgk hymqy dynactlml lpagal hy ymgbhytl, yi
yn gbkn ry aigbttahl mycbihk vye, gyfkhl w yickñkhl hy bik flnmk gli gayi
hbgkhlm uby xy rknné bi hík yi yn gltkeói hy mayttk xltyik, w yn hakfnl xy
dliy kiqy nlm lolm kubí, knní, kgá il, mail kgbnná, bi qknycl nnyil hy
hlfnliym, uby xy dktygy uby k gkhk dkml ny qlgl gli nk xkil, w xy kftkel
gli én, w nl nnyvl k xa gkmk, w ygrl gyimlm, w pbihl tyiqkm, w vavl glxl bi
dtíigady; w yn tkql uby yi ymql dayiml my xy rkgyi páganym w nnyvkhytlm
gbkiqlm qtkfkolm dkhyegl gli ymqy xyiqygkql hy xa kxl, hy ubayi mé uby
qayiy xám hy nlgl uby hy gkfknnytl.

-dlt yml -tymdlihaó yn hyn flmuby- hagyi uby nk glhagak tlxdy yn mkgl; w ma
vk k qtkqkt hynnlm, il rkw lqtl xkwlt yi yn xbihl uby xa kxl, dltuby ym hy
kubynnlm uby hagyi: "gbahkhlm koyilm xkqki kn kmil"; dbym, dltuby glfty
lqtl gkfknnytl yn obagal uby rk dythahl, my rkgy yn nlgl, w kihk fbmgkihl
nl uby il mé ma hymdbém hy rknnkhl ny rk hy mknat k nlm rlgaglm.

-w ¿ym yikxltkhl, dlt hagrk?

-mí -haol yn hyn flmuby-: hy bik qkn gkmanhyk hy vkihknak, nk xám gtbhk w
nk xám kmkhk myñltk uby yi qlhl yn ltfy dbyhy rknnktmy; dytl il gloyk hyn
day hy nk gtbhyek, uby lqtlm xkwltym yxfbmqym ny ctbñyi yi nkm yiqtkñkm, w
ynnl hatá kiqym hy xbgrkm rltkm.

-il rkw gkxail qki nnkil -tydnagó mkigrl- uby il qyick kncúi qtldyeói l
fkttkigl; yi lqtkm gkmkm gbygyi rkfkm, w yi nk xík, k gknhytkhkm; xám
kglxdkñkhlm w dkiakcbkhlm hyfy hy qyiyt nk nlgbtk uby nk hamgtygaói. xkm ma
ym vythkh nl uby glxúixyiqy my hagy, uby yn qyiyt glxdkñytlm yi nlm
qtkfkolm mbyny mytvat hy knaval yi ynnlm, gli vbymqtk xytgyh dlhté
glimlnktxy, dbym matvy k lqtl kxl qki qliql glxl yn xíl.

-qliql, dytl vknayiqy -tymdlihaó yn hyn flmuby-, w xám fynnkgl uby qliql w
uby vknayiqy.

-yml il ym yn xíl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: hacl, uby il qayiy ikhk hy fynnkgl;
kiqym qayiy bik knxk glxl bi gáiqktl: il mkfy rkgyt xkn k ikhay, mail fayi
k qlhlm, ia qayiy xknagak kncbik: bi iañl ny rktá yiqyihyt uby ym hy ilgry
yi nk xaqkh hyn hík; w dlt ymqk myigannye ny ubaytl glxl k nkm qynkm hy xa
gltkeói, w il xy kxkñl k hyoktny, dlt xám hamdktkqym uby rkck.

-gli qlhl yml, rytxkil w myñlt -haol yn hyn flmuby-, ma yn gaycl cbík kn
gaycl, kxflm vki k dynactl hy gkyt yi yn rlwl. xyolt ym tyqatktilm gli fbyi
glxdám hy daym, w vlnvytilm k ibymqtkm ubytyigakm; uby nlm uby fbmgki
kvyiqbtkm il mayxdty nkm rknnki fbyikm.

ymgbdík mkigrl k xyibhl, kn dktygyt, bi gaytql céiytl hy mknavk dyckolmk w
kncl mygk; nl gbkn vamql w ilqkhl dlt yn gktaqkqavl flmubytan ymgbhytl,
haol:

-dktégyxy uby hy nl uby ryxlm rkfnkhl my ilm dycki kn dknkhkt nkm nyicbkm;
dytl wl qtkacl bi hymdyckhlt dyihayiqy hyn kteói hy xa gkfknnl, uby ym qkn
glxl fbyil.

w, nyvkiqáihlmy, vlnvaó hymhy knní k bi dlgl gli bik ctki flqk hy vail w
bik yxdkikhk hy xyhak vktk; w il ym yigktygaxayiql, dltuby ytk hy bi gliyol
knfkt, qki ctkihy uby mkigrl, kn qlgktnk, yiqyihaó myt hy kncúi gkftói, il
uby hy gkftaql; nl gbkn vamql dlt mkigrl, haol:

-w ¿ymql qtky vbymqtk xytgyh glimacl, myñlt?

-dbym, ¿ubé my dyimkfk? -tymdlihaó yn lqtl-. ¿mlw wl dlt vyiqbtk kncúi
ymgbhytl hy kcbk w nkik? xyolt tydbymql qtkacl wl yi nkm kigkm hy xa
gkfknnl uby nnyvk glimacl gbkihl vk hy gkxail bi cyiytkn.

glxaó mkigrl mai rkgytmy hy tlckt, w qtkckfk k ymgbtkm flgkhlm hy ibhlm hy
mbynqk. w haol:

-vbymqtk xytgyh mí uby ym ymgbhytl payn w nyckn, xlnayiqy w glttayiqy,
xkciípagl w ctkihy, glxl nl xbymqtk ymqy fkiubyqy, uby ma il rk vyiahl kubí
dlt ktqy hy yigkiqkxyiql, dktégynl, k nl xyilm; w il glxl wl, xyeubail w
xknkvyiqbtkhl, uby mónl qtkacl yi xam knpltokm bi dlgl hy ubyml, qki hbtl
uby dbyhyi hymgknkftkt gli ynnl k bi cackiqy, k ubayi rkgyi glxdkñík gbkqtl
hlgyikm hy knckttlfkm w lqtkm qkiqkm hy kvynnkikm w ibygym, xytgyhym k nk
ymqtygryek hy xa hbyñl, w k nk ldaiaói uby qayiy w lthyi uby cbkthk hy uby
nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym il my rki hy xkiqyiyt w mbmqyiqkt mail gli ptbqkm
mygkm w gli nkm wytfkm hyn gkxdl.

-dlt xa py, rytxkil -tydnagó yn hyn flmuby-, uby wl il qyicl rygrl yn
ymqóxkcl k qkcktiaikm, ia k datbéqkilm, ia k tkígym hy nlm xliqym. knná my
nl rkwki gli mbm ldaialiym w nywym gkfknnytymgkm ibymqtlm kxlm, w glxki nl
uby ynnlm xkihktyi. pakxftytkm qtkacl, w ymqk flqk glnckihl hyn kteói hy nk
mannk, dlt mí l dlt il; w ym qki hyvlqk xík w ubaétlnk qkiql, uby dlglm
tkqlm my dkmki mai uby nk hé xan fymlm w xan kftkelm.

w, hagayihl ymql, my nk dbml yi nkm xkilm k mkigrl, yn gbkn, yxdaiáihlnk,
dbymqk k nk flgk, ymqbvl xatkihl nkm ymqtynnkm bi gbktql hy rltk, w, yi
kgkfkihl hy fyfyt, hyoó gkyt nk gkfyek k bi nkhl, w, hkihl bi ctki mbmdatl,
haol:

-¡lr rahydbqk fynnkgl, w góxl ym gkqónagl!

-¿vyam krí -haol yn hyn flmuby, yi lwyihl yn rahydbqk hy mkigrl-, góxl
rkféam knkfkhl ymqy vail nnkxáihlny rahydbqk?

-hacl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby glipayml uby glilegl uby il ym hymrlitk
nnkxkt raol hy dbqk k ikhay, gbkihl gky hyfkol hyn yiqyihaxayiql hy
knkfktny. dytl híckxy, myñlt, dlt yn macnl hy nl uby xám ubayty: ¿ymqy vail
ym hy gabhkh tykn?

-¡ftkvl xloói! -tymdlihaó yn hyn flmuby-. yi vythkh uby il ym hy lqtk
dktqy, w uby qayiy kncbilm kñlm hy kigakiahkh.

-¡k xí gli yml! -haol mkigrl-. il qlxéam xyilm, mail uby my xy pbytk k xí
dlt knql hkt kngkigy k mb glilgaxayiql. ¿il mytá fbyil, myñlt ymgbhytl, uby
qyick wl bi aimqaiql qki ctkihy w qki ikqbtkn, yi ymql hy glilgyt vailm,
uby, yi háihlxy k lnyt gbknubaytk, kgaytql nk dkqtak, yn naikoy, yn mkflt,
w nk hbtk, w nkm vbynqkm uby rk hy hkt, gli qlhkm nkm gatgbimqkigakm kn
vail kqkñyhytkm? dytl il rkw hy ubé xktkvannktmy, ma qbvy yi xa naikoy dlt
dktqy hy xa dkhty nlm hlm xám yzgynyiqym xloliym uby yi nbyiclm kñlm
glilgaó nk xkigrk; dktk dtbyfk hy nl gbkn nym mbgyhaó nl uby krltk haté:
«haétlinym k nlm hlm k dtlfkt hyn vail hy bik gbfk, dahaéihlnym mb dktygyt
hyn ymqkhl, gbknahkh, flihkh l xknagak hyn vail. yn bil nl dtlfó gli nk
dbiqk hy nk nyicbk, yn lqtl il rael xám hy nnycktnl k nkm iktagym. yn
dtaxytl haol uby kubyn vail mkfík k rayttl, yn mycbihl haol uby xám mkfík k
glthlfái. yn hbyñl haol uby nk gbfk ymqkfk naxdak, w uby yn qkn vail il
qyiík khlfl kncbil dlt hlihy rbfaymy qlxkhl mkflt hy rayttl ia hy glthlfái.
gli qlhl yml, nlm hlm pkxlmlm xloliym my kpatxktli yi nl uby rkfíki hagrl.
kihbvl yn qayxdl, vyihaómy yn vail, w kn naxdakt hy nk gbfk rknnktli yi
ynnk bik nnkvy dyubyñk, dyihayiqy hy bik glttyk hy glthlfái.» dltuby vyk
vbymqtk xytgyh ma ubayi vayiy hymqk tknyk dlhtá hkt mb dktygyt yi
myxyokiqym gkbmkm.

-dlt yml hacl -haol yn hyn flmuby- uby ilm hyoyxlm hy kihkt fbmgkihl
kvyiqbtkm; w, dbym qyiyxlm rlckekm, il fbmubyxlm qltqkm, w vlnváxlilm k
ibymqtkm grlekm, uby knní ilm rknnktá halm, ma Én ubayty.

-rkmqk uby xa kxl nnycby k ektkclek, ny mytvaté; uby hymdbém qlhlm ilm
yiqyihytyxlm.

paiknxyiqy, qkiql rkfnktli w qkiql fyfaytli nlm hlm fbyilm ymgbhytlm, uby
qbvl iygymahkh yn mbyñl hy kqktnym nkm nyicbkm w qyxdnktnym nk myh, uby
ubaqátmynk pbytk axdlmafny; w kmí, kmahlm yiqtkxflm hy nk wk gkma vkgík
flqk, gli nlm flgkhlm k xyhal xkmgkt yi nk flgk, my ubyhktli hltxahlm,
hlihy nlm hyoktyxlm dlt krltk, dlt gliqkt nl uby yn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby
dkmó gli yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk.





gkdíqbnl zav. hlihy my dtlmacby nk kvyiqbtk hyn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby


yiqty xbgrkm tkeliym uby dkmktli hli ubaolqy w yn gkfknnytl hy nk mynvk,
hagy nk ramqltak uby yn hyn flmuby haol k hli ubaolqy:

-paiknxyiqy, myñlt gkfknnytl, ubaytl uby mydáam uby xa hymqail, l, dlt
xyolt hygat, xa ynyggaói, xy qtbol k yikxltkt hy nk mai dkt gkmanhyk hy
vkihknak. nnáxlnk mai dkt dltuby il ny qayiy, kmí yi nk ctkihyek hyn gbytdl
glxl yi yn ymqtyxl hyn ymqkhl w hy nk rytxlmbtk. ymqk qkn gkmanhyk, dbym,
uby vlw gliqkihl, dkcó xam fbyilm dyimkxayiqlm w glxyhahlm hymylm gli
rkgytxy lgbdkt, glxl mb xkhtaik k rétgbnym, yi xbgrlm w havytmlm dynactlm,
dtlxyqaéihlxy kn pai hy gkhk bil uby yi yn pai hyn lqtl nnycktík yn hy xa
ymdytkiek; dytl kmí my rki ahl ymnkflikihl xam qtkfkolm, uby il qayiyi
gbyiql, ia wl mé gbán rk hy myt yn únqaxl uby hé dtaigadal kn gbxdnaxayiql
hy xam fbyilm hymylm. bik vye xy xkihó uby pbymy k hymkpakt k kubynnk
pkxlmk cackiqk hy myvannk nnkxkhk nk catknhk, uby ym qki vknayiqy w pbytqy
glxl rygrk hy ftligy, w, mai xbhktmy hy bi nbckt, ym nk xám xlvafny w
vlnqktak xboyt hyn xbihl. nnycbé, vank, w vyigínk, w rígynk ymqkt ubyhk w k
tkwk, dltuby yi xám hy bik myxkik il mldnktli mail vayiqlm iltqym. vye
qkxfaéi rbfl uby xy xkihó pbymy k qlxkt yi dyml nkm kiqacbkm dayhtkm hy nlm
vknayiqym qltlm hy cbamkihl, yxdtymk xám dktk yiglxyihktmy k ckikdkiym uby
k gkfknnytlm. lqtk vye xy xkihó uby xy dtygadaqkmy w mbxaymy yi nk maxk hy
gkftk, dynactl aikbhaql w qyxytlml, w uby ny qtboymy dktqagbnkt tynkgaói hy
nl uby yi kubynnk ymgbtk dtlpbihahkh my yigayttk. hyqbvy yn xlvaxayiql k nk
catknhk, dymé nlm qltlm hy cbamkihl, hymdyñéxy yi nk maxk w mkubé k nbe nl
ymglihahl hy mb kfamxl, w xam ymdytkiekm, xbytqkm uby xbytqkm, w mbm
xkihkxayiqlm w hymhyiym, vavlm uby vavlm. yi tymlnbgaói, únqaxkxyiqy xy rk
xkihkhl uby hamgbttk dlt qlhkm nkm dtlvaigakm hy ymdkñk w rkck glipymkt k
qlhlm nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm uby dlt ynnkm vkcktyi uby ynnk mlnk ym nk xám
kvyiqkokhk yi rytxlmbtk hy gbkiqkm rlw vavyi, w uby wl mlw yn xám vknayiqy
w yn xám fayi yikxltkhl gkfknnytl hyn ltfy; yi gbwk hyxkihk ry kihkhl wk nk
xkwlt dktqy hy ymdkñk, w yi ynnk ry vyigahl xbgrlm gkfknnytlm uby my rki
kqtyvahl k gliqtkhygatxy. dytl hy nl uby wl xám xy dtygal w bpkil ym hy
rkfyt vyigahl, yi maicbnkt fkqknnk, k kubyn qki pkxlml gkfknnytl hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, w régrlny glipymkt uby ym xám rytxlmk xa gkmanhyk uby
mb hbngaiyk; w yi mlnl ymqy vyigaxayiql rkcl gbyiqk uby ry vyigahl qlhlm
nlm gkfknnytlm hyn xbihl, dltuby yn qkn hli ubaolqy uby hacl nlm rk vyigahl
k qlhlm; w, rkfaéihlny wl vyigahl k én, mb cnltak, mb pkxk w mb rlitk my rk
qtkimpytahl w dkmkhl k xa dytmlik;

w qkiql yn vyigyhlt ym xám rlitkhl,

gbkiql xám yn vyigahl ym tydbqkhl;

kmí uby, wk glttyi dlt xa gbyiqk w mli xíkm nkm aibxytkfnym rkekñkm hyn wk
typytahl hli ubaolqy.

khxatkhl ubyhó hli ubaolqy hy lít kn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby, w ymqbvl xan
vygym dlt hygatny uby xyiqík, w wk qbvl yn xyiqím yi yn dagl hy nk nyicbk;
dytl tydltqómy nl xyolt uby dbhl, dlt rkgytny glipymkt dlt mb dtldak flgk
mb xyiqatk; w kmí, mlmyckhkxyiqy ny haol:

-hy uby vbymk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, rkwk vyigahl k nlm xám gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym hy ymdkñk, w kbi hy qlhl yn xbihl, il hacl ikhk; dytl hy uby rkwk
vyigahl k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, dóiclnl yi hbhk. dlhtík myt uby pbymy
lqtl uby ny dktygaymy, kbiuby rkw dlglm uby ny dktyegki.

-¿góxl il? -tydnagó yn hyn flmuby-. dlt yn gaynl uby ilm gbfty, uby dynyé
gli hli ubaolqy, w ny vyigí w tyihí; w ym bi rlxfty knql hy gbytdl, mygl hy
tlmqtl, ymqatkhl w kvynnkikhl hy xayxftlm, yiqtygkil, nk iktae kcbanyñk w
kncl gltvk, hy faclqym ctkihym, iyctlm w gkíhlm. gkxdyk hyfkol hyn ilxfty
hyn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, w qtky dlt ymgbhytl k bi nkftkhlt
nnkxkhl mkigrl dkiek; ldtaxy yn nlxl w tacy yn ptyil hy bi pkxlml gkfknnl
nnkxkhl tlgaikiqy, w, paiknxyiqy, qayiy dlt myñltk hy mb vlnbiqkh k bik qkn
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, nnkxkhk bi qayxdl knhliek nltyiel; glxl nk xík, uby,
dlt nnkxktmy gkmanhk w myt hy nk kihknbgík, wl nk nnkxl gkmanhyk hy
vkihknak. ma qlhkm ymqkm myñkm il fkmqki dktk kgtyhaqkt xa vythkh, kubí
ymqá xa ymdkhk, uby nk rktá hkt gtéhaql k nk xymxk aigtyhbnahkh.

-mlmycklm, myñlt gkfknnytl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ymgbgrkh nl uby hygat lm
ubaytl. rkféam hy mkfyt uby ymy hli ubaolqy uby hygím ym yn xkwlt kxacl uby
yi ymqy xbihl qyicl, w qkiql, uby dlhté hygat uby ny qyicl yi nbckt hy xa
xamxk dytmlik, w uby dlt nkm myñkm uby hén xy rkféam hkhl, qki dbiqbknym w
gaytqkm, il dbyhl dyimkt mail uby myk yn xamxl uby rkféam vyigahl. dlt lqtk
dktqy, vyl gli nlm lolm w qlgl gli nkm xkilm il myt dlmafny myt yn xymxl,
ma wk il pbymy uby glxl én qayiy xbgrlm yiyxaclm yigkiqkhltym,
ymdygaknxyiqy bil uby hy lthaiktal ny dytmacby, il rkwk kncbil hynnlm
qlxkhl mb pacbtk dktk hyoktmy vyigyt, dlt hyptkbhktny hy nk pkxk uby mbm
knqkm gkfknnytíkm ny qayiyi ctkioykhk w khubatahk dlt qlhl nl hymgbfaytql
hy nk qayttk. w, dktk glipatxkgaói hymql, ubaytl qkxfaéi uby mydáam uby nlm
qknym yigkiqkhltym mbm gliqtktalm il rk xám hy hlm híkm uby qtkimpltxktli
nk pacbtk w dytmlik hy nk rytxlmk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml yi bik knhykik mlye w
fkok, w hymqk xkiytk rkftái qtkimpltxkhl k hli ubaolqy; w ma qlhl ymql il
fkmqk dktk yiqytktlm yi ymqk vythkh uby hacl, kubí ymqá yn xymxl hli
ubaolqy, uby nk mbmqyiqktá gli mbm ktxkm k day, l k gkfknnl, l hy
gbknubaytk mbytqy uby lm kctkhkty.

w, hagayihl ymql, my nyvkiqó yi day w my yxdbñó yi nk ymdkhk, ymdytkihl ubé
tymlnbgaói qlxktík yn gkfknnytl hyn flmuby; yn gbkn, gli vle kmaxamxl
mlmyckhk, tymdlihaó w haol:

-kn fbyi dkckhlt il ny hbynyi dtyihkm: yn uby bik vye, myñlt hli ubaolqy,
dbhl vyigytlm qtkimpltxkhl, fayi dlhtá qyiyt ymdytkiek hy tyihatlm yi
vbymqtl dtldal myt. xkm, dltuby il ym fayi uby nlm gkfknnytlm rkcki mbm
pygrlm hy ktxkm kmgbtkm, glxl nlm mknqykhltym w tbpakiym, ymdytyxlm yn hík,
dktk uby yn mln vyk ibymqtkm lftkm. w rk hy myt glihagaói hy ibymqtk
fkqknnk uby yn vyigahl rk hy ubyhkt k nk vlnbiqkh hyn vyigyhlt, dktk uby
rkck hén qlhl nl uby ubamayty, gli qkn uby myk hygyiqy k gkfknnytl nl uby
my ny lthyikty.

-mlw xám uby gliqyiql hymk glihagaói w glivyiyigak -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, my pbytli hlihy ymqkfki mbm ymgbhytlm, w nlm rknnktli
tligkihl w yi nk xamxk pltxk uby ymqkfki gbkihl nym mknqyó yn mbyñl.
hymdytqátlinlm w xkihátlinym uby qbvaymyi k dbiql nlm gkfknnlm, dltuby, yi
mknayihl yn mln, rkfíki hy rkgyt nlm hlm bik mkictayiqk, maicbnkt w
hymacbkn fkqknnk; k gbwkm ibyvkm ubyhó mkigrl kqóiaql w dkmxkhl, qyxytlml
hy nk mknbh hy mb kxl, dlt nkm vknyiqíkm uby rkfík líhl hygat hyn mbwl kn
ymgbhytl hyn flmuby; dytl, mai rkfnkt dknkftk, my pbytli nlm hlm ymgbhytlm
k fbmgkt mb ckikhl, uby wk qlhlm qtym gkfknnlm w yn tbgal my rkfíki lnahl,
w ymqkfki qlhlm obiqlm.

yi yn gkxail haol yn hyn flmuby k mkigrl:

-rk hy mkfyt, rytxkil, uby qayiyi dlt glmqbxfty nlm dynykiqym hy nk
kihknbgík, gbkihl mli dkhtailm hy kncbik dyihyigak, il ymqktmy lgalmlm xkil
mlfty xkil yi qkiql uby mbm kraokhlm tañyi. híclnl dltuby ymqé khvytqahl
uby xayiqtkm ibymqtlm hbyñlm tañytyi, ilmlqtlm qkxfaéi ryxlm hy dynykt w
rkgytilm kmqannkm.

-ymk glmqbxfty, myñlt ymgbhytl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, knná dbyhy glttyt w
dkmkt gli nlm tbpakiym w dynykiqym uby hagy, dytl gli nlm ymgbhytlm hy nlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, ia dlt dayiml. k nl xyilm, wl il ry líhl hygat k xa
kxl myxyokiqy glmqbxfty, w mkfy hy xyxltak qlhkm nkm lthyikiekm hy nk
kihkiqy gkfknnytík. gbkiql xám, uby wl ubaytl uby myk vythkh w lthyikiek
yzdtymk yn dynykt nlm ymgbhytlm yi qkiql uby mbm myñltym dynyki; dytl wl il
ubaytl gbxdnatnk, mail dkckt nk dyik uby ymqbvayty dbymqk k nlm qknym
dkgípaglm ymgbhytlm, uby wl kmycbtl uby il dkmy hy hlm naftkm hy gytk, w
xám ubaytl dkckt nkm qknym naftkm, uby mé uby xy glmqktái xyilm uby nkm
rankm uby dlhté ckmqkt yi gbtktxy nk gkfyek, uby wk xy nk gbyiql dlt
dktqahk w havahahk yi hlm dktqym. rkw xám: uby xy axdlmafanaqk yn tyñat yn
il qyiyt ymdkhk, dbym yi xa vahk xy nk dbmy.

-dktk yml mé wl bi fbyi tyxyhal -haol yn hyn flmuby-: wl qtkacl kubí hlm
qknyckm hy nayiel, hy bi xymxl qkxkñl: qlxktéam vlm nk bik, w wl nk lqtk, w
tañatyxlm k qknyckelm, gli ktxkm acbknym.

-hymk xkiytk, myk yi fbyik rltk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby kiqym mytvatá nk
qkn dynyk hy hymdlnvltyktilm uby hy rytatilm.

-il rk hy myt kmí -tydnagó yn lqtl-, dltuby my rki hy ygrkt hyiqtl hy nkm
qknyckm, dltuby il my nkm nnyvy yn katy, xyhak hlgyik hy cbaokttlm naihlm w
dynkhlm, uby dymyi qkiql nlm bilm glxl nlm lqtlm, w hymqk xkiytk ilm
dlhtyxlm kqknyckt mai rkgytilm xkn ia hkñl.

-¡xatkh, gbytdl hy xa dkhty -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ubé xktqkm gyflnnaikm, l
ubé gldlm hy knclhói gkthkhl dliy yi nkm qknyckm, dktk il ubyhkt xlnahlm
nlm gkmglm w rygrlm knryñk nlm rbymlm! dytl, kbiuby my nnyiktki hy gkdbnnlm
hy myhk, mydk, myñlt xíl, uby il ry hy dynykt: dynyyi ibymqtlm kxlm, w knná
my nl rkwki, w fyfkxlm w vavkxlm ilmlqtlm, uby yn qayxdl qayiy gbahkhl hy
ubaqktilm nkm vahkm, mai uby kihyxlm fbmgkihl kdyqaqym dktk uby my kgkfyi
kiqym hy nnyckt mb mkeói w qétxail w uby my gkwki hy xkhbtkm.

-gli qlhl -tydnagó yn hyn flmuby-, ryxlm hy dynykt maubaytk xyhak rltk.

-yml il -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: il myté wl qki hymgltqém ia qki hymkctkhygahl,
uby gli ubayi ry glxahl w ry fyfahl qtkfy gbymqaói kncbik, dlt xíiaxk uby
myk; gbkiql xám uby, ymqkihl mai gónytk w mai yilol, ¿ubaéi hakfnlm my rk
hy kxkñkt k tyñat k mygkm?

-dktk yml -haol yn hyn flmuby- wl hkté bi mbpagayiqy tyxyhal: w ym uby,
kiqym uby glxyigyxlm nk dynyk, wl xy nnyckté fliaqkxyiqy k vbymqtk xytgyh
w ny hkté qtym l gbkqtl flpyqkhkm, uby hé gli én k xam daym, gli nkm gbknym
ny rkté hymdytqkt nk gónytk, kbiuby ymqé gli xám mbyñl uby bi natói.

-gliqtk ymy gltqy mé wl lqtl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby il ny vk yi ekck:
glcyté wl bi ckttlqy, w, kiqym uby vbymqtk xytgyh nnycby k hymdytqktxy nk
gónytk, rkté wl hltxat k ckttlqkelm hy qkn mbytqy nk mbwk, uby il hymdaytqy
ma il pbyty yi yn lqtl xbihl, yi yn gbkn my mkfy uby il mlw wl rlxfty uby
xy hyol xkilmykt yn tlmqtl hy ikhay; w gkhk bil xaty dlt yn vatlqy, kbiuby
nl xám kgytqkhl mytík hyokt hltxat mb gónytk k gkhk bil, uby il mkfy ikhay
yn knxk hy ikhay, w qkn mbyny vyiat dlt nkik uby vbynvy qtymubankhl; w halm
fyihaol nk dke w xknhaol nkm tañkm, dltuby ma bi ckql kglmkhl, yigyttkhl w
kdtyqkhl my vbynvy yi nyói, wl, uby mlw rlxfty, halm mkfy yi nl uby dlhté
vlnvytxy; w kmí, hymhy krltk aiqaxl k vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt ymgbhytl, uby
glttk dlt mb gbyiqk qlhl yn xkn w hkñl uby hy ibymqtk dyihyigak tymbnqkty.

-ymqá fayi -tydnagó yn hyn flmuby-. kxkiygytá halm w xyhtktyxlm.

yi ymql, wk glxyiekfki k cltoykt yi nlm átflnym xan mbytqym hy daiqkhlm
dkoktannlm, w yi mbm havytmlm w knyctym gkiqlm dktygík uby hkfki nk
iltkfbyik w mknbhkfki k nk ptymgk kbtltk, uby wk dlt nkm dbytqkm w fkngliym
hyn ltayiqy afk hymgbftayihl nk rytxlmbtk hy mb tlmqtl, mkgbhayihl hy mbm
gkfynnlm bi iúxytl aipaiaql hy níubahkm dytnkm, yi gbwl mbkvy naglt
fkñáihlmy nkm wytfkm, dktygík kmaxymxl uby ynnkm ftlqkfki w nnlvíki
fnkigl w xyibhl knoópkt; nlm mkbgym hymqankfki xkiá mkftlml, tyíkimy nkm
pbyiqym, xbtxbtkfki nlm kttlwlm, knyctáfkimy nkm mynvkm w yitaubygíkimy nlm
dtkhlm gli mb vyiahk. xkm, kdyikm hal nbckt nk gnktahkh hyn hík dktk vyt w
hapytyigakt nkm glmkm, gbkihl nk dtaxytk uby my lptygaó k nlm lolm hy
mkigrl dkiek pby nk iktae hyn ymgbhytl hyn flmuby, uby ytk qki ctkihy uby
gkma ny rkgík mlxftk k qlhl yn gbytdl. gbéiqkmy, yi ypygql, uby ytk hy
hyxkmakhk ctkihyek, gltvk yi nk xaqkh w qlhk nnyik hy vyttbckm, hy glnlt
kxltkqkhl, glxl hy fytyioyik; fkoáfkny hlm hyhlm xám kfkol hy nk flgk; gbwk
ctkihyek, glnlt, vyttbckm w yigltvkxayiql kmí ny kpykfki yn tlmqtl, uby, yi
vaéihlny mkigrl, glxyieó k rytat hy day w hy xkil, glxl iañl gli knpytygík,
w dtldbml yi mb gltkeói hy hyoktmy hkt hlgayiqkm flpyqkhkm kiqym uby
hymdytqkt nk gónytk dktk tyñat gli kubyn vymqacnl.

hli ubaolqy xató k mb gliqyihlt, w rknnóny wk dbymqk w gknkhk nk gynkhk, hy
xlhl uby il ny dbhl vyt yn tlmqtl, dytl ilqó uby ytk rlxfty xyxftbhl, w il
xbw knql hy gbytdl. mlfty nkm ktxkm qtkík bik mlftyvamqk l gkmkgk hy bik
qynk, kn dktygyt, hy ltl paiímaxl, myxftkhkm dlt ynnk xbgrkm nbikm dyubyñkm
hy tymdnkihygayiqym ymdyolm, uby ny rkgíki yi ctkihímaxk xkiytk cknái w
vamqlml; vlnáfkiny mlfty nk gynkhk ctkihy gkiqahkh hy dnbxkm vythym,
kxktannkm w fnkigkm; nk nkiek, uby qyiík kttaxkhk k bi átfln, ytk
ctkihímaxk w ctbymk, w hy bi rayttl kgytkhl hy xám hy bi dknxl.

qlhl nl xató w qlhl nl ilqó hli ubaolqy, w obecó hy nl vamql w xatkhl uby
yn wk hagrl gkfknnytl hyfík hy myt hy ctkihym pbytekm; dytl il dlt yml
qyxaó, glxl mkigrl dkiek; kiqym, gli cyiqan hyibyhl, haol kn gkfknnytl hy
nlm ymdyolm:

-ma nk xbgrk ckik hy dynykt, myñlt gkfknnytl, il lm ckmqk nk gltqymík, dlt
ynnk lm dahl uby kngéam nk vamytk bi dlgl, dltuby wl vyk ma nk cknnkthík hy
vbymqtl tlmqtl tymdlihy k nk hy vbymqtk hamdlmagaói.

-l vyigahl l vyigyhlt uby mkncáam hymqk yxdtymk, myñlt gkfknnytl -tymdlihaó
yn hy nlm ymdyolm-, lm ubyhktá qayxdl w ymdkgal hyxkmakhl dktk vytxy; w ma
krltk il mkqampkcl k vbymqtl hymyl, ym dlt dktygytxy uby rkcl ilqkfny
kctkval k nk rytxlmk gkmanhyk hy vkihknak yi hankqkt yn qayxdl uby qkthkty
yi knektxy nk vamytk, mai rkgytlm glipymkt nl uby wk mkféam uby dtyqyihl.

-dbym, yi qkiql uby mbfaxlm k gkfknnl -haol hli ubaolqy-, fayi dlhéam
hygatxy ma mlw wl kubyn hli ubaolqy uby haoamqym rkfyt vyigahl.

-k yml vlm tymdlihyxlm -haol yn hy nlm ymdyolm- uby dktygéam, glxl my
dktygy bi rbyvl k lqtl, kn xamxl gkfknnytl uby wl vyigí; dytl, mycúi vlm
hygím uby ny dytmacbyi yigkiqkhltym, il lmkté kpatxkt ma mlam yn gliqyiahl
l il.

-yml xy fkmqk k xí -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- dktk uby gtyk vbymqtl yickñl;
yxdytl, dktk mkgktlm hén hy qlhl dbiql, vyicki ibymqtlm gkfknnlm; uby, yi
xyilm qayxdl uby yn uby qkthátkhym yi knektlm nk vamytk, ma halm, ma xa
myñltk w xa ftkel xy vknyi, vyté wl vbymqtl tlmqtl, w vlm vytéam uby il mlw
wl yn vyigahl hli ubaolqy uby dyimáam.

gli ymql, kgltqkihl tkeliym, mbfaytli k gkfknnl, w hli ubaolqy vlnvaó nkm
tayihkm k tlgaikiqy dktk qlxkt nl uby glivyiík hyn gkxdl, dktk vlnvyt k
yigliqtkt k mb gliqtktal, w nl xymxl rael yn hy nlm ymdyolm. dytl, il my
rkfík kdktqkhl hli ubaolqy vyaiqy dkmlm, gbkihl my lwó nnkxkt hyn hy nlm
ymdyolm, w, dktqayihl nlm hlm yn gkxail, yn hy nlm ymdyolm ny haol:

-khvytqah, myñlt gkfknnytl, uby nk glihagaói hy ibymqtk fkqknnk ym uby yn
vyigahl, glxl lqtk vye ry hagrl, rk hy ubyhkt k hamgtygaói hyn vyigyhlt.

-wk nk mé -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; gli qkn uby nl uby my ny axdbmayty w
xkihkty kn vyigahl rki hy myt glmkm uby il mkncki hy nlm níxaqym hy nk
gkfknnytík.

-kmí my yiqayihy -tymdlihaó yn hy nlm ymdyolm.

lptygaétlimyny yi ymql k nk vamqk hy hli ubaolqy nkm ymqtkñkm iktagym hyn
ymgbhytl, w il my khxató xyilm hy vytnkm uby mkigrl; qkiql, uby ny obecó
dlt kncúi xlimqtl, l dlt rlxfty ibyvl w hy kubynnlm uby il my bmki yi yn
xbihl. mkigrl, uby val dktqat k mb kxl dktk qlxkt gkttytk, il ubaml ubyhkt
mlnl gli yn iktacbhl, qyxayihl uby gli mlnl bi dkmkclieknl gli kubynnkm
iktagym yi nkm mbwkm mytík kgkfkhk nk dyihyigak mbwk, ubyhkihl hyn clndy, l
hyn xayhl, qyihahl yi yn mbynl, w pbymy qtkm mb kxl, kmahl k bik kggaói hy
tlgaikiqy; w, gbkihl ny dktygaó uby wk ytk qayxdl uby vlnvaymy, ny haol:

-mbdnagl k vbymk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, uby kiqym uby vbynvk k yigliqtktmy xy
kwbhy k mbfat mlfty kubyn kngltiluby, hy hlihy dlhté vyt xám k xa mkflt,
xyolt uby hymhy yn mbynl, yn cknnkthl yigbyiqtl uby vbymk xytgyh rk hy
rkgyt gli ymqy gkfknnytl.

-kiqym gtyl, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby qy ubaytym yigktkxkt w mbfat yi
kihkxal dlt vyt mai dynactl nlm qltlm.

-nk vythkh uby hack -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, nkm hymkpltkhkm iktagym hy kubyn
ymgbhytl xy qayiyi kqóiaql w nnyil hy ymdkiql, w il xy kqtyvl k ymqkt obiql
k én.

-ynnkm mli qknym -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby, k il myt wl ubayi mlw, qkxfaéi xy
kmlxftktki; w kmí, vyi: kwbhktqy ry k mbfat hlihy hagym.

yi nl uby my hyqbvl hli ubaolqy yi uby mkigrl mbfaymy yi yn kngltiluby,
qlxó yn hy nlm ymdyolm hyn gkxdl nl uby ny dktygaó iygymktal; w, gtywyihl
uby nl xamxl rkftík rygrl hli ubaolqy, mai ymdytkt mli hy qtlxdyqk ia lqtk
myñkn uby nlm kvamkmy, vlnvaó nkm tayihkm k mb gkfknnl -uby il ytk xám
nacytl ia hy xyolt dktygyt uby tlgaikiqy-, w, k qlhl mb glttyt, uby ytk bi
xyhakil qtlqy, afk k yigliqtkt k mb yiyxacl; dytl, vaéihlny lgbdkhl yi nk
mbfahk hy mkigrl, hyqbvl nkm tayihkm w dktómy yi nk xaqkh hy nk gkttytk, hy
nl uby yn gkfknnl ubyhó kctkhygahímaxl, k gkbmk uby wk il dlhík xlvytmy.
hli ubaolqy, uby ny dktygaó uby wk mb yiyxacl vyiík vlnkihl, kttaxó
tygakxyiqy nkm ymdbynkm k nkm qtkmaokhkm aokhkm hy tlgaikiqy, w ny rael
kcbaokt hy xkiytk, uby gbyiqk nk ramqltak uby ymqk mlnk vye my glilgaó
rkfyt glttahl kncl, dltuby qlhkm nkm hyxám mayxdty pbytli qtlqym
hygnktkhlm; w gli ymqk il vamqk pbtak nnycó hlihy yn hy nlm ymdyolm ymqkfk
raigkihl k mb gkfknnl nkm ymdbynkm rkmqk nlm flqliym, mai uby ny dbhaymy
xlvyt bi mlnl hyhl hyn nbckt hlihy rkfík rygrl ymqkigl hy mb gkttytk.

yi ymqk fbyik mkeói w glwbiqbtk rknnó hli ubaolqy k mb gliqtktal yxfktkekhl
gli mb gkfknnl w lgbdkhl gli mb nkiek, uby ibigk, l il kgytqó, l il qbvl
nbckt hy dliytnk yi tamqty. hli ubaolqy, uby il xatkfk yi ymqlm
aiglivyiayiqym, k mknvkxkil w mai dynactl kncbil, yigliqtó kn hy nlm
ymdyolm gli qkiqk pbytek, uby xkn hy mb ctkhl ny rael vyiat kn mbynl dlt
nkm kigkm hyn gkfknnl, hkihl qkn gkíhk, uby, mai xlvyt day ia xkil, hal
myñknym hy uby ymqkfk xbytql.

kdyikm ny val gkíhl mkigrl, gbkihl my hymnaeó hyn kngltiluby w k qlhk
dtaymk vail hlihy mb myñlt ymqkfk, yn gbkn, kdyáihlmy hy tlgaikiqy, pby
mlfty yn hy nlm ymdyolm, w, ubaqáihlny nkm nkekhkm hyn wynxl dktk vyt ma
ytk xbytql w dktk uby ny haymy yn katy ma kgkml ymqkfk vavl; w val...
¿ubaéi dlhtá hygat nl uby val, mai gkbmkt khxatkgaói, xktkvannk w ymdkiql k
nlm uby nl lwytyi? val, hagy nk ramqltak, yn tlmqtl xymxl, nk xamxk pacbtk,
yn xymxl kmdygql, nk xamxk pamlilxík, nk xymxk ypacay, nk dymdyqavk xymxk
hyn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl; w, kmí glxl nk val, yi knqkm vlgym haol:

-¡kgbhy, mkigrl, w xatk nl uby rkm hy vyt w il nl rkm gtyyt! ¡kcbaok, raol,
w khvaytqy nl uby dbyhy nk xkcak, nl uby dbyhyi nlm rygragytlm w nlm
yigkiqkhltym!

nnycó mkigrl, w, glxl val yn tlmqtl hyn fkgrannyt gkttkmgl, glxyieó k
rkgytmy xan gtbgym w k mkiqacbktmy lqtkm qkiqkm. yi qlhl ymql, il hkfk
xbymqtkm hy ymqkt vavl yn hyttafkhl gkfknnytl, w mkigrl haol k hli ubaolqy:

-mlw hy dktygyt, myñlt xíl, uby, dlt mí l dlt il, vbymk xytgyh raiuby w
xyqk nk ymdkhk dlt nk flgk k ymqy uby dktygy yn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl;
ubaeá xkqktá yi én k kncbil hy mbm yiyxaclm nlm yigkiqkhltym.

-il hagym xkn -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby hy nlm yiyxaclm, nlm xyilm.

w, mkgkihl nk ymdkhk dktk dliyt yi ypygql yn kvaml w glimyol hy mkigrl,
nnycó yn ymgbhytl hyn hy nlm ymdyolm, wk mai nkm iktagym uby qki pyl ny
rkfíki rygrl, w k ctkihym vlgym haol:

-xaty vbymk xytgyh nl uby rkgy, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby ymy uby qayiy k nlm
daym ym yn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, mb kxacl, w wl mlw mb ymgbhytl.

w, vaéihlny mkigrl mai kubynnk pyknhkh dtaxytk, ny haol:

-¿w nkm iktagym?

k nl uby én tymdlihaó:

-kubí nkm qyicl, yi nk pknhtaubytk.

w, ygrkihl xkil k nk hytygrk, mkgó bikm iktagym hy dkmqk w fktiae, hy
xámgktk, hy nk xkiapkqbtk uby ubyhki hynaiykhkm. w, xatáihlny xám w xám
mkigrl, gli vle khxatkqavk w ctkihy, haol:

-¡mkiqk xktík, w vknxy! ¿Émqy il ym qlxé gygakn, xa vygail w xa glxdkhty?

-w ¡góxl ma nl mlw! -tymdlihaó yn wk hymiktackhl ymgbhytl-: qlxé gygakn
mlw, glxdkhty w kxacl mkigrl dkiek, w nbycl lm haté nlm ktgkhbgym, yxfbmqym
w yityhlm dlt hlihy mlw kubí vyiahl; w yi qkiql, dyhah w mbdnagkh kn myñlt
vbymqtl kxl uby il qluby, xknqtkqy, raytk ia xkqy kn gkfknnytl hy nlm
ymdyolm, uby k mbm daym qayiy, dltuby mai hbhk kncbik ym yn kqtyvahl w xkn
kglimyokhl hyn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, ibymqtl glxdkqtalql.

yi ymql, vlnvaó yi mí yn hy nlm ymdyolm, nl gbkn vamql dlt hli ubaolqy, ny
dbml nk dbiqk hymibhk hy mb ymdkhk yigaxk hyn tlmqtl, w ny haol:

-xbytql mlam, gkfknnytl, ma il glipymáam uby nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml
my kvyiqkok yi fynnyek k vbymqtk gkmanhyk hy vkihknak; w hyxám hy ymql
rkféam hy dtlxyqyt, ma hy ymqk gliqayihk w gkíhk ubyhátkhym gli vahk, hy at
k nk gabhkh hyn qlflml w dtymyiqktlm yi mb dtymyigak hy xa dktqy, dktk uby
rkck hy vlm nl uby xám yi vlnbiqkh ny vaiayty; w ma lm hyokty yi nk
vbymqtk, kmaxamxl rkféam hy vlnvyt k fbmgktxy, uby yn tkmqtl hy xam rkekñkm
lm mytvatá hy cbík uby lm qtkack hlihy wl ymqbvayty, w k hygatxy nl uby gli
ynnk rbfaétyhym dkmkhl; glihagaliym uby, glipltxy k nkm uby dbmaxlm kiqym
hy ibymqtk fkqknnk, il mknyi hy nlm qétxailm hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík.

-glipayml -haol yn gkíhl gkfknnytl- uby vkny xám yn ekdkql hymglmahl w
mbgal hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml uby nkm fktfkm xkn dyaikhkm, kbiuby
naxdakm, hy gkmanhyk, w dtlxyql hy at w vlnvyt hy mb dtymyigak k nk
vbymqtk, w hktlm yiqytk w dktqagbnkt gbyiqk hy nl uby xy dyhím.

-qkxfaéi rkféam hy glipymkt w gtyyt -kñkhaó hli ubaolqy- uby kubyn
gkfknnytl uby vyigamqym il pby ia dbhl myt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, mail
lqtl uby my ny dktygík, glxl wl glipayml w gtyl uby vlm, kbiuby dktygéam yn
fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, il nl mlam, mail lqtl uby ny dktygy, w uby yi mb
pacbtk kubí xy ny rki dbymql xam yiyxaclm, dktk uby hyqyick w qyxdny yn
íxdyqb hy xa gónytk, w dktk uby bmy fnkihkxyiqy hy nk cnltak hyn
vyigaxayiql.

-qlhl nl glipayml, obecl w mayiql glxl vlm nl gtyéam, obecáam w myiqím
-tymdlihaó yn hyttyickhl gkfknnytl-. hyokhxy nyvkiqkt, lm tbycl, ma ym uby
nl dytxaqy yn clndy hy xa gkíhk, uby kmke xknqtygrl xy qayiy.

kwbhóny k nyvkiqkt hli ubaolqy w qlxé gygakn, mb ymgbhytl, hyn gbkn il
kdktqkfk nlm lolm mkigrl, dtycbiqáihlny glmkm gbwkm tymdbymqkm ny hkfki
xkiapaymqkm myñknym hy uby vythkhytkxyiqy ytk yn qlxé gygakn uby hygík; xkm
nk kdtyryimaói uby yi mkigrl rkfík rygrl nl uby mb kxl haol, hy uby nlm
yigkiqkhltym rkfíki xbhkhl nk pacbtk hyn gkfknnytl hy nlm ymdyolm yi nk hyn
fkgrannyt gkttkmgl, il ny hyokfk hkt gtéhaql k nk vythkh uby gli nlm lolm
ymqkfk xatkihl. paiknxyiqy, my ubyhktli gli ymqy yickñl kxl w xlel, w yn hy
nlm ymdyolm w mb ymgbhytl, xlríilm w xknkihkiqym, my kdktqktli hy hli
ubaolqy w mkigrl, gli aiqyigaói hy fbmgkt kncúi nbckt hlihy faexktny w
yiqkfnktny nkm glmqannkm. hli ubaolqy w mkigrl vlnvaytli k dtlmycbat mb
gkxail hy ektkclek, hlihy nlm hyok nk ramqltak, dlt hkt gbyiqk hy ubaéi ytk
yn gkfknnytl hy nlm ymdyolm w mb iktackiqy ymgbhytl.





gkdíqbnl zv. hlihy my gbyiqk w hk ilqagak hy ubaéi ytk yn gkfknnytl hy nlm
ymdyolm w mb ymgbhytl


yi ymqtyxl gliqyiql, bpkil w vkikcnltalml afk hli ubaolqy dlt rkfyt
kngkiekhl vaqltak hy qki vknayiqy gkfknnytl glxl én my axkcaikfk uby ytk yn
hy nlm ymdyolm, hy gbwk gkfknnytymgk dknkftk ymdytkfk mkfyt ma yn
yigkiqkxyiql hy mb myñltk dkmkfk khynkiqy, dbym ytk pltelml uby yn qkn
vyigahl gkfknnytl vlnvaymy, ml dyik hy il mytnl, k hktny tkeói hy nl uby
gli ynnk ny rbfaymy mbgyhahl. dytl bil dyimkfk hli ubaolqy w lqtl yn hy nlm
ymdyolm, dbymql uby dlt yiqligym il ytk lqtl mb dyimkxayiql mail fbmgkt
hlihy faexktmy, glxl my rk hagrl.

hagy, dbym, nk ramqltak uby gbkihl yn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl kglimyoó k
hli ubaolqy uby vlnvaymy k dtlmycbat mbm hyokhkm gkfknnytíkm, pby dlt rkfyt
yiqtkhl dtaxytl yi fbtyl gli yn gbtk w yn fktfytl mlfty ubé xyhal my dlhtík
qlxkt dktk tyhbgat k hli ubaolqy k uby my ymqbvaymy yi mb gkmk ubayql w
mlmyckhl, mai uby ny knfltlqkmyi mbm xkn fbmgkhkm kvyiqbtkm; hy gbwl
glimyol mknaó, dlt vlql glxúi hy qlhlm w dktygyt dktqagbnkt hy gkttkmgl,
uby hyokmyi mknat k hli ubaolqy, dbym yn hyqyiytny dktygík axdlmafny, w uby
mkimói ny mknaymy kn gkxail glxl gkfknnytl kihkiqy, w qtkfkmy fkqknnk gli
én, dbym il pknqktík mlfty ubé, w ny vyigaymy, qyiaéihlnl dlt glmk págan, w
uby pbymy dkgql w gligaytql uby yn vyigahl ubyhkmy k xytgyh hyn vyigyhlt; w
kmí vyigahl hli ubaolqy, ny rkfík hy xkihkt yn fkgrannyt gkfknnytl my
vlnvaymy k mb dbyfnl w gkmk, w il mknaymy hynnk yi hlm kñlm, l rkmqk qkiql
uby dlt én ny pbymy xkihkhl lqtk glmk; nl gbkn ytk gnktl uby hli ubaolqy
vyigahl gbxdnatík aihbfaqkfnyxyiqy, dlt il gliqtkvyiat w pknqkt k nkm nywym
hy nk gkfknnytík, w dlhtík myt uby yi yn qayxdl hy mb tygnbmaói my ny
lnvahkmyi mbm vkiahkhym, l my haymy nbckt hy fbmgkt k mb nlgbtk kncúi
glivyiayiqy tyxyhal.

kgydqónl gkttkmgl, w lptygaómyny dlt ymgbhytl qlxé gygakn, glxdkhty w
vygail hy mkigrl dkiek, rlxfty knycty w hy nbgalm gkmglm. ktxómy mkimói
glxl ubyhk typytahl w qlxé gygakn kglxlhó mlfty mbm ikqbtknym iktagym nkm
pknmkm w hy xámgktk wk hagrkm, dltuby il pbymy glilgahl hy mb glxdkhty
gbkihl my vaymyi; w kmí, macbaytli yn xamxl vakoy uby nnyvkfk hli ubaolqy,
w nnycktli gkma k rknnktmy yi nk kvyiqbtk hyn gkttl hy nk xbytqy. w,
paiknxyiqy, haytli gli ynnlm yi yn flmuby, hlihy nym mbgyhaó qlhl nl uby yn
dtbhyiqy rk nyíhl; w ma il pbytk dlt nlm dyimkxayiqlm yzqtklthaiktalm hy
hli ubaolqy, uby my hal k yiqyihyt uby yn fkgrannyt il ytk yn fkgrannyt, yn
myñlt fkgrannyt ubyhktk axdlmafanaqkhl dktk mayxdty hy ctkhbktmy hy
nagyigakhl, dlt il rkfyt rknnkhl iahlm hlihy dyimó rknnkt dáoktlm.

qlxé gygakn, uby val gbái xkn rkfík nlctkhl mbm hymylm w yn xkn dktkhytl
uby rkfík qyiahl mb gkxail, haol kn fkgrannyt:

-dlt gaytql, myñlt mkimói gkttkmgl, uby qyiyxlm ibymqtl xytygahl: gli
pkganahkh my dayimk w my kglxyqy bik yxdtymk, dytl gli hapagbnqkh nkm xám
vygym my mkny hynnk. hli ubaolqy nlgl, ilmlqtlm gbythlm: én my vk mkil w
tayihl, vbymk xytgyh ubyhk xlnahl w qtamqy. mydkxlm, dbym, krltk, gbán ym
xám nlgl: ¿yn uby nl ym dlt il dlhyt xyilm, l yn uby nl ym dlt mb vlnbiqkh?

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkimói:

-nk hapytyigak uby rkw yiqty ymlm hlm nlglm ym uby yn uby nl ym dlt pbytek
nl mytá mayxdty, w yn uby nl ym hy ctkhl nl hyoktá hy myt gbkihl ubamayty.

-dbym kmí ym -haol qlxé gygakn-, wl pba dlt xa vlnbiqkh nlgl gbkihl ubamy
rkgytxy ymgbhytl hy vbymqtk xytgyh, w dlt nk xamxk ubaytl hyokt hy mytnl w
vlnvytxy k xa gkmk.

-yml lm gbxdny -tymdlihaó mkimói-, dltuby dyimkt uby wl ry hy vlnvyt k nk
xík, rkmqk rkfyt xlnahl k dknlm k hli ubaolqy, ym dyimkt yi nl ymgbmkhl; w
il xy nnyvktá krltk k fbmgktny yn hymyl hy uby glfty mb obagal, mail yn hy
nk vyickiek; uby yn hlnlt ctkihy hy xam glmqannkm il xy hyok rkgyt xám
dakhlmlm hamgbtmlm.

yi ymql pbytli tkelikihl nlm hlm, rkmqk uby nnycktli k bi dbyfnl hlihy pby
vyiqbtk rknnkt bi kncyftamqk, gli ubayi my gbtó yn mkimói hymctkgakhl. qlxé
gygakn my vlnvaó w ny hyoó, w én ubyhó axkcaikihl mb vyickiek; w nk
ramqltak vbynvy k rkfnkt hén k mb qayxdl, dlt il hyokt hy tyclgaoktmy krltk
gli hli ubaolqy.





gkdíqbnl zva. hy nl uby mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy gli bi hamgtyql gkfknnytl hy
nk xkigrk


gli nk knyctík, gliqyiql w bpkiahkh uby my rk hagrl, mycbík hli ubaolqy mb
oltikhk, axkcaiáihlmy dlt nk dkmkhk vaqltak myt yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy xám
vknayiqy uby qyiík yi kubynnk yhkh yn xbihl; hkfk dlt kgkfkhkm w k pynagy
pai glihbgahkm gbkiqkm kvyiqbtkm dbhaymyi mbgyhytny hy knní khynkiqy; qyiík
yi dlgl k nlm yigkiqlm w k nlm yigkiqkhltym; il my kglthkfk hy nlm
aibxytkfnym dknlm uby yi yn hamgbtml hy mbm gkfknnytíkm ny rkfíki hkhl, ia
hy nk dyhtkhk uby ny hyttafó nk xaqkh hy nlm hayiqym, ia hyn
hymkctkhygaxayiql hy nlm cknylqym, ia hyn kqtyvaxayiql w nnbvak hy ymqkgkm
hy nlm wkicüymym. paiknxyiqy, hygík yiqty mí uby ma én rknnktk ktqy, xlhl l
xkiytk glxl hymyigkiqkt k mb myñltk hbngaiyk, il aivahaktk k nk xkwlt
vyiqbtk uby kngkieó l dbhl kngkiekt yn xám vyiqbtlml gkfknnytl kihkiqy hy
nlm dkmkhlm macnlm. yi ymqkm axkcaikgaliym afk qlhl lgbdkhl, gbkihl mkigrl
ny haol:

-¿il ym fbyil, myñlt, uby kbi qlhkvík qtkacl yiqty nlm lolm nkm hymkpltkhkm
iktagym, w xkwltym hy xktgk, hy xa glxdkhty qlxé gygakn?

-w ¿gtyym qú, mkigrl, dlt vyiqbtk, uby yn gkfknnytl hy nlm ymdyolm ytk yn
fkgrannyt gkttkmgl; w mb ymgbhytl, qlxé gygakn, qb glxdkhty?

-il mé ubé xy hack k yml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; mónl mé uby nkm myñkm uby xy
hal hy xa gkmk, xboyt w raolm il xy nkm dlhtík hkt lqtl uby én xymxl; w nk
gktk, ubaqkhkm nkm iktagym, ytk nk xamxk hy qlxé gygakn, glxl wl my nk ry
vamql xbgrkm vygym yi xa dbyfnl w dktyh yi xyhal hy xa xamxk gkmk; w yn
qlil hy nk rkfnk ytk qlhl bil.

-ymqyxlm k tkeói, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. vyi kgá: ¿yi ubé
glimahytkgaói dbyhy gkfyt uby yn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl vaiaymy glxl
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, ktxkhl hy ktxkm lpyimavkm w hypyimavkm, k dynykt
glixacl? ¿ry mahl wl mb yiyxacl dlt vyiqbtk? ¿ryny hkhl wl okxám lgkmaói
dktk qyiytxy loytaek? ¿mlw wl mb tavkn, l rkgy én dtlpymaói hy nkm ktxkm,
dktk qyiyt aivahak k nk pkxk uby wl dlt ynnkm ry ckikhl?

-dbym, ¿ubé hatyxlm, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, k ymql hy dktygytmy qkiql
kubyn gkfknnytl, myk yn uby my pbyty, kn fkgrannyt gkttkmgl, w mb ymgbhytl
k qlxé gygakn, xa glxdkhty? w ma ynnl ym yigkiqkxyiql, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh
rk hagrl, ¿il rkfík yi yn xbihl lqtlm hlm k ubayi my dktygaytki?

-qlhl ym ktqapagal w qtkek -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- hy nlm xknacilm xkclm
uby xy dytmacbyi, nlm gbknym, kiqyvayihl uby wl rkfík hy ubyhkt vyigyhlt yi
nk gliqayihk, my dtyvaiaytli hy uby yn gkfknnytl vyigahl xlmqtkmy yn tlmqtl
hy xa kxacl yn fkgrannyt, dltuby nk kxamqkh uby ny qyicl my dbmaymy yiqty
nlm panlm hy xa ymdkhk w yn taclt hy xa ftkel, w qyxdnkmy nk obmqk atk hy
xa gltkeói, w hymqk xkiytk ubyhkmy gli vahk yn uby gli yxfynyglm w pknmíkm
dtlgbtkfk ubaqktxy nk xík. dktk dtbyfk hy nl gbkn wk mkfym, ¡lr mkigrl!,
dlt yzdytayigak uby il qy hyoktá xyiqat ia yickñkt, gbái págan myk k nlm
yigkiqkhltym xbhkt bilm tlmqtlm yi lqtlm, rkgayihl hy nl rytxlml pyl w hy
nl pyl rytxlml, dbym il rk hlm híkm uby vamqy dlt qbm xamxlm lolm nk
rytxlmbtk w cknnkthík hy nk mai dkt hbngaiyk yi qlhk mb yiqytyek w ikqbtkn
glipltxahkh, w wl nk va yi nk pyknhkh w fkoyek hy bik ekpak nkftkhltk, gli
gkqktkqkm yi nlm lolm w gli xkn lnlt yi nk flgk; w xám, uby yn dytvytml
yigkiqkhlt uby my kqtyvaó k rkgyt bik qtkimpltxkgaói qki xknk il ym xbgrl
uby rkwk rygrl nk hy mkimói gkttkmgl w nk hy qb glxdkhty, dlt ubaqktxy nk
cnltak hyn vyigaxayiql hy nkm xkilm. dytl, gli qlhl ymql, xy glimbynl;
dltuby, yi pai, yi gbknubaytk pacbtk uby rkwk mahl, ry ubyhkhl vyigyhlt hy
xa yiyxacl.

-halm mkfy nk vythkh hy qlhl -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

w glxl én mkfík uby nk qtkimpltxkgaói hy hbngaiyk rkfík mahl qtkek w
yxfynygl mbwl, il ny mkqampkgíki nkm ubaxytkm hy mb kxl; dytl il ny ubaml
tydnagkt, dlt il hygat kncbik dknkftk uby hymgbftaymy mb yxfbmqy.

yi ymqkm tkeliym ymqkfki gbkihl nlm kngkieó bi rlxfty uby hyqtám hynnlm dlt
yn xamxl gkxail vyiík mlfty bik xbw rytxlmk wycbk qlthannk, vymqahl bi
ckfái hy dkñl pail vythy, oatlikhl hy qytgaldynl nylikhl, gli bik xliqytk
hyn xamxl qytgaldynl; yn khytyel hy nk wycbk ytk hy gkxdl w hy nk oaiyqk,
kmaxamxl hy xltkhl w vythy. qtkík bi knpkioy xltamgl dyihayiqy hy bi kigrl
qkrkní hy vythy w ltl, w nlm fltgycbíym ytki hy nk nkflt hyn qkrkní; nkm
ymdbynkm il ytki hltkhkm, mail hkhkm gli bi fktiae vythy, qki qytmkm w
ftbñahkm uby, dlt rkgyt nkflt gli qlhl yn vymqahl, dktygíki xyolt uby ma
pbytk hy ltl dbtl. gbkihl nnycó k ynnlm, yn gkxaikiqy nlm mknbhó
gltqémxyiqy, w, dagkihl k nk wycbk, my dkmkfk hy nktcl; dytl hli ubaolqy ny
haol:

-myñlt cknái, ma ym uby vbymqtk xytgyh nnyvk yn gkxail uby ilmlqtlm w il
axdltqk yn hktmy dtaymk, xytgyh tygafatík yi uby ilm pbémyxlm obiqlm.

-yi vythkh -tymdlihaó yn hy nk wycbk- uby il xy dkmktk qki hy nktcl, ma il
pbytk dlt qyxlt uby gli nk glxdkñík hy xa wycbk il my knfltlqktk ymy
gkfknnl.

-fayi dbyhy, myñlt -tymdlihaó k ymqk mkeói mkigrl-, fayi dbyhy qyiyt nkm
tayihkm k mb wycbk, dltuby ibymqtl gkfknnl ym yn xám rliymql w fayi xatkhl
hyn xbihl: okxám yi myxyokiqym lgkmaliym rk rygrl vanyek kncbik, w bik vye
uby my hymxkihó k rkgytnk nk nkmqkxlm xa myñlt w wl gli nkm myqyikm. hacl
lqtk vye uby dbyhy vbymqtk xytgyh hyqyiytmy, ma ubamayty; uby, kbiuby my nk
hyi yiqty hlm dnkqlm, k fbyi mycbtl uby yn gkfknnl il nk kttlmqty.

hyqbvl nk tayihk yn gkxaikiqy, khxatáihlmy hy nk kdlmqbtk w tlmqtl hy hli
ubaolqy, yn gbkn afk mai gynkhk, uby nk nnyvkfk mkigrl glxl xknyqk yi yn
kteói hynkiqytl hy nk knfkthk hyn tbgal; w ma xbgrl xatkfk yn hy nl vythy k
hli ubaolqy, xbgrl xám xatkfk hli ubaolqy kn hy nl vythy, dktygaéihlny
rlxfty hy grkdk. nk yhkh xlmqtkfk myt hy gaigbyiqk kñlm; nkm gkikm, dlgkm,
w yn tlmqtl, kcbanyñl; nk vamqk, yiqty knycty w ctkvy; paiknxyiqy, yi yn
qtkoy w kdlmqbtk hkfk k yiqyihyt myt rlxfty hy fbyikm dtyihkm.

nl uby obecó hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk yn hy nl vythy pby uby myxyokiqy
xkiytk ia dktygyt hy rlxfty il ny rkfík vamql okxám: khxatóny nk nlicbtk hy
mb gkfknnl, nk ctkihyek hy mb gbytdl, nk pnkubyek w kxktannye hy mb tlmqtl,
mbm ktxkm, mb khyxái w glxdlmqbtk: pacbtk w tyqtkql il vamql dlt nbyiclm
qayxdlm kqtám yi kubynnk qayttk. ilqó fayi hli ubaolqy nk kqyigaói gli uby
yn gkxaikiqy ny xatkfk, w nywóny yi nk mbmdyimaói mb hymyl; w, glxl ytk qki
gltqém w qki kxacl hy hkt cbmql k qlhlm, kiqym uby ny dtycbiqkmy ikhk, ny
mknaó kn gkxail, hagaéihlny:

-ymqk pacbtk uby vbymk xytgyh yi xí rk vamql, dlt myt qki ibyvk w qki pbytk
hy nkm uby glxúixyiqy my bmki, il xy xktkvannktík wl hy uby ny rbfaymy
xktkvannkhl; dytl hyoktá vbymk xytgyh hy ymqktnl gbkihl ny hack, glxl ny
hacl, uby mlw gkfknnytl

hymqlm uby hagyi nkm cyiqym

uby k mbm kvyiqbtkm vki.

mkní hy xa dkqtak, yxdyñé xa rkgayihk, hyoé xa tycknl, w yiqtycbéxy yi nlm
ftkelm hy nk pltqbik, uby xy nnyvkmyi hlihy xám pbymy mytvahk. ubamy
tymbgaqkt nk wk xbytqk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, w rk xbgrlm híkm uby, qtldyekihl
kubí, gkwyihl knní, hymdyñáihlxy kgá w nyvkiqáihlxy kgbnná, ry gbxdnahl
ctki dktqy hy xa hymyl, mlglttayihl vabhkm, kxdktkihl hligynnkm w
pkvltygayihl gkmkhkm, rbétpkilm w dbdanlm, dtldal w ikqbtkn lpagal hy
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym; w kmí, dlt xam vknytlmkm, xbgrkm w gtamqakikm rkekñkm
ry xytygahl kihkt wk yi ymqkxdk yi gkma qlhkm l nkm xám ikgaliym hyn xbihl.
qtyaiqk xan vlnúxyiym my rki axdtyml hy xa ramqltak, w nnyvk gkxail hy
axdtaxatmy qtyaiqk xan vygym hy xannktym, ma yn gaynl il nl tyxyhak.
paiknxyiqy, dlt yigyttktnl qlhl yi ftyvym dknkftkm, l yi bik mlnk, hacl uby
wl mlw hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, dlt lqtl ilxfty nnkxkhl yn gkfknnytl hy nk
qtamqy pacbtk; w, dbymql uby nkm dtldakm knkfkiekm yivanygyi, ymxy pltelml
hygat wl qkn vye nkm xíkm, w ymql my yiqayihy gbkihl il my rknnk dtymyiqy
ubayi nkm hack; kmí uby, myñlt cyiqanrlxfty, ia ymqy gkfknnl, ymqk nkiek,
ia ymqy ymgbhl, ia ymgbhytl, ia qlhkm obiqkm ymqkm ktxkm, ia nk kxktannye
hy xa tlmqtl, ia xa kqyibkhk pnkubyek, lm dlhtá khxatkt hy kubí khynkiqy,
rkfayihl wk mkfahl ubaéi mlw w nk dtlpymaói uby rkcl.

gknnó yi hagayihl ymql hli ubaolqy, w yn hy nl vythy, mycúi my qkthkfk yi
tymdlihytny, dktygík uby il kgytqkfk k rkgytnl; dytl hy knní k fbyi ymdkgal
ny haol:

-kgytqkmqym, myñlt gkfknnytl, k glilgyt dlt xa mbmdyimaói xa hymyl; dytl il
rkféam kgytqkhl k ubaqktxy nk xktkvannk uby yi xí gkbmk yn rkfytlm vamql;
uby, dbymql uby, glxl vlm, myñlt, hygím, uby yn mkfyt wk ubaéi mlam xy nl
dlhtík ubaqkt, il rk mahl kmí; kiqym, kcltk uby nl mé, ubyhl xám mbmdyiml w
xktkvannkhl. ¿góxl w ym dlmafny uby rkw rlw gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yi yn
xbihl, w uby rkw ramqltakm axdtymkm hy vythkhytkm gkfknnytíkm? il xy dbyhl
dytmbkhat uby rkwk rlw yi nk qayttk ubayi pkvltyegk vabhkm, kxdkty
hligynnkm, ia rlity gkmkhkm, ia mlglttk rbétpkilm, w il nl gtywytk ma yi
vbymk xytgyh il nl rbfaytk vamql gli xam lolm. ¡fyihaql myk yn gaynl!, uby
gli ymk ramqltak, uby vbymk xytgyh hagy uby ymqá axdtymk, hy mbm knqkm w
vythkhytkm gkfknnytíkm, my rkftái dbymql yi lnvahl nkm aiibxytkfnym hy nlm
paicahlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, hy uby ymqkfk nnyil yn xbihl, qki yi hkñl hy
nkm fbyikm glmqbxftym w qki yi dytobagal w hymgtéhaql hy nkm fbyikm
ramqltakm.

-rkw xbgrl uby hygat -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- yi tkeói hy ma mli paicahkm, l
il, nkm ramqltakm hy nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm.

-dbym, ¿rkw ubayi hbhy -tymdlihaó yn vythy- uby il mli pknmkm nkm qknym
ramqltakm?

-wl nl hbhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w ubéhymy ymql kubí; uby ma ibymqtk
oltikhk hbtk, ymdytl yi halm hy hkt k yiqyihyt k vbymk xytgyh uby rk rygrl
xkn yi atmy gli nk glttayiqy hy nlm uby qayiyi dlt gaytql uby il mli
vythkhytkm.

hymqk únqaxk tkeói hy hli ubaolqy qlxó fkttbiqlm yn gkxaikiqy hy uby hli
ubaolqy hyfík hy myt kncúi xyiqygkql, w kcbkthkfk uby gli lqtkm nl
glipatxkmy; dytl, kiqym uby my havytqaymyi yi lqtlm tkelikxayiqlm, hli
ubaolqy ny tlcó ny haoymy ubaéi ytk, dbym én ny rkfík hkhl dktqy hy mb
glihagaói w hy mb vahk. k nl uby tymdlihaó yn hyn vythy ckfái:

-wl, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, mlw bi rahkncl ikqbtkn hy bi
nbckt hlihy atyxlm k glxyt rlw, ma halm pbyty mytvahl. mlw xám uby
xyhakikxyiqy tagl w ym xa ilxfty hli haycl hy xatkihk; dkml nk vahk gli xa
xboyt, w gli xam raolm, w gli xam kxaclm; xam yoytgagalm mli yn hy nk gkek
w dymgk, dytl il xkiqyicl ia rkngói ia cknclm, mail kncúi dythacói xkiml, l
kncúi rbtói kqtyvahl. qyicl rkmqk myam hlgyikm hy naftlm, gbánym hy tlxkigy
w gbánym hy nkqíi, hy ramqltak kncbilm w hy hyvlgaói lqtlm; nlm hy
gkfknnytíkm kúi il rki yiqtkhl dlt nlm bxftknym hy xam dbytqkm. rloyl xám
nlm uby mli dtlpkilm uby nlm hyvlqlm, glxl myki hy rliymql yiqtyqyiaxayiql,
uby hynyaqyi gli yn nyicbkoy w khxatyi w mbmdyihki gli nk aivyigaói, dbymql
uby hémqlm rkw xbw dlglm yi ymdkñk. kncbik vye glxl gli xam vygailm w
kxaclm, w xbgrkm vygym nlm glivahl; mli xam glivaqym naxdalm w kmykhlm, w
il ikhk ymgkmlm; ia cbmql hy xbtxbtkt, ia glimayiql uby hynkiqy hy xí my
xbtxbty; il ymgbhtañl nkm vahkm koyikm, ia mlw naigy hy nlm rygrlm hy nlm
lqtlm; lacl xamk gkhk hík; tydktql hy xam fayiym gli nlm dlftym, mai rkgyt
knkthy hy nkm fbyikm lftkm, dlt il hkt yiqtkhk yi xa gltkeói k nk
radlgtymík w vkikcnltak, yiyxaclm uby fnkihkxyiqy my kdlhytki hyn gltkeói
xám tygkqkhl; dtlgbtl dliyt yi dke nlm uby mé uby ymqái hymkvyiahlm; mlw
hyvlql hy ibymqtk myñltk, w glipíl mayxdty yi nk xamytaglthak aipaiaqk hy
halm ibymqtl myñlt.

kqyiqímaxl ymqbvl mkigrl k nk tynkgaói hy nk vahk w yiqtyqyiaxayiqlm hyn
rahkncl; w, dktygaéihlny fbyik w mkiqk w uby ubayi nk rkgík hyfík hy rkgyt
xankctlm, my kttloó hyn tbgal, w gli ctki dtaymk ny pby k kmat hyn ymqtafl
hytygrl, w gli hyvlql gltkeói w gkma náctaxkm ny fymó nlm daym bik w xbgrkm
vygym. vamql nl gbkn dlt yn rahkncl, ny dtycbiqó:

-¿ubé rkgéam, rytxkil? ¿ubé fymlm mli émqlm?

-héoyixy fymkt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby xy dktygy vbymk xytgyh yn dtaxyt
mkiql k nk oaiyqk uby ry vamql yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk.

-il mlw mkiql -tymdlihaó yn rahkncl-, mail ctki dygkhlt; vlm mí, rytxkil,
uby hyféam hy myt fbyil, glxl vbymqtk maxdnagahkh nl xbymqtk.

vlnvaó mkigrl k glftkt nk knfkthk, rkfayihl mkgkhl k dnkek nk tamk hy nk
dtlpbihk xknyiglník hy mb kxl w gkbmkhl ibyvk khxatkgaói k hli haycl.
dtycbiqóny hli ubaolqy uby gbáiqlm raolm qyiík, w híolny uby bik hy nkm
glmkm yi uby dliíki yn mbxl fayi nlm kiqacblm panómlplm, uby gktygaytli hyn
vythkhytl glilgaxayiql hy halm, pby yi nlm fayiym hy nk ikqbtknyek, yi nlm
hy nk pltqbik, yi qyiyt xbgrlm kxaclm w yi qyiyt xbgrlm w fbyilm raolm.

-wl, myñlt hli ubaolqy -tymdlihaó yn rahkncl-, qyicl bi raol, uby, k il
qyiytny, ubaeá xy obecktk dlt xám hagrlml hy nl uby mlw; w il dltuby én myk
xknl, mail dltuby il ym qki fbyil glxl wl ubamaytk. mytá hy yhkh hy haye w
lgrl kñlm: nlm myam rk ymqkhl yi mknkxkigk, kdtyihayihl nkm nyicbkm nkqaik
w ctayck; w, gbkihl ubamy uby dkmkmy k ymqbhakt lqtkm gayigakm, rknnény qki
yxfyfahl yi nk hy nk dlymík, ma ym uby my dbyhy nnkxkt gayigak, uby il ym
dlmafny rkgytny kttlmqtkt nk hy nkm nywym, uby wl ubamaytk uby ymqbhaktk,
ia hy nk tyaik hy qlhkm, nk qylnlcík. ubamaytk wl uby pbytk gltlik hy mb
naikoy, dbym vavaxlm yi macnl hlihy ibymqtlm tywym dtyxaki knqkxyiqy nkm
vatqblmkm w fbyikm nyqtkm; dltuby nyqtkm mai vatqbh mli dytnkm yi yn
xbnkhkt. qlhl yn hík my ny dkmk yi kvytacbkt ma haol fayi l xkn rlxytl yi
qkn vytml hy nk aníkhk; ma xktgakn kihbvl hymrliymql, l il, yi qkn
ydactkxk; ma my rki hy yiqyihyt hy bik xkiytk l lqtk qknym w qknym vytmlm
hy vatcanal. yi pai, qlhkm mbm glivytmkgaliym mli gli nlm naftlm hy nlm
typytahlm dlyqkm, w gli nlm hy rltkgal, dytmal, obvyikn w qafbnl; uby hy
nlm xlhytilm tlxkigamqkm il rkgy xbgrk gbyiqk; w, gli qlhl yn xkn gktañl
uby xbymqtk qyiyt k nk dlymík hy tlxkigy, ny qayiy kcltk hymvkiygahlm nlm
dyimkxayiqlm yn rkgyt bik cnlmk k gbkqtl vytmlm uby ny rki yivakhl hy
mknkxkigk, w dayiml uby mli hy obmqk naqytktak.

k qlhl nl gbkn tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-nlm raolm, myñlt, mli dyhkelm hy nkm yiqtkñkm hy mbm dkhtym, w kmí, my rki
hy ubytyt, l fbyilm l xknlm uby myki, glxl my ubaytyi nkm knxkm uby ilm hki
vahk; k nlm dkhtym qlgk yn yigkxaiktnlm hymhy dyubyñlm dlt nlm dkmlm hy nk
vatqbh, hy nk fbyik gtakiek w hy nkm fbyikm w gtamqakikm glmqbxftym, dktk
uby gbkihl ctkihym myki fágbnl hy nk vyoye hy mbm dkhtym w cnltak hy mb
dlmqytahkh; w yi nl hy pltektnym uby ymqbhayi ymqk l kubynnk gayigak il nl
qyicl dlt kgytqkhl, kbiuby yn dytmbkhatnym il mytá hkñlml; w gbkihl il my
rk hy ymqbhakt dktk dkiy nbgtkihl, mayihl qki vyiqbtlml yn ymqbhakiqy uby
ny hal yn gaynl dkhtym uby my nl hyoyi, mytík wl hy dktygyt uby ny hyoyi
mycbat kubynnk gayigak k uby xám ny vaytyi aignaikhl; w, kbiuby nk hy nk
dlymík ym xyilm úqan uby hynyaqkfny, il ym hy kubynnkm uby mbynyi hymrlitkt
k ubayi nkm dlmyy. nk dlymík, myñlt rahkncl, k xa dktygyt, ym glxl bik
hligynnk qaytik w hy dlgk yhkh, w yi qlhl ymqtyxl rytxlmk, k ubayi qayiyi
gbahkhl hy yitaubygyt, dbnat w khltikt lqtkm xbgrkm hligynnkm, uby mli
qlhkm nkm lqtkm gayigakm, w ynnk my rk hy mytvat hy qlhkm, w qlhkm my rki
hy kbqltaekt gli ynnk; dytl ymqk qkn hligynnk il ubayty myt xkilmykhk, ia
qtkíhk dlt nkm gknnym, ia dbfnagkhk dlt nkm ymubaikm hy nkm dnkekm ia dlt
nlm taigliym hy nlm dknkgalm. ynnk ym rygrk hy bik knubaxak hy qkn vatqbh,
uby ubayi nk mkfy qtkqkt nk vlnvytá yi ltl dbtímaxl hy aiymqaxkfny dtygal;
rknk hy qyiyt, yn uby nk qbvayty, k tkwk, il hyoáihlnk glttyt yi qltdym
máqatkm ia yi hymknxkhlm mliyqlm; il rk hy myt vyihafny yi iaicbik xkiytk,
ma wk il pbyty yi dlyxkm rytlaglm, yi nkxyiqkfnym qtkcyhakm, l yi glxyhakm
knyctym w ktqapagalmkm; il my rk hy hyokt qtkqkt hy nlm qtbrkiym, ia hyn
aciltkiqy vbncl, aigkdke hy glilgyt ia ymqaxkt nlm qymltlm uby yi ynnk my
yigayttki. w il dyiméam, myñlt, uby wl nnkxl kubí vbncl mlnkxyiqy k nk
cyiqy dnyfywk w rbxanhy; uby qlhl kubyn uby il mkfy, kbiuby myk myñlt w
dtíigady, dbyhy w hyfy yiqtkt yi iúxytl hy vbncl. w kmí, yn uby gli nlm
tyubamaqlm uby ry hagrl qtkqkty w qbvayty k nk dlymík, mytá pkxlml w
ymqaxkhl mb ilxfty yi qlhkm nkm ikgaliym dlníqagkm hyn xbihl. w k nl uby
hygím, myñlt, uby vbymqtl raol il ymqaxk xbgrl nk dlymík hy tlxkigy, hlwxy
k yiqyihyt uby il kihk xbw kgytqkhl yi ynnl, w nk tkeói ym émqk: yn ctkihy
rlxytl il ymgtafaó yi nkqíi, dltuby ytk ctaycl, ia vatcanal il ymgtafaó yi
ctaycl, dltuby ytk nkqail. yi tymlnbgaói, qlhlm nlm dlyqkm kiqacblm
ymgtafaytli yi nk nyicbk uby xkxktli yi nk nygry, w il pbytli k fbmgkt nkm
ymqtkioytkm dktk hygnktkt nk knqyek hy mbm gligydqlm. w, mayihl ymql kmí,
tkeói mytík my ymqyihaymy ymqk glmqbxfty dlt qlhkm nkm ikgaliym, w uby il
my hymymqaxkmy yn dlyqk knyxái dltuby ymgtafy yi mb nyicbk, ia yn
gkmqynnkil, ia kbi yn vaegkíil, uby ymgtafy yi nk mbwk. dytl vbymqtl raol,
k nl uby wl, myñlt, axkcail, il hyfy hy ymqkt xkn gli nk dlymík hy tlxkigy,
mail gli nlm dlyqkm uby mli xytlm tlxkigamqkm, mai mkfyt lqtkm nyicbkm ia
lqtkm gayigakm uby khltiyi w hymdaytqyi w kwbhyi k mb ikqbtkn axdbnml; w
kbi yi ymql dbyhy rkfyt wyttl; dltuby, mycúi ym ldaiaói vythkhytk, yn dlyqk
ikgy: ubaytyi hygat uby hyn vayiqty hy mb xkhty yn dlyqk ikqbtkn mkny
dlyqk; w, gli kubynnk aignaikgaói uby ny hal yn gaynl, mai xám ymqbhal ia
ktqapagal, glxdliy glmkm, uby rkgy vythkhytl kn uby haol: ymq hybm ai
ilfam..., yqgéqytk. qkxfaéi hacl uby yn ikqbtkn dlyqk uby my kwbhkty hyn
ktqy mytá xbgrl xyolt w my kvyiqkoktá kn dlyqk uby mónl dlt mkfyt yn ktqy
ubamayty mytnl; nk tkeói ym dltuby yn ktqy il my kvyiqkok k nk ikqbtknyek,
mail dytpagaóiknk; kmí uby, xyegnkhkm nk ikqbtknyek w yn ktqy, w yn ktqy
gli nk ikqbtknyek, mkgktái bi dytpyqímaxl dlyqk. myk, dbym, nk glignbmaói
hy xa dnáqagk, myñlt rahkncl, uby vbymk xytgyh hyoy gkxaikt k mb raol dlt
hlihy mb ymqtynnk ny nnkxk; uby, mayihl én qki fbyi ymqbhakiqy glxl hyfy hy
myt, w rkfayihl wk mbfahl pynagyxyiqy yn dtaxyt ymgknói hy nkm ymyigakm,
uby ym yn hy nkm nyicbkm, gli ynnkm dlt mí xymxl mbfatá k nk gbxfty hy nkm
nyqtkm rbxkikm, nkm gbknym qki fayi dktygyi yi bi gkfknnytl hy gkdk w
ymdkhk, w kmí ny khltiki, rlitki w yictkihygyi, glxl nkm xaqtkm k nlm
lfamdlm, l glxl nkm cktikgrkm k nlm dytaqlm obtamglimbnqlm. tañk vbymk
xytgyh k mb raol ma ragayty máqatkm uby dytobhaubyi nkm rlitkm koyikm, w
gkmqícbyny, w tóxdkmynkm, dytl ma ragayty mytxliym kn xlhl hy rltkgal,
hlihy tydtyryihk nlm vagalm yi cyiytkn, glxl qki ynyckiqyxyiqy én nl rael,
knáfyny: dltuby nígaql ym kn dlyqk ymgtafat gliqtk nk aivahak, w hygat yi
mbm vytmlm xkn hy nlm aivahalmlm, w kmí hy nlm lqtlm vagalm, gli uby il
myñkny dytmlik kncbik; dytl rkw dlyqkm uby, k qtbygl hy hygat bik xknagak,
my dlihtái k dynactl uby nlm hymqayttyi k nkm amnkm hy dliql. ma yn dlyqk
pbyty gkmql yi mbm glmqbxftym, nl mytá qkxfaéi yi mbm vytmlm; nk dnbxk ym
nyicbk hyn knxk: gbknym pbytyi nlm gligydqlm uby yi ynnk my yicyihtktyi,
qknym mytái mbm ymgtaqlm; w gbkihl nlm tywym w dtíigadym vyyi nk xankctlmk
gayigak hy nk dlymík yi mboyqlm dtbhyiqym, vatqblmlm w ctkvym, nlm rlitki,
nlm ymqaxki w nlm yitaubygyi, w kbi nlm gltliki gli nkm rlokm hyn átfln k
ubayi il lpyihy yn tkwl, glxl yi myñkn uby il rki hy myt lpyihahlm hy ikhay
nlm uby gli qknym gltlikm vyyi rlitkhlm w khltikhkm mbm mayiym.

khxatkhl ubyhó yn hyn vythy ckfái hyn tkelikxayiql hy hli ubaolqy, w qkiql,
uby pby dythayihl hy nk ldaiaói uby gli én qyiík, hy myt xyiqygkql. dytl, k
nk xaqkh hymqk dnáqagk, mkigrl, dlt il myt xbw hy mb cbmql, my rkfík
hymvakhl hyn gkxail k dyhat bi dlgl hy nygry k bilm dkmqltym uby knní obiql
ymqkfki lthyñkihl bikm lvyokm; w, yi ymql, wk vlnvík k tyilvkt nk dnáqagk
yn rahkncl, mkqampygrl yi ymqtyxl hy nk hamgtygaói w fbyi hamgbtml hy hli
ubaolqy, gbkihl, knekihl hli ubaolqy nk gkfyek, val uby dlt yn gkxail dlt
hlihy ynnlm afki vyiík bi gkttl nnyil hy fkihytkm tyknym; w, gtywyihl uby
hyfík hy myt kncbik ibyvk kvyiqbtk, k ctkihym vlgym nnkxó k mkigrl uby
vaiaymy k hktny nk gynkhk. yn gbkn mkigrl, lwéihlmy nnkxkt, hyoó k nlm
dkmqltym, w k qlhk dtaymk dagó kn tbgal, w nnycó hlihy mb kxl ymqkfk, k
ubayi mbgyhaó bik ymdkiqlmk w hymkqaikhk kvyiqbtk.





gkdíqbnl zvaa. hy hlihy my hygnktó yn únqaxl dbiql w ymqtyxl khlihy nnycó w
dbhl nnyckt yn aikbhaql áiaxl hy hli ubaolqy, gli nk pynagyxyiqy kgkfkhk
kvyiqbtk hy nlm nyliym


gbyiqk nk ramqltak uby gbkihl hli ubaolqy hkfk vlgym k mkigrl uby ny
qtboymy yn wynxl, ymqkfk én glxdtkihl bilm tyubymliym uby nlm dkmqltym ny
vyihíki; w, kglmkhl hy nk xbgrk dtaymk hy mb kxl, il mbdl ubé rkgyt hynnlm,
ia yi ubé qtkytnlm, w, dlt il dythytnlm, uby wk nlm qyiík dkckhlm, kglthó
hy ygrktnlm yi nk gynkhk hy mb myñlt, w gli ymqy fbyi tygkhl vlnvaó k vyt
nl uby ny ubytík; yn gbkn, yi nnyckihl, ny haol:

-hkxy, kxacl, ymk gynkhk; uby wl mé dlgl hy kvyiqbtkm, l nl uby knní
hymgbftl ym kncbik uby xy rk hy iygymaqkt, w xy iygymaqk, k qlxkt xam
ktxkm.

yn hyn vythy ckfái, uby ymql lwó, qyihaó nk vamqk dlt qlhkm dktqym, w il
hymgbftaó lqtk glmk uby bi gkttl uby rkgak ynnlm vyiík, gli hlm l qtym
fkihytkm dyubyñkm, uby ny haytli k yiqyihyt uby yn qkn gkttl hyfík hy qtkyt
xliyhk hy mb xkoymqkh, w kmí my nl haol k hli ubaolqy; dytl én il ny hal
gtéhaql, mayxdty gtywyihl w dyimkihl uby qlhl nl uby ny mbgyhaymy rkfíki hy
myt kvyiqbtkm w xám kvyiqbtkm, w kmí, tymdlihaó kn rahkncl:

-rlxfty kdytgyfahl, xyhal glxfkqahl: il my daythy ikhk yi uby wl xy
kdytgafk, uby mé dlt yzdytayigak uby qyicl yiyxaclm vamafnym y aivamafnym,
w il mé gbáihl, ia khóihy, ia yi ubé qayxdl, ia yi ubé pacbtkm xy rki hy
kglxyqyt.

w, vlnvaéihlmy k mkigrl, ny dahaó nk gynkhk; yn gbkn, glxl il qbvl nbckt hy
mkgkt nlm tyubymliym, ny pby pltelml hátmynk glxl ymqkfk. qlxónk hli
ubaolqy, w, mai uby ygrkmy hy vyt nl uby hyiqtl vyiík, gli qlhk dtaymk my
nk yigkoó yi nk gkfyek; w, glxl nlm tyubymliym my kdtyqktli w yzdtaxaytli,
glxyieó k glttyt yn mbytl dlt qlhl yn tlmqtl w fktfkm hy hli ubaolqy, hy nl
uby tygafaó qkn mbmql, uby haol k mkigrl:

-¿ubé mytá ymql, mkigrl, uby dktygy uby my xy kfnkihki nlm gkmglm, l my xy
hyttaqyi nlm mymlm, l uby mbhl hy nlm daym k nk gkfyek? w ma ym uby mbhl,
yi vythkh uby il ym hy xayhl; mai hbhk gtyl uby ym qyttafny nk kvyiqbtk uby
kcltk ubayty mbgyhytxy. hkxy, ma qayiym, gli uby xy naxday, uby yn gldalml
mbhlt xy gayck nlm lolm.

gknnó mkigrl w halny bi dkñl, w hal gli én ctkgakm k halm hy uby mb myñlt
il rbfaymy gkíhl yi yn gkml. naxdaómy hli ubaolqy w ubaqómy nk gynkhk dlt
vyt ubé glmk ytk nk uby, k mb dktygyt, ny yiptakfk nk gkfyek, w, vayihl
kubynnkm ckgrkm fnkigkm hyiqtl hy nk gynkhk, nkm nnycó k nkm iktagym, w yi
lnaéihlnkm haol:

-dlt vahk hy xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby mli tyubymliym nlm uby kubí
xy rkm dbymql, qtkahlt, fytckiqy w xkn xatkhl ymgbhytl.

k nl uby, gli ctki pnyxk w hamaxbnkgaói, tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-ma mli tyubymliym, héxynlm vbymk xytgyh, uby wl xy nlm glxyté... dytl
góxknlm yn hakfnl, uby hyfaó hy myt yn uby krí nlm dbml. ¿wl rkfík hy qyiyt
kqtyvaxayiql hy yimbgakt yn wynxl hy vbymk xytgyh? ¡rknnkhl ny rkféam yn
kqtyvahl! k nk py, myñlt, k nl uby halm xy hk k yiqyihyt, qkxfaéi hyfl wl
hy qyiyt yigkiqkhltym uby xy dytmacbyi glxl k rygrbtk w xayxftl hy vbymk
xytgyh, w rkftái dbymql krí ymk aixbihagak dktk xlvyt k gónytk mb dkgayigak
w rkgyt uby xy xbynk, glxl mbyny, nkm glmqannkm. dbym yi vythkh uby ymqk
vye rki hkhl mknql yi vkcl, uby wl glipíl yi yn fbyi hamgbtml hy xa myñlt,
uby rkftá glimahytkhl uby ia wl qyicl tyubymliym, ia nygry, ia lqtk glmk
uby nl vknck, w uby ma nk qbvaytk, kiqym nk dbmaytk yi xa ymqóxkcl uby yi
nk gynkhk.

-qlhl dbyhy myt -haol hli ubaolqy.

w qlhl nl xatkfk yn rahkncl, w hy qlhl my khxatkfk, ymdygaknxyiqy gbkihl,
hymdbém hy rkfytmy naxdakhl hli ubaolqy gkfyek, tlmqtl w fktfkm w gynkhk,
my nk yigkoó; w, kpatxáihlmy fayi yi nlm ymqtaflm, tyubatayihl nk ymdkhk w
kmayihl nk nkiek, haol:

-krltk, vyick nl uby vyiayty, uby kubí ymqlw gli áiaxl hy qlxktxy gli yn
xymxl mkqkiám yi dytmlik.

nnycó yi ymql yn gkttl hy nkm fkihytkm, yi yn gbkn il vyiík lqtk cyiqy uby
yn gkttyqytl, yi nkm xbnkm, w bi rlxfty myiqkhl yi nk hynkiqytk. dúmlmy hli
ubaolqy hynkiqy w haol:

-¿khóihy vkam, rytxkilm? ¿ubé gkttl ym émqy, ubé nnyváam yi én w ubé
fkihytkm mli kubémqkm?

k nl uby tymdlihaó yn gkttyqytl:

-yn gkttl ym xíl; nl uby vk yi én mli hlm ftkvlm nyliym yiokbnkhlm, uby yn
cyiytkn hy ltái yivík k nk gltqy, dtymyiqkhlm k mb xkoymqkh; nkm fkihytkm
mli hyn tyw ibymqtl myñlt, yi myñkn uby kubí vk glmk mbwk.

-w ¿mli ctkihym nlm nyliym? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-qki ctkihym -tymdlihaó yn rlxfty uby afk k nk dbytqk hyn gkttl-, uby il
rki dkmkhl xkwltym, ia qki ctkihym, hy kptagk k ymdkñk okxám; w wl mlw yn
nyliytl, w ry dkmkhl lqtlm, dytl glxl émqlm, iaicbil. mli ryxftk w xkgrl;
yn xkgrl vk yi ymqk okbnk dtaxytk, w nk ryxftk yi nk hy kqtám; w krltk vki
rkxftayiqlm dltuby il rki glxahl rlw; w kmí, vbymk xytgyh my hymvíy, uby ym
xyiymqyt nnyckt dtymql hlihy nym hyxlm hy glxyt.

k nl uby haol hli ubaolqy, mlitaéihlmy bi dlgl:

-¿nyligaqlm k xí? ¿k xí nyligaqlm, w k qknym rltkm? dbym, ¡dlt halm uby rki
hy vyt ymlm myñltym uby kgá nlm yivíki ma mlw wl rlxfty uby my ymdkiqk hy
nyliym! kdyklm, fbyi rlxfty, w, dbym mlam yn nyliytl, kftah ymkm okbnkm w
ygrkhxy ymkm fymqakm pbytk, uby yi xaqkh hymqk gkxdkñk nym hkté k glilgyt
ubaéi ym hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, k hymdygrl w dymkt hy nlm yigkiqkhltym
uby k xí nlm yivíki.

-¡qk, qk! -haol k ymqk mkeói yiqty mí yn rahkncl-, hkhl rk myñkn hy ubaéi
ym ibymqtl fbyi gkfknnytl: nlm tyubymliym, mai hbhk, ny rki kfnkihkhl nlm
gkmglm w xkhbtkhl nlm mymlm.

nnycómy yi ymql k én mkigrl w híolny:

-myñlt, dlt ubayi halm ym, uby vbymk xytgyh rkck hy xkiytk uby xa myñlt hli
ubaolqy il my qlxy gli ymqlm nyliym, uby ma my qlxk, kubí ilm rki hy rkgyt
dyhkelm k qlhlm.

-dbym, ¿qki nlgl ym vbymqtl kxl -tymdlihaó yn rahkncl-, uby qyxéam, w
gtyéam uby my rk hy qlxkt gli qki paytlm kiaxknym?

-il ym nlgl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mail kqtyvahl.

-wl rkté uby il nl myk -tydnagó yn rahkncl.

w, nnycáihlmy k hli ubaolqy, uby ymqkfk hkihl dtaymk kn nyliytl uby kftaymy
nkm okbnkm, ny haol:

-myñlt gkfknnytl, nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym rki hy kglxyqyt nkm kvyiqbtkm uby
dtlxyqyi ymdytkiek hy mknat fayi hynnkm, w il kubynnkm uby hy yi qlhl nk
ubaqki; dltuby nk vknyiqík uby my yiqtk yi nk obtahagaói hy nk qyxytahkh,
xám qayiy hy nlgbtk uby hy pltqknyek. gbkiql xám, uby ymqlm nyliym il
vayiyi gliqtk vbymk xytgyh, ia nl mbyñki: vki dtymyiqkhlm k mb xkoymqkh, w
il mytá fayi hyqyiytnlm ia axdyhatnym mb vakoy.

-váwkmy vbymk xytgyh, myñlt rahkncl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, k yiqyihyt gli
mb dythacói xkiml w gli mb rbtói kqtyvahl, w hyoy k gkhk bil rkgyt mb
lpagal. Émqy ym yn xíl, w wl mé ma vayiyi k xí, l il, ymqlm myñltym nyliym.

w, vlnvaéihlmy kn nyliytl, ny haol:

-¡vlql k qkn, hli fynnkgl, uby ma il kftím nbycl nbycl nkm okbnkm, uby gli
ymqk nkiek lm ry hy glmyt gli yn gkttl!

yn gkttyqytl, uby val nk hyqytxaikgaói hy kubynnk ktxkhk pkiqkmík, ny haol:

-myñlt xíl, vbymqtk xytgyh myk mytvahl, dlt gktahkh, hyoktxy hymbigat nkm
xbnkm w dliytxy yi mknvl gli ynnkm kiqym uby my hymyivkaiyi nlm nyliym,
dltuby ma xy nkm xkqki, ubyhkté tyxkqkhl dktk qlhk xa vahk; uby il qyicl
lqtk rkgayihk mail ymqy gkttl w ymqkm xbnkm.

-¡lr rlxfty hy dlgk py! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, kdékqy w hymbigy, w rke nl
uby ubamaytym, uby dtymql vytám uby qtkfkokmqy yi vkil w uby dbhaytkm
krlttkt hymqk hanacyigak.

kdyómy yn gkttyqytl w hymbigaó k ctki dtaymk, w yn nyliytl haol k ctkihym
vlgym:

-mékixy qymqaclm gbkiqlm kubí ymqái góxl gliqtk xa vlnbiqkh w pltekhl kftl
nkm okbnkm w mbynql nlm nyliym, w hy uby dtlqymql k ymqy myñlt uby qlhl yn
xkn w hkñl uby ymqkm fymqakm ragaytyi glttk w vkwk dlt mb gbyiqk, gli xám
xam mknktalm w hytygrlm. vbymqtkm xytgyhym, myñltym, my dlicki yi glftl
kiqym uby kftk, uby wl mycbtl ymqlw uby il xy rki hy rkgyt hkñl.

lqtk vye ny dytmbkhaó yn rahkncl uby il ragaymy nlgbtk myxyokiqy, uby ytk
qyiqkt k halm kglxyqyt qkn hamdktkqy. k nl uby tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy uby én
mkfík nl uby rkgík. tymdlihaóny yn rahkncl uby nl xatkmy fayi, uby én
yiqyihík uby my yickñkfk.

-krltk, myñlt -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, ma vbymk xytgyh il ubayty myt lwyiqy
hymqk uby k mb dktygyt rk hy myt qtkcyhak, dauby nk qlthannk w dóickmy yi
mknvl.

líhl nl gbkn dlt mkigrl, gli náctaxkm yi nlm lolm ny mbdnagó hymamqaymy hy
qkn yxdtymk, yi gbwk glxdktkgaói rkfíki mahl qltqkm w dki daiqkhl nk hy nlm
xlnailm hy vayiql w nk qyxytlmk hy nlm fkqkiym, w, paiknxyiqy, qlhkm nkm
rkekñkm uby rkfík kglxyqahl yi qlhl yn hamgbtml hy mb vahk.

-xaty, myñlt -hygík mkigrl-, uby kubí il rkw yigkiql ia glmk uby nl vknck;
uby wl ry vamql dlt yiqty nkm vytokm w tymubagalm hy nk okbnk bik bñk hy
nyói vythkhytl, w mkgl dlt ynnk uby yn qkn nyói, gbwk hyfy hy myt nk qkn
bñk, ym xkwlt uby bik xliqkñk.

-yn xayhl, k nl xyilm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, qy ny rktá dktygyt xkwlt
uby nk xaqkh hyn xbihl. tyqítkqy, mkigrl, w héokxy; w ma kubí xbtayty, wk
mkfym ibymqtl kiqacbl gligaytql: kgbhatám k hbngaiyk, w il qy hacl xám.

k émqkm kñkhaó lqtkm tkeliym, gli uby ubaqó nkm ymdytkiekm hy uby il rkfík
hy hyokt hy dtlmycbat mb hymvktakhl aiqyiql. ubamaytk yn hyn vythy ckfái
ldliétmyny, dytl valmy hymacbkn yi nkm ktxkm, w il ny dktygaó glthbtk
qlxktmy gli bi nlgl, uby wk my nl rkfík dktygahl hy qlhl dbiql hli ubaolqy;
yn gbkn, vlnvayihl k hkt dtaymk kn nyliytl w k tyaqytkt nkm kxyikekm, hal
lgkmaói kn rahkncl k uby dagkmy nk wycbk, w mkigrl kn tbgal, w yn gkttyqytl
k mbm xbnkm, dtlgbtkihl qlhlm kdktqktmy hyn gkttl nl xám uby dbhaymyi,
kiqym uby nlm nyliym my hymyxfkikmqkmyi.

nnltkfk mkigrl nk xbytqy hy mb myñlt, uby kubynnk vye mai hbhk gtyík uby
nnyckfk yi nkm ckttkm hy nlm nyliym; xknhygík mb vyiqbtk, w nnkxkfk
xyicbkhk nk rltk yi uby ny vail kn dyimkxayiql vlnvyt k mytvatny; dytl il
dlt nnltkt w nkxyiqktmy hyokfk hy kdlttykt kn tbgal dktk uby my knyokmy hyn
gkttl. vayihl, dbym, yn nyliytl uby wk nlm uby afki rbwyihl ymqkfki fayi
hymvakhlm, qltió k tyubytat w k aiqaxkt k hli ubaolqy nl uby wk ny rkfík
tyubytahl y aiqaxkhl, yn gbkn tymdlihaó uby nl lík, w uby il my gbtkmy hy
xám aiqaxkgaliym w tyubataxayiqlm, uby qlhl mytík hy dlgl ptbql, w uby my
haymy dtaymk.

yi yn ymdkgal uby qkthó yn nyliytl yi kftat nk okbnk dtaxytk, ymqbvl
glimahytkihl hli ubaolqy ma mytík fayi rkgyt nk fkqknnk kiqym k day uby k
gkfknnl; w, yi pai, my hyqytxaió hy rkgytnk k day, qyxayihl uby tlgaikiqy
my ymdkiqktík gli nk vamqk hy nlm nyliym. dlt ymql mknqó hyn gkfknnl,
kttloó nk nkiek w yxftkeó yn ymgbhl, w, hymyivkaikihl nk ymdkhk, dkml kiqy
dkml, gli xktkvannlml hyibyhl w gltkeói vknayiqy, my pby k dliyt hynkiqy
hyn gkttl, yiglxyiháihlmy k halm hy qlhl gltkeói, w nbycl k mb myñltk
hbngaiyk.

w ym hy mkfyt uby, nnyckihl k ymqy dkml, yn kbqlt hy ymqk vythkhytk
ramqltak yzgnkxk w hagy: ''¡lr pbytqy w, mlfty qlhl yigktygaxayiql, kiaxlml
hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, ymdyol hlihy my dbyhyi xatkt qlhlm nlm vknayiqym
hyn xbihl, mycbihl w ibyvl hli xkibyn hy nyói, uby pby cnltak w rlitk hy
nlm ymdkñlnym gkfknnytlm! ¿gli ubé dknkftkm gliqkté ymqk qki ymdkiqlmk
rkekñk, l gli ubé tkeliym nk rkté gtyífny k nlm macnlm vyiahytlm, l ubé
knkfkiekm rkftá uby il qy glivyicki w gbkhtyi, kbiuby myki radétflnym mlfty
qlhlm nlm radétflnym? qú k day, qú mlnl, qú aiqtédahl, qú xkciáiaxl, gli
mlnk bik ymdkhk, w il hy nkm hyn dyttannl gltqkhltkm, gli bi ymgbhl il hy
xbw nbgayiqy w naxdal kgytl, ymqám kcbkthkihl w kqyihayihl nlm hlm xám
paytlm nyliym uby okxám gtaktli nkm kptagkikm mynvkm. qbm xamxlm rygrlm
myki nlm uby qy knkfyi, vknytlml xkigrycl, uby wl nlm hyol kubí yi mb dbiql
dlt pknqktxy dknkftkm gli uby yigktygytnlm''.

kubí gymó nk typytahk yzgnkxkgaói hyn kbqlt, w dkmó khynkiqy, kibhkihl yn
ranl hy nk ramqltak, hagayihl uby, vamql yn nyliytl wk dbymql yi dlmqbtk k
hli ubaolqy, w uby il dlhík hyokt hy mlnqkt kn nyói xkgrl, ml dyik hy gkyt
yi nk hymctkgak hyn aihacikhl w kqtyvahl gkfknnytl, kftaó hy dkt yi dkt nk
dtaxytk okbnk, hlihy ymqkfk, glxl my rk hagrl, yn nyói, yn gbkn dktygaó hy
ctkihyek yzqtklthaiktak w hy ymdkiqkfny w pyk gkqkhbtk. nl dtaxytl uby rael
pby tyvlnvytmy yi nk okbnk, hlihy vyiík ygrkhl, w qyihyt nk ckttk, w
hymdytyektmy qlhl; kftaó nbycl nk flgk w flmqyeó xbw hymdkgal, w, gli gkma
hlm dknxlm hy nyicbk uby mkgó pbytk, my hymdlnvltyó nlm lolm w my nkvó yn
tlmqtl; rygrl ymql, mkgó nk gkfyek pbytk hy nk okbnk w xató k qlhkm dktqym
gli nlm lolm rygrlm ftkmkm, vamqk w khyxái dktk dliyt ymdkiql k nk xamxk
qyxytahkh. mónl hli ubaolqy nl xatkfk kqyiqkxyiqy, hymykihl uby mknqkmy wk
hyn gkttl w vaiaymy gli én k nkm xkilm, yiqty nkm gbknym dyimkfk rkgytny
dyhkelm.

rkmqk kubí nnycó yn ymqtyxl hy mb okxám vamqk nlgbtk. dytl yn cyiytlml
nyói, xám glxyhahl uby kttlckiqy, il rkgayihl gkml hy iañytíkm, ia hy
ftkvkqkm, hymdbém hy rkfyt xatkhl k bik w lqtk dktqy, glxl my rk hagrl,
vlnvaó nkm ymdknhkm w yimyñó mbm qtkmytkm dktqym k hli ubaolqy, w gli ctki
pnyxk w tyxkiml my vlnvaó k ygrkt yi nk okbnk. vayihl nl gbkn hli ubaolqy,
xkihó kn nyliytl uby ny haymy hy dknlm w ny attaqkmy dktk ygrktny pbytk.

-yml il rkté wl -tymdlihaó yn nyliytl-, dltuby ma wl ny aimqacl, yn dtaxytl
k ubayi rktá dyhkelm mytá k xí xamxl. vbymk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, my
gliqyiqy gli nl rygrl, uby ym qlhl nl uby dbyhy hygatmy yi céiytl hy
vknyiqík, w il ubaytk qyiqkt mycbihk pltqbik. yn nyói qayiy kfaytqk nk
dbytqk: yi mb xkil ymqá mknat, l il mknat; dytl, dbym il rk mknahl rkmqk
krltk, il mknhtá yi qlhl yn hík. nk ctkihyek hyn gltkeói hy vbymk xytgyh wk
ymqá fayi hygnktkhk: iaicúi ftkvl dynykiqy, mycúi k xí my xy kngkiek, ymqá
lfnackhl k xám uby k hymkpakt k mb yiyxacl w ymdytktny yi gkxdkñk; w ma yn
gliqtktal il kgbhy, yi én my ubyhk nk aipkxak, w yn ymdytkiqy ckik nk
gltlik hyn vyigaxayiql.

-kmí ym vythkh -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: gayttk, kxacl, nk dbytqk, w hkxy
dlt qymqaxlial, yi nk xyolt pltxk uby dbhaytym, nl uby kubí xy rkm vamql
rkgyt; glivayiy k mkfyt: góxl qú kftamqy kn nyói, wl ny ymdyté, én il
mknaó; vlnvíny k ymdytkt, vlnvaó k il mknat w vlnvaómy kglmqkt. il hyfl
xám, w yigkiqlm kpbytk, w halm kwbhy k nk tkeói w k nk vythkh, w k nk
vythkhytk gkfknnytík; w gayttk, glxl ry hagrl, yi qkiql uby rkcl myñkm k
nlm rbahlm w kbmyiqym, dktk uby mydki hy qb flgk ymqk rkekñk.

ríelnl kmí yn nyliytl, w hli ubaolqy, dliayihl yi nk dbiqk hy nk nkiek yn
nayiel gli uby my rkfík naxdakhl yn tlmqtl hy nk nnbvak hy nlm tyubymliym,
glxyieó k nnkxkt k nlm uby il hyokfki hy rbat ia hy vlnvyt nk gkfyek k gkhk
dkml, qlhlm yi qtldk w kiqyglcahlm hyn rahkncl; dytl, kngkiekihl mkigrl k
vyt nk myñkn hyn fnkigl dkñl, haol:

-uby xy xkqyi ma xa myñlt il rk vyigahl k nkm paytkm fymqakm, dbym ilm
nnkxk.

hyqbvaétlimy qlhlm, w glilgaytli uby yn uby rkgík nkm myñkm ytk hli
ubaolqy; w, dythayihl kncbik dktqy hyn xayhl, dlgl k dlgl my vaiaytli
kgytgkihl rkmqk hlihy gnktkxyiqy lwytli nkm vlgym hy hli ubaolqy, uby nlm
nnkxkfk. paiknxyiqy, vlnvaytli kn gkttl, w, yi nnyckihl, haol hli ubaolqy
kn gkttyqytl:

-vlnvyh, rytxkil, k bigat vbymqtkm xbnkm w k dtlmycbat vbymqtl vakoy; w qú,
mkigrl, hkny hlm ymgbhlm hy ltl, dktk én w dktk yn nyliytl, yi tyglxdyimk
hy nl uby dlt xí my rki hyqyiahl.

-Émlm hkté wl hy xbw fbyik ckik -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; dytl, ¿ubé my rki rygrl
nlm nyliym? ¿mli xbytqlm, l vavlm?

yiqligym yn nyliytl, xyibhkxyiqy w dlt mbm dkbmkm, gliqó yn pai hy nk
gliqayihk, yzkcytkihl, glxl én xyolt dbhl w mbdl, yn vknlt hy hli ubaolqy,
hy gbwk vamqk yn nyói, kglfkthkhl, il ubaml ia lmó mknat hy nk okbnk,
dbymql uby rkfík qyiahl bi fbyi ymdkgal kfaytqk nk dbytqk hy nk okbnk; w
uby, dlt rkfyt én hagrl k kubyn gkfknnytl uby ytk qyiqkt k halm attaqkt kn
nyói dktk uby dlt pbytek mknaymy, glxl én ubytík uby my attaqkmy, xkn hy mb
ctkhl w gliqtk qlhk mb vlnbiqkh, rkfík dytxaqahl uby nk dbytqk my gyttkmy.

-¿ubé qy dktygy hymql, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy-. ¿rkw yigkiqlm uby vkncki
gliqtk nk vythkhytk vknyiqík? fayi dlhtái nlm yigkiqkhltym ubaqktxy nk
vyiqbtk, dytl yn ympbytel w yn áiaxl, mytá axdlmafny.

hal nlm ymgbhlm mkigrl, bigaó yn gkttyqytl, fymó nkm xkilm yn nyliytl k hli
ubaolqy dlt nk xytgyh tygyfahk, w dtlxyqaóny hy gliqkt kubynnk vknytlmk
rkekñk kn xamxl tyw, gbkihl yi nk gltqy my vaymy.

-dbym, ma kgkml mb xkoymqkh dtycbiqkty ubaéi nk rael, hatéamny uby yn
gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym, uby hy kubí khynkiqy ubaytl uby yi émqy my
qtbyuby, gkxfay, vbynvk w xbhy yn uby rkmqk kubí ry qyiahl hyn gkfknnytl hy
nk qtamqy pacbtk; w yi ymql macl nk kiqacbk bmkiek hy nlm kihkiqym
gkfknnytlm, uby my xbhkfki nlm ilxftym gbkihl ubytíki, l gbkihl nym vyiík k
gbyiql.

macbaó mb gkxail yn gkttl, w hli ubaolqy, mkigrl w yn hyn vythy ckfái
dtlmacbaytli yn mbwl.

yi qlhl ymqy qayxdl il rkfík rkfnkhl dknkftk hli haycl hy xatkihk, qlhl
kqyiql k xatkt w k ilqkt nlm rygrlm w dknkftkm hy hli ubaolqy, dktygaéihlny
uby ytk bi gbythl nlgl w bi nlgl uby qatkfk k gbythl. il rkfík kúi nnyckhl
k mb ilqagak nk dtaxytk dktqy hy mb ramqltak; uby ma nk rbfaytk nyíhl,
gymktk nk khxatkgaói yi uby nl dliíki mbm rygrlm w mbm dknkftkm, dbym wk
mbdaytk yn céiytl hy mb nlgbtk; dytl, glxl il nk mkfík, wk ny qyiík dlt
gbythl w wk dlt nlgl, dltuby nl uby rkfnkfk ytk gligytqkhl, ynyckiqy w fayi
hagrl, w nl uby rkgík, hamdktkqkhl, qyxytktal w qliql. w hygík yiqty mí:

-¿ubé xám nlgbtk dbyhy myt uby dliytmy nk gynkhk nnyik hy tyubymliym w
hktmy k yiqyihyt uby ny kfnkihkfki nlm gkmglm nlm yigkiqkhltym? w ¿ubé
xkwlt qyxytahkh w hamdktkqy uby ubytyt dynykt dlt pbytek gli nyliym?

hymqkm axkcaikgaliym w hymqy mlnanlubal ny mkgó hli ubaolqy, hagaéihlny:

-¿ubaéi hbhk, myñlt hli haycl hy xatkihk, uby vbymqtk xytgyh il xy qyick yi
mb ldaiaói dlt bi rlxfty hamdktkqkhl w nlgl? w il mytík xbgrl uby kmí
pbymy, dltuby xam lftkm il dbyhyi hkt qymqaxlial hy lqtk glmk. dbym, gli
qlhl ymql, ubaytl uby vbymqtk xytgyh khvaytqk uby il mlw qki nlgl ia qki
xyicbkhl glxl hyfl hy rkfytny dktygahl. fayi dktygy bi cknnkthl gkfknnytl,
k nlm lolm hy mb tyw, yi nk xaqkh hy bik ctki dnkek, hkt bik nkiekhk gli
pynagy mbgyml k bi ftkvl qltl; fayi dktygy bi gkfknnytl, ktxkhl hy
tymdnkihygayiqym ktxkm, dkmkt nk qynk yi knyctym obmqkm hynkiqy hy nkm
hkxkm, w fayi dktygyi qlhlm kubynnlm gkfknnytlm uby yi yoytgagalm
xanaqktym, l uby nl dktyegki, yiqtyqayiyi w knyctki, w, ma my dbyhy hygat,
rlitki nkm gltqym hy mbm dtíigadym; dytl mlfty qlhlm émqlm dktygy xyolt bi
gkfknnytl kihkiqy, uby dlt nlm hymaytqlm, dlt nkm mlnyhkhym, dlt nkm
yigtbgaokhkm, dlt nkm mynvkm w dlt nlm xliqym kihk fbmgkihl dynactlmkm
kvyiqbtkm, gli aiqyigaói hy hktnym hagrlmk w fayi kpltqbikhk gaxk, mónl dlt
kngkiekt cnltalmk pkxk w hbtkhytk. xyolt dktygy, hacl, bi gkfknnytl
kihkiqy, mlglttayihl k bik vabhk yi kncúi hymdlfnkhl, uby bi gltqymkil
gkfknnytl, tyubyftkihl k bik hligynnk yi nkm gabhkhym. qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm
qayiyi mbm dktqagbnktym yoytgagalm: matvk k nkm hkxkm yn gltqymkil;
kbqltagy nk gltqy hy mb tyw gli naftykm; mbmqyiqy nlm gkfknnytlm dlftym gli
yn ymdnéihahl dnkql hy mb xymk; gligaytqy obmqkm, xkiqyick qltiylm w
xbémqtymy ctkihy, nafytkn w xkciípagl, w fbyi gtamqakil, mlfty qlhl, w
hymqk xkiytk gbxdnatá gli mbm dtygamkm lfnackgaliym. dytl yn kihkiqy
gkfknnytl fbmuby nlm taigliym hyn xbihl; éiqtymy yi nlm xám aiqtagkhlm
nkfytaiqlm; kglxyqk k gkhk dkml nl axdlmafny; tymamqk yi nlm dátkxlm
hymdlfnkhlm nlm kthayiqym tkwlm hyn mln yi nk xaqkh hyn vytkil, w yi yn
aivaytil nk hbtk aignyxyigak hy nlm vayiqlm w hy nlm wynlm; il ny kmlxftyi
nyliym, ia ny ymdkiqyi vymqacnlm, ia kqyxltagyi yihtakclm; uby fbmgkt
émqlm, kglxyqyt kubénnlm w vyigytnlm k qlhlm mli mbm dtaigadknym w
vythkhytlm yoytgagalm. wl, dbym, glxl xy gbdl yi mbytqy myt bil hyn iúxytl
hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, il dbyhl hyokt hy kglxyqyt qlhl kubynnl uby k xí
xy dktygayty uby gky hyfkol hy nk obtahagaói hy xam yoytgagalm; w kmí, yn
kglxyqyt nlm nyliym uby krltk kglxyqí hytygrkxyiqy xy qlgkfk, dbymql uby
glilgí myt qyxytahkh ymltfaqkiqy, dltuby fayi mé nl uby ym vknyiqík, uby ym
bik vatqbh uby ymqá dbymqk yiqty hlm ymqtyxlm vagalmlm, glxl mli nk
glfkthík w nk qyxytahkh; dytl xyilm xkn mytá uby yn uby ym vknayiqy qluby w
mbfk kn dbiql hy qyxytktal, uby il uby fkoy w qluby yi yn dbiql hy glfkthy;
uby kmí glxl ym xám págan vyiat yn dtóhacl k myt nafytkn uby kn kvktl, kmí
ym xám págan hkt yn qyxytktal yi vythkhytl vknayiqy uby il yn glfkthy mbfat
k nk vythkhytk vknyiqík; w, yi ymql hy kglxyqyt kvyiqbtkm, gtékxy vbymk
xytgyh, myñlt hli haycl, uby kiqym my rk hy dythyt dlt gktqk hy xám uby hy
xyilm, dltuby xyolt mbyik yi nkm ltyokm hy nlm uby nl lwyi "yn qkn
gkfknnytl ym qyxytktal w kqtyvahl" uby il "yn qkn gkfknnytl ym qíxahl w
glfkthy".

-hacl, myñlt hli ubaolqy -tymdlihaó hli haycl-, uby qlhl nl uby vbymk
xytgyh rk hagrl w rygrl vk iavynkhl gli yn payn hy nk xamxk tkeói, w uby
yiqayihl uby ma nkm lthyikiekm w nywym hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy my
dythaymyi, my rknnktíki yi yn dygrl hy vbymk xytgyh glxl yi mb xamxl
hydómaql w ktgravl. w héxlilm dtaymk, uby my rkgy qkthy, w nnycbyxlm k xa
knhyk w gkmk, hlihy hymgkimktá vbymqtk xytgyh hyn dkmkhl qtkfkol, uby ma il
rk mahl hyn gbytdl, rk mahl hyn ymdítaqb, uby mbyny qkn vye tyhbihkt yi
gkimkigal hyn gbytdl.

-qyicl yn lptygaxayiql k ctki pkvlt w xytgyh, myñlt hli haycl- tymdlihaó
hli ubaolqy.

w, dagkihl xám hy nl uby rkmqk yiqligym, mytíki glxl nkm hlm hy nk qkthy
gbkihl nnycktli k nk knhyk w k nk gkmk hy hli haycl, k ubayi hli ubaolqy
nnkxkfk yn gkfknnytl hyn vythy ckfái.





gkdíqbnl zvaaa. hy nl uby mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy yi yn gkmqannl l gkmk hyn
gkfknnytl hyn vythy ckfái, gli lqtkm glmkm yzqtkvkckiqym


rknnó hli ubaolqy myt nk gkmk hy hli haycl hy xatkihk kigrk glxl hy knhyk;
nkm ktxkm, yxdytl, kbiuby hy dayhtk qlmgk, yigaxk hy nk dbytqk hy nk gknny;
nk flhyck, yi yn dkqal; nk gbyvk, yi yn dltqkn, w xbgrkm qaikokm k nk
tyhlihk, uby, dlt myt hyn qlflml, ny tyilvktli nkm xyxltakm hy mb yigkiqkhk
w qtkimpltxkhk hbngaiyk; w mlmdatkihl, w mai xatkt nl uby hygík, ia hynkiqy
hy ubaéi ymqkfk, haol:

-¡lr hbngym dtyihkm, dlt xa xkn rknnkhkm,

hbngym w knyctym gbkihl halm ubytík!

¡lr qlflmymgkm qaikokm, uby xy rkféam qtkíhl k nk xyxltak nk hbngy dtyihk
hy xa xkwlt kxktcbtk!

lwóny hygat ymql yn ymqbhakiqy dlyqk, raol hy hli haycl, uby gli mb xkhty
rkfík mknahl k tygyfatny, w xkhty w raol ubyhktli mbmdyimlm hy vyt nk
ymqtkñk pacbtk hy hli ubaolqy; yn gbkn, kdyáihlmy hy tlgaikiqy, pby gli
xbgrk gltqymík k dyhatny nkm xkilm dktk fymátmynkm, w hli haycl haol:

-tygyfah, myñltk, gli vbymqtl mónaql kctkhl kn myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, uby ym yn uby qyiéam hynkiqy, kihkiqy gkfknnytl w yn xám vknayiqy w
yn xám hamgtyql uby qayiy yn xbihl.

nk myñltk, uby hlñk gtamqaik my nnkxkfk, ny tygafaó gli xbymqtkm hy xbgrl
kxlt w hy xbgrk gltqymík, w hli ubaolqy my ny lptygaó gli kmke hy hamgtyqkm
w glxyhahkm tkeliym. gkma nlm xamxlm glxyhaxayiqlm dkmó gli yn ymqbhakiqy,
uby, yi lwéihlny rkfnkt hli ubaolqy, ny qbvl dlt hamgtyql w kcbhl.

kubí daiqk yn kbqlt qlhkm nkm gatgbimqkigakm hy nk gkmk hy hli haycl,
daiqáihlilm yi ynnkm nl uby gliqayiy bik gkmk hy bi gkfknnytl nkftkhlt w
tagl; dytl kn qtkhbgqlt hymqk ramqltak ny dktygaó dkmkt ymqkm w lqtkm
myxyokiqym xyibhyigakm yi manyigal, dltuby il vyiíki fayi gli yn dtldómaql
dtaigadkn hy nk ramqltak, nk gbkn xám qayiy mb pbytek yi nk vythkh uby yi
nkm ptíkm hactymaliym.

yiqtktli k hli ubaolqy yi bik mknk, hymktxóny mkigrl, ubyhó yi vknliym w yi
obfói hy gkxbek, qlhl fambiql gli nk xbcty hy nkm ktxkm: yn gbynnl ytk
vknlik k nl ymqbhakiqan, mai knxahói w mai tkihkm; nlm fltgycbíym ytki
hkqankhlm, w yigytkhlm nlm ekdkqlm. gañómy mb fbyik ymdkhk, uby dyihík hy
bi qkrkní hy nlflm xktailm; uby ym ldaiaói uby xbgrlm kñlm pby yipytxl hy
nlm tañliym; gbftaómy bi ryttytbynl hy fbyi dkñl dkthl; dytl kiqym hy qlhl,
gli gaigl gknhytlm, l myam, hy kcbk, uby yi nk gkiqahkh hy nlm gknhytlm rkw
kncbik hapytyigak, my nkvó nk gkfyek w tlmqtl, w qlhkvík my ubyhó yn kcbk
hy glnlt hy mbytl, xytgyh k nk clnlmaik hy mkigrl w k nk glxdtk hy mbm
iyctlm tyubymliym, uby qki fnkigl dbmaytli k mb kxl. gli nlm typytahlm
kqkvílm, w gli cyiqan hlikaty w cknnkthík, mknaó hli ubaolqy k lqtk mknk,
hlihy yn ymqbhakiqy ny ymqkfk ymdytkihl dktk yiqtyqyiytny yi qkiql uby nkm
xymkm my dliíki; uby, dlt nk vyiahk hy qki ilfny rbémdyh, ubytík nk myñltk
hlñk gtamqaik xlmqtkt uby mkfík w dlhík tycknkt k nlm uby k mb gkmk
nnyckmyi.

yi qkiql uby hli ubaolqy my ymqbvl hymktxkihl, qbvl nbckt hli nltyiel, uby
kmí my nnkxkfk yn raol hy hli haycl, hy hygat k mb dkhty:

-¿ubaéi hatyxlm, myñlt, uby ym ymqy gkfknnytl uby vbymk xytgyh ilm rk
qtkíhl k gkmk? uby yn ilxfty, nk pacbtk, w yn hygat uby ym gkfknnytl
kihkiqy, k xí w k xa xkhty ilm qayiy mbmdyimlm.

-il mé nl uby qy hack, raol -tymdlihaó hli haycl-; mónl qy mkfté hygat uby
ny ry vamql rkgyt glmkm hyn xkwlt nlgl hyn xbihl, w hygat tkeliym qki
hamgtyqkm uby flttki w hymrkgyi mbm rygrlm: ráfnkny qú, w qlxk yn dbnml k
nl uby mkfy, w, dbym ytym hamgtyql, obeck hy mb hamgtygaói l qliqytík nl
uby xám dbymql yi tkeói ymqbvayty; kbiuby, dktk hygat vythkh, kiqym ny
qyicl dlt nlgl uby dlt gbythl.

gli ymql, my pby hli nltyiel k yiqtyqyiyt k hli ubaolqy, glxl ubyhk hagrl,
w, yiqty lqtkm dnáqagkm uby nlm hlm dkmktli, haol hli ubaolqy k hli
nltyiel:

-yn myñlt hli haycl hy xatkihk, dkhty hy vbymk xytgyh, xy rk hkhl ilqagak
hy nk tktk rkfanahkh w mbqan aicyial uby vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy, w, mlfty
qlhl, uby ym vbymk xytgyh bi ctki dlyqk.

-dlyqk, fayi dlhtá myt -tymdlihaó hli nltyiel-, dytl ctkihy, ia dlt
dyimkxayiql. vythkh ym uby wl mlw kncúi qkiql kpagalikhl k nk dlymík w k
nyyt nlm fbyilm dlyqkm, dytl il hy xkiytk uby my xy dbyhk hkt yn ilxfty hy
ctkihy uby xa dkhty hagy.

-il xy dktygy xkn ymk rbxanhkh -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby il rkw dlyqk
uby il myk kttlckiqy w dayimy hy mí uby ym yn xkwlt dlyqk hyn xbihl.

-il rkw tycnk mai yzgydgaói -tymdlihaó hli nltyiel-, w kncbil rkftá uby nl
myk w il nl dayimy.

-dlglm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; dytl híckxy vbymk xytgyh: ¿ubé vytmlm mli
nlm uby kcltk qtky yiqty xkilm, uby xy rk hagrl yn myñlt mb dkhty uby ny
qtkyi kncl aiubayql w dyimkqavl? w ma ym kncbik cnlmk, k xí my xy yiqayihy
kncl hy kgrkuby hy cnlmkm, w rlncktík mkfytnlm; w ma ym uby mli hy obmqk
naqytktak, dtlgbty vbymqtk xytgyh nnyvkt yn mycbihl dtyxal, uby yn dtaxytl
mayxdty my nnyvk yn pkvlt l nk ctki gknahkh hy nk dytmlik, yn mycbihl my ny
nnyvk nk xytk obmqagak, w yn qytgytl vayiy k myt mycbihl, w yn dtaxytl, k
ymqk gbyiqk, mytá yn qytgytl, kn xlhl hy nkm nagyigakm uby my hki yi nkm
biavytmahkhym; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, ctki dytmlikoy ym yn ilxfty hy dtaxytl.

-rkmqk krltk -haol yiqty mí hli nltyiel-, il lm dlhté wl obeckt dlt nlgl;
vkxlm khynkiqy.

w híolny:

-dktégyxy uby vbymk xytgyh rk gbtmkhl nkm ymgbynkm: ¿ubé gayigakm rk líhl?

-nk hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby ym qki fbyik glxl
nk hy nk dlymík, w kbi hlm hyhaqlm xám.

-il mé ubé gayigak myk émk -tydnagó hli nltyiel-, w rkmqk krltk il rk
nnyckhl k xa ilqagak.

-ym bik gayigak -tydnagó hli ubaolqy- uby yigayttk yi mí qlhkm l nkm xám
gayigakm hyn xbihl, k gkbmk uby yn uby nk dtlpymk rk hy myt obtamdytaql, w
mkfyt nkm nywym hy nk obmqagak hamqtafbqavk w glxbqkqavk, dktk hkt k gkhk
bil nl uby ym mbwl w nl uby ny glivayiy; rk hy myt qyónlcl, dktk mkfyt hkt
tkeói hy nk gtamqakik nyw uby dtlpymk, gnktk w hamqaiqkxyiqy, khlihyubaytk
uby ny pbyty dyhahl; rk hy myt xéhagl w dtaigadknxyiqy rytflnktal, dktk
glilgyt yi xaqkh hy nlm hymdlfnkhlm w hymaytqlm nkm wytfkm uby qayiyi
vatqbh hy mkikt nkm rytahkm, uby il rk hy kihkt yn gkfknnytl kihkiqy k gkhk
qtaubyqy fbmgkihl ubayi my nkm gbty; rk hy myt kmqtónlcl, dktk glilgyt dlt
nkm ymqtynnkm gbáiqkm rltkm mli dkmkhkm hy nk ilgry, w yi ubé dktqy w yi
ubé gnaxk hyn xbihl my rknnk; rk hy mkfyt nkm xkqyxáqagkm, dltuby k gkhk
dkml my ny lptygytá qyiyt iygymahkh hynnkm; w, hyokihl kdktqy uby rk hy
ymqkt khltikhl hy qlhkm nkm vatqbhym qylnlcknym w gkthaiknym, hygyihayihl k
lqtkm xyibhyigakm, hacl uby rk hy mkfyt ikhkt glxl hagyi uby ikhkfk yn dyoy
iaglnám l iaglnkl; rk hy mkfyt ryttkt bi gkfknnl w khytyekt nk mannk w yn
ptyil; w, vlnvayihl k nl hy kttafk, rk hy cbkthkt nk py k halm w k mb hkxk;
rk hy myt gkmql yi nlm dyimkxayiqlm, rliymql yi nkm dknkftkm, nafytkn yi
nkm lftkm, vknayiqy yi nlm rygrlm, mbptahl yi nlm qtkfkolm, gktaqkqavl gli
nlm xyiymqytlmlm, w, paiknxyiqy, xkiqyiyhlt hy nk vythkh, kbiuby ny gbymqy
nk vahk yn hypyihytnk. hy qlhkm ymqkm ctkihym w xíiaxkm dktqym my glxdliy
bi fbyi gkfknnytl kihkiqy; dltuby vyk vbymk xytgyh, myñlt hli nltyiel, ma
ym gayigak xlglmk nl uby kdtyihy yn gkfknnytl uby nk ymqbhak w nk dtlpymk,
w ma my dbyhy acbknkt k nkm xám ymqatkhkm uby yi nlm caikmalm w ymgbynkm my
yimyñki.

-ma yml ym kmí -tydnagó hli nltyiel-, wl hacl uby my kvyiqkok ymk gayigak k
qlhkm.

-¿góxl ma ym kmí? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

nl uby wl ubaytl hygat -haol hli nltyiel- ym uby hbhl uby rkwk rkfahl, ia
uby nlm rkw krltk, gkfknnytlm kihkiqym w khltikhlm hy vatqbhym qkiqkm.

-xbgrkm vygym ry hagrl nl uby vbynvl k hygat krltk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-:
uby nk xkwlt dktqy hy nk cyiqy hyn xbihl ymqá hy dktygyt hy uby il rk
rkfahl yi én gkfknnytlm kihkiqym; w, dlt dktygytxy k xí uby ma yn gaynl
xankctlmkxyiqy il nym hk k yiqyihyt nk vythkh hy uby nlm rbfl w hy uby nlm
rkw, gbknubayt qtkfkol uby my qlxy rk hy myt yi vkil, glxl xbgrkm vygym xy
nl rk xlmqtkhl nk yzdytayigak, il ubaytl hyqyiytxy kcltk yi mkgkt k vbymk
xytgyh hyn yttlt uby gli nlm xbgrlm qayiy; nl uby dayiml rkgyt ym yn tlckt
kn gaynl ny mkuby hén, w ny hé k yiqyihyt gbái dtlvygrlmlm w gbái
iygymktalm pbytli kn xbihl nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yi nlm dkmkhlm macnlm, w
gbái úqanym pbytki yi yn dtymyiqy ma my bmktki; dytl qtabipki krltk, dlt
dygkhlm hy nkm cyiqym, nk dytyek, nk lgalmahkh, nk cbnk w yn tycknl.

-ymgkdkhl my ilm rk ibymqtl rbémdyh -haol k ymqk mkeói yiqty mí hli
nltyiel-, dytl, gli qlhl yml, én ym nlgl faekttl, w wl mytík xyiqygkql
pnlol ma kmí il nl gtywymy.

kubí haytli pai k mb dnáqagk, dltuby nlm nnkxktli k glxyt. dtycbiqó hli
haycl k mb raol ubé rkfík mkgkhl yi naxdal hyn aicyial hyn rbémdyh. k nl
uby én tymdlihaó:

-il ny mkgktái hyn flttkhlt hy mb nlgbtk gbkiqlm xéhaglm w fbyilm
ymgtafkilm qayiy yn xbihl: én ym bi yiqtyvytkhl nlgl, nnyil hy núgahlm
aiqytvknlm.

pbétlimy k glxyt, w nk glxahk pby qkn glxl hli haycl rkfík hagrl yi yn
gkxail uby nk mlník hkt k mbm glivahkhlm: naxdak, kfbihkiqy w mkftlmk; dytl
hy nl uby xám my gliqyiqó hli ubaolqy pby hyn xktkvannlml manyigal uby yi
qlhk nk gkmk rkfík, uby myxyokfk bi xlikmqytal hy gktqbolm. nyvkiqkhlm,
dbym, nlm xkiqynym, w hkhkm ctkgakm k halm w kcbk k nkm xkilm, hli
ubaolqy dahaó kraigkhkxyiqy k hli nltyiel haoymy nlm vytmlm hy nk obmqk
naqytktak; k nl uby én tymdlihaó uby, dlt il dktygyt hy kubynnlm dlyqkm uby
gbkihl nym tbycki hacki mbm vytmlm nlm iaycki w gbkihl il my nlm dahyi nlm
vlxaqki,...

-...wl haté xa cnlmk, hy nk gbkn il ymdytl dtyxal kncbil, uby mónl dlt
yoytgaqkt yn aicyial nk ry rygrl.

-bi kxacl w hamgtyql -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- ytk hy dktygyt uby il my rkfík
hy gkimkt ikhay yi cnlmkt vytmlm; w nk tkeói, hygík én, ytk uby okxám nk
cnlmk dlhík nnyckt kn qyzql, w uby xbgrkm l nkm xám vygym afk nk cnlmk
pbytk hy nk aiqyigaói w dtldómaql hy nl uby dyhík nl uby my cnlmkfk; w xám,
uby nkm nywym hy nk cnlmk ytki hyxkmakhkxyiqy ymqtygrkm: uby il mbptíki
aiqyttlckiqym, ia haol, ia haté, ia rkgyt ilxftym hy vytflm, ia xbhkt yn
myiqahl, gli lqtkm kqkhbtkm w ymqtygryekm gli uby vki kqkhlm nlm uby
cnlmki, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hyfy hy mkfyt.

-vythkhytkxyiqy, myñlt hli ubaolqy -haol hli nltyiel-, uby hymyl glcyt k
vbymqtk xytgyh yi bi xkn nkqíi gliqaibkhl, w il dbyhl, dltuby my xy hymnaek
hy yiqty nkm xkilm glxl kicbank.

-il yiqayihl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- nl uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy ia ubayty
hygat yi yml hyn hymnaektxy.

-wl xy hkté k yiqyihyt -tymdlihaó hli nltyiel-; w dlt krltk ymqé vbymk
xytgyh kqyiql k nlm vytmlm cnlmkhlm w k nk cnlmk, uby hagyi hymqk xkiytk:

   ¡ma xa pby qltikmy k ym,
   mai ymdytkt xám mytá,
   l vaiaymy yn qayxdl wk
   hy nl uby mytá hymdbém...!

cnlmk

   kn pai, glxl qlhl dkmk,
   my dkmó yn fayi uby xy hal
   pltqbik, bi qayxdl il ymgkmk,
   w ibigk xy ny vlnvaó,
   ia kfbihkiqy, ia dlt qkmk.
   macnlm rk wk uby xy vyym,
   pltqbik, dbymql k qbm daym;
   vbénvyxy k myt vyiqbtlml,
   uby mytá xa myt hagrlml
   ma xa pby qltikmy k ym.
   il ubaytl lqtl cbmql l cnltak,
   lqtk dknxk l vyigaxayiql,
   lqtl qtabipl, lqtk vaqltak,
   mail vlnvyt kn gliqyiql
   uby ym dymkt yi xa xyxltak.
   ma qú xy vbynvym knná,
   pltqbik, qyxdnkhl ymqá
   qlhl yn taclt hy xa pbycl,
   w xám ma ymqy fayi ym nbycl,
   mai ymdytkt xám mytá.
   glmkm axdlmafnym dahl,
   dbym vlnvyt yn qayxdl k myt
   hymdbém uby bik vye rk mahl,
   il rkw yi nk qayttk dlhyt
   uby k qkiql my rkwk ymqyihahl.
   gltty yn qayxdl, vbynk w vk
   nacytl, w il vlnvytá,
   w yttktík yn uby dahaymy,
   l uby yn qayxdl wk my pbymy,
   l vlnvaymy yn qayxdl wk.
   vavl yi dytdnyok vahk,
   wk ymdytkihl, wk qyxayihl:
   ym xbytqy xbw glilgahk,
   w ym xbgrl xyolt xbtayihl
   fbmgkt kn hlnlt mknahk.
   k xí xy pbytk aiqytém
   kgkfkt, xkm il nl ym,
   dbym, gli hamgbtml xyolt,
   xy hk nk vahk yn qyxlt
   hy nl uby mytá hymdbém.

yi kgkfkihl hy hygat mb cnlmk hli nltyiel, my nyvkiqó yi day hli ubaolqy,
w, yi vle nyvkiqkhk, uby dktygík ctaql, kmayihl gli mb xkil nk hytygrk hy
hli nltyiel, haol:

-¡vavyi nlm gaynlm hlihy xám knqlm ymqái, xkigyfl cyiytlml, uby mlam yn
xyolt dlyqk hyn ltfy, w uby xytygéam ymqkt nkbtykhl, il dlt gradty ia dlt
ckyqk, glxl haol bi dlyqk, uby halm dythliy, mail dlt nkm kgkhyxakm hy
kqyikm, ma rlw vavaytki, w dlt nkm uby rlw vavyi hy dktím, flnliak w
mknkxkigk! dnyck kn gaynl uby nlm obygym uby lm ubaqktyi yn dtyxal dtaxytl,
pyfl nlm kmkyqyy w nkm xbmkm okxám kqtkvaymyi nlm bxftknym hy mbm gkmkm.
hygahxy, myñlt, ma mlam mytvahl, kncbilm vytmlm xkwltym, uby ubaytl qlxkt
hy qlhl yi qlhl yn dbnml k vbymqtl khxatkfny aicyial.

¿il ym fbyil uby hagyi uby my rlncó hli nltyiel hy vytmy knkfkt hy hli
ubaolqy, kbiuby ny qyiík dlt nlgl? ¡lr pbytek hy nk khbnkgaói, k gbáiql qy
ymqayihym, w gbái hankqkhlm níxaqym mli nlm hy qb obtahagaói kctkhkfny!
ymqk vythkh kgtyhaqó hli nltyiel, dbym gligyhaó gli nk hyxkihk w hymyl hy
hli ubaolqy, hagaéihlny ymqy mliyql k nk páfbnk l ramqltak hy dítkxl w
qamfy:

mliyql

   yn xbtl tlxdy nk hligynnk rytxlmk
   uby hy dítkxl kftaó yn cknnkthl dygrl:
   dktqy yn kxlt hy gradty, w vk hytygrl
   k vyt nk ubayftk ymqtygrk w dtlhacalmk.
   rkfnk yn manyigal knní, dltuby il lmk
   nk vle yiqtkt dlt qki ymqtygrl ymqtygrl;
   nkm knxkm mí, uby kxlt mbyny hy rygrl
   pkganaqkt nk xám hapígan glmk.
   mknaó yn hymyl hy glxdám, w yn dkml
   hy nk axdtbhyiqy vatcyi mlnagaqk
   dlt mb cbmql mb xbytqy; vyh ubé ramqltak:
   uby k yiqtkxflm yi bi dbiql, ¡lr ymqtkñl gkml!,
   nlm xkqk, nlm yigbfty w tymbgaqk
   bik ymdkhk, bi mydbngtl, bik xyxltak.

-¡fyihaql myk halm! -haol hli ubaolqy rkfayihl líhl yn mliyql k hli
nltyiel-, uby yiqty nlm aipaiaqlm dlyqkm glimbxahlm uby rkw, ry vamql bi
glimbxkhl dlyqk, glxl nl ym vbymk xytgyh, myñlt xíl; uby kmí xy nl hk k
yiqyihyt yn ktqapagal hymqy mliyql.

gbkqtl híkm ymqbvl hli ubaolqy tycknkhímaxl yi nk gkmk hy hli haycl, kn
gkfl hy nlm gbknym ny dahaó nagyigak dktk atmy, hagaéihlny uby ny kctkhygík
nk xytgyh w fbyi qtkqkxayiql uby yi mb gkmk rkfík tygyfahl; dytl uby, dlt
il dktygyt fayi uby nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym my hyi xbgrkm rltkm k lgal w kn
tycknl, my ubytík at k gbxdnat gli mb lpagal, fbmgkihl nkm kvyiqbtkm, hy
ubayi qyiík ilqagak uby kubynnk qayttk kfbihkfk, hlihy ymdytkfk yiqtyqyiyt
yn qayxdl rkmqk uby nnyckmy yn hík hy nkm obmqkm hy ektkclek, uby ytk yn hy
mb hytygrk hyttlqk; w uby dtaxytl rkfík hy yiqtkt yi nk gbyvk hy
xliqymailm, hy ubayi qkiqkm w qki khxatkfnym glmkm yi kubynnlm gliqltilm my
gliqkfki, mkfayihl y aiubatayihl kmaxamxl yn ikgaxayiql w vythkhytlm
xkikiqaknym hy nkm mayqy nkcbikm nnkxkhkm glxúixyiqy hy tbahytk.

hli haycl w mb raol ny knkfktli mb rlitlmk hyqytxaikgaói, w ny haoytli uby
qlxkmy hy mb gkmk w hy mb rkgayihk qlhl nl uby yi ctkhl ny vaiaymy, uby ny
mytvatíki gli nk vlnbiqkh dlmafny; uby k ynnl nym lfnackfk yn vknlt hy mb
dytmlik w nk rlitlmk dtlpymaói mbwk.

nnycómy, yi pai, yn hík hy mb dktqahk, qki knycty dktk hli ubaolqy glxl
qtamqy w kgakcl dktk mkigrl dkiek, uby my rknnkfk xbw fayi gli nk
kfbihkigak hy nk gkmk hy hli haycl, w tyrbmkfk hy vlnvyt k nk rkxfty uby my
bmk yi nkm pnltymqkm, hymdlfnkhlm, w k nk ymqtygryek hy mbm xkn dtlvyíhkm
knpltokm. gli qlhl ymql, nkm nnyió w glnxó hy nl xám iygymktal uby ny
dktygaó; w kn hymdyhatmy haol hli ubaolqy k hli nltyiel:

-il mé ma ry hagrl k vbymk xytgyh lqtk vye, w ma nl ry hagrl nl vbynvl k
hygat, uby gbkihl vbymk xytgyh ubamayty krlttkt gkxailm w qtkfkolm dktk
nnyckt k nk aikgymafny gbxfty hyn qyxdnl hy nk pkxk, il qayiy uby rkgyt
lqtk glmk mail hyokt k bik dktqy nk myihk hy nk dlymík, kncl ymqtygrk, w
qlxkt nk ymqtygrímaxk hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, fkmqkiqy dktk rkgytny
yxdytkhlt yi hkgk nkm dkokm.

gli ymqkm tkeliym kgkfó hli ubaolqy hy gyttkt yn dtlgyml hy mb nlgbtk, w
xám gli nkm uby kñkhaó, hagayihl:

-mkfy halm ma ubamaytk nnyvkt glixacl kn myñlt hli nltyiel, dktk yimyñktny
góxl my rki hy dythlikt nlm mboyqlm, w mbdyhaqkt w kglgykt nlm mlfytfalm,
vatqbhym kiyokm k nk dtlpymaói uby wl dtlpyml; dytl, dbym il nl dahy mb
dlgk yhkh, ia nl ubyttái glimyiqat mbm nlkfnym yoytgagalm, mónl xy gliqyiql
gli khvytqatny k vbymk xytgyh uby, mayihl dlyqk, dlhtá myt pkxlml ma my
cbík xám dlt yn dktygyt koyil uby dlt yn dtldal, dltuby il rkw dkhty ia
xkhty k ubayi mbm raolm ny dktyegki pylm, w yi nlm uby nl mli hyn
yiqyihaxayiql gltty xám ymqy yickñl.

hy ibyvl my khxatktli dkhty w raol hy nkm yiqtyxyqahkm tkeliym hy hli
ubaolqy, wk hamgtyqkm w wk hamdktkqkhkm, w hyn qyxk w qymói uby nnyvkfk hy
kgbhat hy qlhl yi qlhl k nk fbmgk hy mbm hymvyiqbtkhkm kvyiqbtkm, uby nkm
qyiík dlt pai w fnkigl hy mbm hymylm. tyaqytátlimy nlm lptygaxayiqlm w
glxyhaxayiqlm, w, gli nk fbyik nagyigak hy nk myñltk hyn gkmqannl, hli
ubaolqy w mkigrl, mlfty tlgaikiqy w yn tbgal, my dktqaytli.





gkdíqbnl zaz. hlihy my gbyiqk nk kvyiqbtk hyn dkmqlt yikxltkhl, gli lqtlm
yi vythkh ctkgalmlm mbgymlm


dlgl qtygrl my rkfík knlickhl hli ubaolqy hyn nbckt hy hli haycl, gbkihl
yigliqtó gli hlm glxl gnétaclm l glxl ymqbhakiqym w gli hlm nkftkhltym uby
mlfty gbkqtl fymqakm kmiknym vyiíki gkfknnytlm. yn bil hy nlm ymqbhakiqym
qtkík, glxl yi dltqkxkiqyl, yi bi nayiel hy flgkgí vythy yivbynql, kn
dktygyt, bi dlgl hy ctkik fnkigk w hlm dktym hy xyhakm hy glthynnkqy; yn
lqtl il qtkík lqtk glmk uby hlm ymdkhkm iyctkm hy ymctaxk, ibyvkm, w gli
mbm ekdkqannkm. nlm nkftkhltym qtkíki lqtkm glmkm, uby hkfki aihagal w
myñkn uby vyiíki hy kncbik vannk ctkihy, hlihy nkm rkfíki glxdtkhl, w nkm
nnyvkfki k mb knhyk; w kmí ymqbhakiqym glxl nkftkhltym gkwytli yi nk xamxk
khxatkgaói yi uby gkíki qlhlm kubynnlm uby nk vye dtaxytk vyíki k hli
ubaolqy, w xltíki dlt mkfyt ubé rlxfty pbymy kubén qki pbytk hyn bml hy nlm
lqtlm rlxftym.

mknbhónym hli ubaolqy, w, hymdbém hy mkfyt yn gkxail uby nnyvkfki, uby ytk
yn xymxl uby én rkgík, nym lptygaó mb glxdkñík, w nym dahaó hyqbvaymyi yn
dkml, dltuby gkxaikfki xám mbm dlnnaikm uby mb gkfknnl; w, dktk lfnacktnlm,
yi ftyvym tkeliym nym haol ubaéi ytk, w mb lpagal w dtlpymaói, uby ytk hy
gkfknnytl kihkiqy uby afk k fbmgkt nkm kvyiqbtkm dlt qlhkm nkm dktqym hyn
xbihl. híolnym uby my nnkxkfk hy ilxfty dtldal hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, w
dlt yn kdynkqavl, yn gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym. qlhl ymql dktk nlm nkftkhltym
ytk rkfnktnym yi ctaycl l yi oytacliek, dytl il dktk nlm ymqbhakiqym, uby
nbycl yiqyihaytli nk pnkubyek hyn gynyftl hy hli ubaolqy; dytl, gli qlhl
yml, ny xatkfki gli khxatkgaói w gli tymdygql, w bil hynnlm ny haol:

-ma vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, il nnyvk gkxail hyqytxaikhl, glxl il
ny mbynyi nnyvkt nlm uby fbmgki nkm kvyiqbtkm, vbymk xytgyh my vyick gli
ilmlqtlm: vytá bik hy nkm xyoltym flhkm w xám tagkm uby rkmqk yn hík hy rlw
my rkftái gynyftkhl yi nk xkigrk, ia yi lqtkm xbgrkm nycbkm k nk tyhlihk.

dtycbiqóny hli ubaolqy ma ytki hy kncúi dtíigady, uby kmí nkm dlihytkfk.

-il mli -tymdlihaó yn ymqbhakiqy- mail hy bi nkftkhlt w bik nkftkhltk: én,
yn xám tagl hy qlhk ymqk qayttk; w ynnk, nk xám rytxlmk uby rki vamql nlm
rlxftym. yn kdktkql gli uby my rki hy rkgyt ym ymqtklthaiktal w ibyvl,
dltuby my rki hy gynyftkt yi bi dtkhl uby ymqá obiql kn dbyfnl hy nk ilvak,
k ubayi dlt yzgynyigak nnkxki ubaqytak nk rytxlmk, w yn hymdlmkhl my nnkxk
gkxkgrl yn tagl; ynnk hy yhkh hy haye w lgrl kñlm, w én hy vyaiqy w hlm;
kxflm dktk yi bil, kbiuby kncbilm gbtalmlm uby qayiyi hy xyxltak nlm
naikoym hy qlhl yn xbihl ubaytyi hygat uby yn hy nk rytxlmk ubaqytak my
kvyiqkok kn hy gkxkgrl; dytl wk il my xatk yi ymql, uby nkm taubyekm mli
dlhytlmkm hy mlnhkt xbgrkm ubayftkm. yi ypygql, yn qkn gkxkgrl ym nafytkn w
rámyny kiqlokhl hy yitkxkt w gbftat qlhl yn dtkhl dlt kttafk, hy qkn mbytqy
uby yn mln my rk hy vyt yi qtkfkol ma ubayty yiqtkt k vamaqkt nkm wytfkm
vythym hy uby ymqá gbfaytql yn mbynl. qayiy kmaxymxl xkrytahkm hkiekm, kmí
hy ymdkhkm glxl hy gkmgkfyn xyibhl, uby rkw yi mb dbyfnl ubayi nlm tydauby
w mkgbhk dlt ymqtyxl; hy ekdkqykhltym il hacl ikhk, uby ym bi obagal nlm
uby qayiy xbñahlm; dytl iaicbik hy nkm glmkm typytahkm ia lqtkm xbgrkm uby
ry hyokhl hy typytat rk hy rkgyt xám xyxltkfnym ymqkm flhkm, mail nkm uby
axkcail uby rktá yi ynnkm yn hymdygrkhl fkmanal. ym ymqy fkmanal bi ekckn
vygail hyn xymxl nbckt hy ubaqytak, yn gbkn qyiík mb gkmk dktyh w xyhal hy
nk hy nlm dkhtym hy ubaqytak, hy hlihy qlxó lgkmaói yn kxlt hy tyilvkt kn
xbihl nlm wk lnvahkhlm kxltym hy dítkxl w qamfy, dltuby fkmanal my yikxltó
hy ubaqytak hymhy mbm qaytilm w dtaxytlm kñlm, w ynnk pby glttymdlihayihl k
mb hymyl gli xan rliymqlm pkvltym, qkiql, uby my gliqkfki dlt
yiqtyqyiaxayiql yi yn dbyfnl nlm kxltym hy nlm hlm iañlm fkmanal w
ubaqytak. pby gtygayihl nk yhkh, w kglthó yn dkhty hy ubaqytak hy ymqltfkt
k fkmanal nk lthaiktak yiqtkhk uby yi mb gkmk qyiík; w, dlt ubaqktmy hy
kihkt tygynlml w nnyil hy mlmdygrkm, lthyió hy gkmkt k mb raok gli yn tagl
gkxkgrl, il dktygaéihlny myt fayi gkmktnk gli fkmanal, uby il qyiík qkiqlm
fayiym hy pltqbik glxl hy ikqbtknyek; dbym ma vk k hygat nkm vythkhym mai
aivahak, én ym yn xám ácan xkigyfl uby glilgyxlm: ctki qatkhlt hy fkttk,
nbgrkhlt ymqtyxkhl w ctki obckhlt hy dynlqk; gltty glxl bi ckxl, mknqk xám
uby bik gkftk w fatnk k nlm flnlm glxl dlt yigkiqkxyiql; gkiqk glxl bik
gknkihtak, w qlgk bik cbaqkttk, uby nk rkgy rkfnkt, w, mlfty qlhl, obyck
bik ymdkhk glxl yn xám daiqkhl.

-dlt ymk mlnk ctkgak -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, xytygík ymy xkigyfl
il mónl gkmktmy gli nk rytxlmk ubaqytak, mail gli nk xymxk tyaik caiyftk,
ma pbytk rlw vavk, k dymkt hy nkiektlqy w hy qlhlm kubynnlm uby ymqltfktnl
ubamaytki.

-¡k xa xboyt gli yml! -haol mkigrl dkiek, uby rkmqk yiqligym rkfík ahl
gknnkihl w ymgbgrkihl-, nk gbkn il ubayty mail uby gkhk bil gkmy gli mb
acbkn, kqyiaéihlmy kn typtái uby hagyi "gkhk lvyok gli mb dktyok". nl uby
wl ubamaytk ym uby ymy fbyi fkmanal, uby wk xy ny vlw kpagalikihl, my
gkmktk gli ymk myñltk ubaqytak; uby fbyi macnl rkwki w fbyi dlml, afk k
hygat kn tyvém, nlm uby ymqltfki uby my gkmyi nlm uby fayi my ubaytyi.

-ma qlhlm nlm uby fayi my ubaytyi my rbfaymyi hy gkmkt -haol hli ubaolqy-,
ubaqktíkmy nk ynygaói w obtahagaói k nlm dkhtym hy gkmkt mbm raolm gli
ubayi w gbkihl hyfyi; w ma k nk vlnbiqkh hy nkm raokm ubyhkmy ymglcyt nlm
xktahlm, qkn rkftík uby ymglcaymy kn gtakhl hy mb dkhty, w qkn kn uby val
dkmkt dlt nk gknny, k mb dktygyt, faekttl w yiqlikhl, kbiuby pbymy bi
hymfktkqkhl ymdkhkgríi; uby yn kxlt w nk kpagaói gli pkganahkh gaycki nlm
lolm hyn yiqyihaxayiql, qki iygymktalm dktk ymglcyt ymqkhl, w yn hyn
xkqtaxlial ymqá xbw k dynactl hy yttktmy, w ym xyiymqyt ctki qayiql w
dktqagbnkt pkvlt hyn gaynl dktk kgytqktny. ubayty rkgyt bil bi vakoy nktcl,
w ma ym dtbhyiqy, kiqym hy dliytmy yi gkxail fbmgk kncbik glxdkñík mycbtk w
kdkgafny gli ubayi kglxdkñktmy; dbym, ¿dlt ubé il rktá nl xymxl yn uby rk
hy gkxaikt qlhk nk vahk, rkmqk yn dktkhytl hy nk xbytqy, w xám ma nk
glxdkñík ny rk hy kglxdkñkt yi nk gkxk, yi nk xymk w yi qlhkm dktqym, glxl
ym nk hy nk xboyt gli mb xktahl? nk hy nk dtldak xboyt il ym xytgkhbtík uby
bik vye glxdtkhk my vbynvy, l my qtbygk l gkxfak, dltuby ym kggahyiqy
aimydktkfny, uby hbtk nl uby hbtk nk vahk: ym bi nkel uby ma bik vye ny
ygráam kn gbynnl, my vbynvy yi yn ibhl clthakil, uby ma il ny gltqk nk
cbkhkñk hy nk xbytqy, il rkw hymkqktny. xbgrkm xám glmkm dbhaytk hygat yi
ymqk xkqytak, ma il nl ymqltfktk yn hymyl uby qyicl hy mkfyt ma ny ubyhk
xám uby hygat kn myñlt nagyigakhl kgytgk hy nk ramqltak hy fkmanal.

k nl uby tymdlihaó yn ymqbhakiqy fkgrannyt, l nagyigakhl, glxl ny nnkxó hli
ubaolqy, uby:

-hy qlhl il xy ubyhk xám uby hygat mail uby hymhy yn dbiql uby fkmanal mbdl
uby nk rytxlmk ubaqytak my gkmkfk gli gkxkgrl yn tagl, ibigk xám ny rki
vamql tyít ia rkfnkt tkeói gligytqkhk, w mayxdty kihk dyimkqavl w qtamqy,
rkfnkihl yiqty mí xamxl, gli uby hk gaytqkm w gnktkm myñknym hy uby my ny
rk vbynql yn obagal: glxy dlgl w hbytxy dlgl, w nl uby glxy mli ptbqkm, w
yi nl uby hbytxy, ma hbytxy, ym yi yn gkxdl, mlfty nk hbtk qayttk, glxl
kiaxkn ftbql; xatk hy gbkihl yi gbkihl kn gaynl, w lqtkm vygym gnkvk nlm
lolm yi nk qayttk, gli qkn yxfynymkxayiql, uby il dktygy mail ymqkqbk
vymqahk uby yn katy ny xbyvy nk tldk. yi pai, én hk qknym xbymqtkm hy qyiyt
kdkmalikhl yn gltkeói, uby qyxyxlm qlhlm nlm uby ny glilgyxlm uby yn hkt yn
mí xkñkik nk rytxlmk ubaqytak rk hy myt nk myiqyigak hy mb xbytqy.

-halm nl rktá xyolt -haol mkigrl-; uby halm, uby hk nk nnkck, hk nk
xyhagaik; ikhay mkfy nl uby ymqá dlt vyiat: hy kubí k xkñkik xbgrkm rltkm
rkw, w yi bik, w kbi yi bi xlxyiql, my gky nk gkmk; wl ry vamql nnlvyt w
rkgyt mln, qlhl k bi xymxl dbiql; qkn my kgbymqk mkil nk ilgry, uby il my
dbyhy xlvyt lqtl hík. w híckixy, ¿dlt vyiqbtk rkftá ubayi my knkfy uby
qayiy ygrkhl bi gnkvl k nk tlhkok hy nk pltqbik? il, dlt gaytql; w yiqty yn
mí w yn il hy nk xboyt il xy kqtyvytík wl k dliyt bik dbiqk hy knpanyt,
dltuby il gkftík. hyixy k xí uby ubaqytak ubaytk hy fbyi gltkeói w hy fbyik
vlnbiqkh k fkmanal, uby wl ny hkté k én bi mkgl hy fbyik vyiqbtk: uby yn
kxlt, mycúi wl ry líhl hygat, xatk gli bilm kiqlolm uby rkgyi dktygyt ltl
kn glfty, k nk dlftyek taubyek, w k nkm nkckñkm dytnkm.

-¿khóihy vkm k dktkt, mkigrl, uby mykm xknhaql? -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby
gbkihl glxayiekm k yimktqkt typtkiym w gbyiqlm, il qy dbyhy ymdytkt mail yn
xymxl obhkm, uby qy nnyvy. haxy, kiaxkn, ¿ubé mkfym qú hy gnkvlm, ia hy
tlhkokm, ia hy lqtk glmk iaicbik?

-¡lr! dbym ma il xy yiqayihyi -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, il ym xktkvannk uby xam
myiqyigakm myki qyiahkm dlt hamdktkqym. dytl il axdltqk: wl xy yiqayihl, w
mé uby il ry hagrl xbgrkm iygyhkhym yi nl uby ry hagrl; mail uby vbymk
xytgyh, myñlt xíl, mayxdty ym ptamgkn hy xam hagrlm, w kbi hy xam rygrlm.

-pamgkn rkm hy hygat -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby il ptamgkn, dtyvktagkhlt hyn
fbyi nyicbkoy, uby halm qy glipbihk.

-il my kdbiqy vbymqtk xytgyh glixacl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dbym mkfy uby il
xy ry gtakhl yi nk gltqy, ia ry ymqbhakhl yi mknkxkigk, dktk mkfyt ma kñkhl
l ubaql kncbik nyqtk k xam vlgkfnlm. mí, uby, ¡vánckxy halm!, il rkw dktk
ubé lfnackt kn mkwkcbém k uby rkfny glxl yn qlnyhkil, w qlnyhkilm dbyhy
rkfyt uby il nkm gltqyi yi yn katy yi ymql hyn rkfnkt dlnahl.

-kmí ym -haol yn nagyigakhl-, dltuby il dbyhyi rkfnkt qki fayi nlm uby my
gtíki yi nkm qyiytíkm w yi elglhlvyt glxl nlm uby my dkmyki gkma qlhl yn
hík dlt yn gnkbmqtl hy nk acnymak xkwlt, w qlhlm mli qlnyhkilm. yn nyicbkoy
dbtl, yn dtldal, yn ynyckiqy w gnktl, ymqá yi nlm hamgtyqlm gltqymkilm,
kbiuby rkwki ikgahl yi xkoknkrlihk: haoy hamgtyqlm dltuby rkw xbgrlm uby il
nl mli, w nk hamgtygaói ym nk ctkxáqagk hyn fbyi nyicbkoy, uby my kglxdkñk
gli yn bml. wl, myñltym, dlt xam dygkhlm, ry ymqbhakhl gáiliym yi
mknkxkigk, w díglxy kncúi qkiql hy hygat xa tkeói gli dknkftkm gnktkm,
nnkikm w maciapagkiqym.

-ma il lm dagátyhym xám hy mkfyt xám xyiykt nkm iyctkm uby nnyváam uby nk
nyicbk -haol yn lqtl ymqbhakiqy-, vlm nnyvátkhym yn dtaxytl yi nagyigakm,
glxl nnyvkmqym glnk.

-xatkh, fkgrannyt -tymdlihaó yn nagyigakhl-: vlm ymqáam yi nk xám yttkhk
ldaiaói hyn xbihl kgytgk hy nk hymqtyek hy nk ymdkhk, qyiaéihlnk dlt vkik.

-dktk xí il ym ldaiaói, mail vythkh kmyiqkhk -tydnagó gltgrbynl-; w ma
ubytéam uby lm nl xbymqty gli nk yzdytayigak, ymdkhkm qtkéam, glxlhahkh
rkw, wl dbnmlm w pbytekm qyicl, uby kglxdkñkhkm hy xa áiaxl, uby il ym
dlgl, lm rktái glipymkt uby wl il xy yickñl. kdyklm, w bmkh hy vbymqtl
glxdám hy daym, hy vbymqtlm gítgbnlm w vbymqtlm áicbnlm w gayigak; uby wl
ymdytl hy rkgytlm vyt ymqtynnkm k xyhalhík gli xa hymqtyek xlhytik w ekpak,
yi ubayi ymdytl, hymdbém hy halm, uby ymqá dlt ikgyt rlxfty uby xy rkck
vlnvyt nkm ymdknhkm, w uby il ny rkw yi yn xbihl k ubayi wl il ny rkck
dythyt qayttk.

-yi yml hy vlnvyt, l il, nkm ymdknhkm il xy xyql -tydnagl yn haymqtl-;
kbiuby dlhtík myt uby yi nk dktqy hlihy nk vye dtaxytk gnkvámyhym yn day,
knní lm kftaymyi nk mydbnqbtk: ubaytl hygat uby knní ubyhámyhym xbytql dlt
nk hymdtygakhk hymqtyek.

-krltk my vytá -tymdlihaó gltgrbynl.

w, kdyáihlmy gli ctki dtymqyek hy mb obxyiql, qató gli pbtak hy bik hy nkm
ymdkhkm uby nnyvkfk yn nagyigakhl yi yn mbwl.

-il rk hy myt kmí -haol k ymqy aimqkiqy hli ubaolqy-, uby wl ubaytl myt yn
xkymqtl hymqk ymctaxk, w yn obye hymqk xbgrkm vygym il kvytacbkhk gbymqaói.

w, kdyáihlmy hy tlgaikiqy w kmayihl hy mb nkiek, my dbml yi nk xaqkh hyn
gkxail, k qayxdl uby wk yn nagyigakhl, gli cyiqan hlikaty hy gbytdl w
glxdám hy daym, my afk gliqtk gltgrbynl, uby gliqtk én my vail, nkiekihl,
glxl hygatmy mbyny, pbycl dlt nlm lolm. nlm lqtlm hlm nkftkhltym hyn
kglxdkñkxayiql, mai kdyktmy hy mbm dlnnaikm, matvaytli hy kmdyqkqltym yi nk
xltqkn qtkcyhak. nkm gbgrannkhkm, ymqlgkhkm, knqafkolm, tyvymym w xkihlfnym
uby qatkfk gltgrbynl ytki mai iúxytl, xám ymdymkm uby ríckhl w xám xyibhkm
uby ctkiael. kttyxyqík glxl bi nyói attaqkhl, dytl mkníkny kn yigbyiqtl bi
qkdkflgk hy nk ekdkqannk hy nk ymdkhk hyn nagyigakhl, uby yi xaqkh hy mb
pbtak ny hyqyiík, w my nk rkgík fymkt glxl ma pbytk tynaubak, kbiuby il gli
qkiqk hyvlgaói glxl nkm tynaubakm hyfyi w mbynyi fymktmy.

paiknxyiqy, yn nagyigakhl ny gliqó k ymqlgkhkm qlhlm nlm flqliym hy bik
xyhak mlqkiannk uby qtkík vymqahk, rkgaéihlny qatkm nlm pknhkxyiqlm, glxl
glnkm hy dbndl; hyttafóny yn mlxftytl hlm vygym, w gkimóny hy xkiytk uby hy
hymdygrl, gónytk w tkfak kmaó nk ymdkhk dlt nk yxdbñkhbtk, w kttloónk dlt
yn katy gli qkiqk pbytek, uby bil hy nlm nkftkhltym kmamqyiqym, uby ytk
ymgtafkil, uby pby dlt ynnk, hal hymdbém dlt qymqaxlial uby nk knlicó hy mí
gkma qtym gbktqlm hy nycbk; yn gbkn qymqaxlial matvy w rk mytvahl dktk uby
my glilegk w vyk gli qlhk vythkh góxl nk pbytek ym vyigahk hyn ktqy.

myiqómy gkimkhl gltgrbynl, w nnycáihlmy k én mkigrl, ny haol:

-xík py, myñlt fkgrannyt, ma vbymk xytgyh qlxk xa glimyol, hy kubí khynkiqy
il rk hy hymkpakt k ikhay k ymctaxat, mail k nbgrkt l k qatkt nk fkttk,
dbym qayiy yhkh w pbytekm dktk ynnl; uby hymqlm k ubayi nnkxki haymqtlm ry
líhl hygat uby xyqyi bik dbiqk hy bik ymdkhk dlt yn lol hy bik kcbok.

-wl xy gliqyiql -tymdlihaó gltgrbynl- hy rkfyt gkíhl hy xa fbttk, w hy uby
xy rkwk xlmqtkhl nk yzdytayigak nk vythkh, hy ubayi qki nyolm ymqkfk.

w, nyvkiqáihlmy, kftkeó kn nagyigakhl, w ubyhktli xám kxaclm uby hy kiqym,
w il ubytayihl ymdytkt kn ymgtafkil, uby rkfík ahl dlt nk ymdkhk, dlt
dktygytny uby qkthktík xbgrl; w kmí, hyqytxaiktli mycbat, dlt nnyckt
qyxdtkil k nk knhyk hy ubaqytak, hy hlihy qlhlm ytki.

yi nl uby pknqkfk hyn gkxail, nym pby gliqkihl yn nagyigakhl nkm
yzgynyigakm hy nk ymdkhk, gli qkiqkm tkeliym hyxlmqtkqavkm w gli qkiqkm
pacbtkm w hyxlmqtkgaliym xkqyxáqagkm, uby qlhlm ubyhktli yiqytkhlm hy nk
flihkh hy nk gayigak, w gltgrbynl tyhbgahl hy mb dytqaikgak.

ytk kilgrygahl, dytl kiqym uby nnyckmyi nym dktygaó k qlhlm uby ymqkfk
hynkiqy hyn dbyfnl bi gaynl nnyil hy aibxytkfnym w tymdnkihygayiqym
ymqtynnkm. lwytli, kmaxamxl, glipbmlm w mbkvym mliahlm hy havytmlm
aimqtbxyiqlm, glxl hy pnkbqkm, qkxfltailm, mknqytalm, knflcbym, dkihytlm w
mlikokm; w gbkihl nnycktli gytgk vaytli uby nlm átflnym hy bik yitkxkhk,
uby k xkil rkfíki dbymql k nk yiqtkhk hyn dbyfnl, ymqkfki qlhlm nnyilm hy
nbxaiktakm, k ubayi il lpyihík yn vayiql, uby yiqligym il mldnkfk mail qki
xkiml uby il qyiík pbytek dktk xlvyt nkm rlokm hy nlm átflnym. nlm xúmaglm
ytki nlm tyclgaokhltym hy nk flhk, uby yi havytmkm gbkhtannkm dlt kubyn
kctkhkfny maqal kihkfki, bilm fkankihl, w lqtlm gkiqkihl, w lqtlm qlgkihl
nk havytmahkh hy nlm typytahlm aimqtbxyiqlm. yi ypygql, il dktygík mail uby
dlt qlhl kubyn dtkhl kihkfk glttayihl nk knyctík w mknqkihl yn gliqyiql.

lqtlm xbgrlm kihkfki lgbdkhlm yi nyvkiqkt kihkxalm, hy hlihy gli glxlhahkh
dbhaymyi vyt lqtl hík nkm tydtymyiqkgaliym w hkiekm uby my rkfíki hy rkgyt
yi kubyn nbckt hyhagkhl dktk mlnyiaekt nkm flhkm hyn tagl gkxkgrl w nkm
yzyubakm hy fkmanal. il ubaml yiqtkt yi yn nbckt hli ubaolqy, kbiuby my nl
dahaytli kmí yn nkftkhlt glxl yn fkgrannyt; dytl én hal dlt hamgbndk,
fkmqkiqímaxk k mb dktygyt, myt glmqbxfty hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym hltxat
dlt nlm gkxdlm w pnltymqkm kiqym uby yi nlm dlfnkhlm, kbiuby pbymy hyfkol
hy hltkhlm qygrlm; w gli ymql, my hymvaó bi dlgl hyn gkxail, fayi gliqtk nk
vlnbiqkh hy mkigrl, vaiaéihlmyny k nk xyxltak yn fbyi knlokxayiql uby rkfík
qyiahl yi yn gkmqannl l gkmk hy hli haycl.





gkdíqbnl zz. hlihy my gbyiqki nkm flhkm hy gkxkgrl yn tagl, gli yn mbgyml
hy fkmanal yn dlfty


kdyikm nk fnkigk kbtltk rkfík hkhl nbckt k uby yn nbgayiqy pyfl, gli yn
kthlt hy mbm gknayiqym tkwlm, nkm níubahkm dytnkm hy mbm gkfynnlm hy ltl
yiobckmy, gbkihl hli ubaolqy, mkgbhayihl nk dytyek hy mbm xayxftlm, my dbml
yi day w nnkxó k mb ymgbhytl mkigrl, uby kúi qlhkvík tligkfk; nl gbkn vamql
dlt hli ubaolqy, kiqym uby ny hymdytqkmy, ny haol:

-¡lr qú, fayikvyiqbtkhl mlfty gbkiqlm vavyi mlfty nk rke hy nk qayttk, dbym
mai qyiyt aivahak ia myt aivahakhl, hbytxym gli mlmyckhl ymdítaqb, ia qy
dytmacbyi yigkiqkhltym, ia mlftymknqki yigkiqkxyiqlm! hbytxy, hacl lqtk
vye, w nl haté lqtkm gayiql, mai uby qy qyicki yi gliqaik vacanak gynlm hy
qb hkxk, ia qy hymvynyi dyimkxayiqlm hy dkckt hybhkm uby hyfkm, ia hy nl
uby rkm hy rkgyt dktk glxyt lqtl hík qú w qb dyubyñk w kicbmqakhk pkxanak.
ia nk kxfagaói qy aiubayqk, ia nk dlxdk vkik hyn xbihl qy pkqack, dbym nlm
níxaqym hy qbm hymylm il my ymqayihyi k xám uby k dyimkt qb obxyiql; uby yn
hy qb dytmlik mlfty xam rlxftlm ny qayiym dbymql: gliqtkdyml w gktck uby
dbml nk ikqbtknyek w nk glmqbxfty k nlm myñltym. hbytxy yn gtakhl, w ymqá
vynkihl yn myñlt, dyimkihl góxl ny rk hy mbmqyiqkt, xyoltkt w rkgyt
xytgyhym. nk gliclok hy vyt uby yn gaynl my rkgy hy ftligy mai kgbhat k nk
qayttk gli yn glivyiayiqy tlgíl il kpnacy kn gtakhl, mail kn myñlt, uby rk
hy mbmqyiqkt yi nk ymqytanahkh w rkxfty kn uby ny matvaó yi nk pytqanahkh w
kfbihkigak.

k qlhl ymql il tymdlihaó mkigrl, dltuby hltxík, ia hymdytqktk qki dtymql ma
hli ubaolqy gli yn gbyiql hy nk nkiek il ny ragayty vlnvyt yi mí. hymdytqó,
yi pai, mlñlnayiql w dytyelml, w, vlnvayihl yn tlmqtl k qlhkm dktqym, haol:

-hy nk dktqy hymqk yitkxkhk, ma il xy yickñl, mkny bi qbpl w lnlt rktql xám
hy qlttyeilm kmkhlm uby hy obiglm w qlxannlm: flhkm uby dlt qknym lnltym
glxayieki, dktk xa mkiqacbkhk uby hyfyi hy myt kfbihkiqym w cyiytlmkm.

-kgkfk, cnlqói -haol hli ubaolqy-; vyi, atyxlm k vyt ymqlm hymdlmltalm, dlt
vyt nl uby rkgy yn hymhyñkhl fkmanal.

-xkm uby rkck nl uby ubamayty -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: il pbytk én dlfty w
gkmátkmy gli ubaqytak. ¿il rkw xám mail qyiyt bi gbktql w ubytyt knektmy
dlt nkm ibfym? k nk py, myñlt, wl mlw hy dktygyt uby yn dlfty hyfy hy
gliqyiqktmy gli nl uby rknnkty, w il dyhat glqbpkm yi yn clnpl. wl kdlmqkté
bi ftkel uby dbyhy gkxkgrl yivlnvyt yi tyknym k fkmanal; w ma ymql ym kmí,
glxl hyfy hy myt, fayi flfk pbytk ubaqytak yi hymygrkt nkm cknkm w nkm
olwkm uby ny hyfy hy rkfyt hkhl, w ny dbyhy hkt gkxkgrl, dlt ymglcyt yn
qatkt hy nk fkttk w yn obckt hy nk iyctk hy fkmanal. mlfty bi fbyi qatl hy
fkttk l mlfty bik cyiqan qtyqk hy ymdkhk il hki bi gbktqannl hy vail yi nk
qkfytik. rkfanahkhym w ctkgakm uby il mli vyihafnym, xkm uby nkm qyick yn
glihy hatnlm; dytl, gbkihl nkm qknym ctkgakm gkyi mlfty ubayi qayiy fbyi
haiytl, qkn myk xa vahk glxl ynnkm dktygyi. mlfty bi fbyi gaxayiql my dbyhy
nyvkiqkt bi fbyi yhapagal, w yn xyolt gaxayiql w ekiok hyn xbihl ym yn
haiytl.

-dlt ubayi halm ym, mkigrl -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, uby glignbwkm
gli qb ktyick; uby qyicl dktk xí uby ma qy hyokmyi mycbat yi nkm uby k gkhk
dkml glxayiekm, il qy ubyhktík qayxdl dktk glxyt ia dktk hltxat, uby qlhl
ny ckmqktíkm yi rkfnkt.

-ma vbymqtk xytgyh qbvaytk fbyik xyxltak -tydnagó mkigrl-, hyfaétkmy
kglthkt hy nlm gkdíqbnlm hy ibymqtl gligaytql kiqym uby ymqk únqaxk vye
mknaémyxlm hy gkmk: bil hynnlm pby uby xy rkfík hy hyokt rkfnkt qlhl
kubynnl uby ubamaymy, gli uby il pbymy gliqtk yn dtóoaxl ia gliqtk nk
kbqltahkh hy vbymk xytgyh; w rkmqk kcltk xy dktygy uby il ry gliqtkvyiahl
gliqtk yn qkn gkdíqbnl.

-wl il xy kgbythl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, hyn qkn gkdíqbnl; w,
dbymql uby myk kmí, ubaytl uby gknnym w vyickm, uby wk nlm aimqtbxyiqlm uby
kilgry líxlm vbynvyi k knyctkt nlm vknnym, w mai hbhk nlm hymdlmltalm my
gynyftktái yi yn ptymglt hy nk xkñkik, w il yi yn gknlt hy nk qkthy.

rael mkigrl nl uby mb myñlt ny xkihkfk, w, dliayihl nk mannk k tlgaikiqy w
nk knfkthk kn tbgal, mbfaytli nlm hlm, w dkml kiqy dkml my pbytli yiqtkihl
dlt nk yitkxkhk.

nl dtaxytl uby my ny lptygaó k nk vamqk hy mkigrl pby, ymdyqkhl yi bi
kmkhlt hy bi lnxl yiqytl, bi yiqytl ilvannl; w yi yn pbycl hlihy my rkfík
hy kmkt kthík bi xyhakil xliqy hy nyñk, w myam lnnkm uby kntyhyhlt hy nk
rlcbytk ymqkfki il my rkfíki rygrl yi nk glxúi qbtubymk hy nkm hyxám lnnkm,
dltuby ytki myam xyhakm qaikokm, uby gkhk bik gkfík bi tkmqtl hy gktiy: kmí
yxfyfíki w yigyttkfki yi mí gktiytlm yiqytlm, mai ygrktmy hy vyt, glxl ma
pbytki dknlxailm; nkm nayftym wk mai dynnyol w nkm cknnaikm mai dnbxk uby
ymqkfki glnckhkm dlt nlm átflnym dktk mydbnqktnkm yi nkm lnnkm il qyiíki
iúxytl; nlm dáoktlm w gkek hy havytmlm céiytlm ytki aipaiaqlm, glnckhlm hy
nlm átflnym dktk uby yn katy nlm yiptakmy.

gliqó mkigrl xám hy mymyiqk ekubym hy xám hy k hlm kttlfkm gkhk bil, w
qlhlm nnyilm, mycúi hymdbém dktygaó, hy cyiytlmlm vailm; kmí rkfík taxytlm
hy dki fnkiubímaxl, glxl nlm mbyny rkfyt hy xliqliym hy qtacl yi nkm ytkm;
nlm ubymlm, dbymqlm glxl nkhtannlm yityokhlm, pltxkfki bik xbtknnk, w hlm
gknhytkm hy kgyaqy, xkwltym uby nkm hy bi qaiqy, mytvíki hy ptyít glmkm hy
xkmk, uby gli hlm vknayiqym dknkm nkm mkgkfki ptaqkm w nkm ekfbnníki yi
lqtk gknhytk hy dtydktkhk xayn uby knní obiql ymqkfk.

nlm glgaiytlm w glgaiytkm dkmkfki hy gaigbyiqk: qlhlm naxdalm, qlhlm
hanacyiqym w qlhlm gliqyiqlm. yi yn hankqkhl vayiqty hyn ilvannl ymqkfki
hlgy qaytilm w dyubyñlm nygrliym, uby, glmahlm dlt yigaxk, mytvíki hy hktny
mkflt w yiqytiygytny. nkm ymdygakm hy havytmkm mbytqym il dktygík rkfytnkm
glxdtkhl dlt naftkm, mail dlt kttlfkm, w qlhkm ymqkfki hy xkiapaymql yi bik
ctkihy ktgk. paiknxyiqy, yn kdktkql hy nk flhk ytk túmqagl, dytl qki
kfbihkiqy uby dlhík mbmqyiqkt k bi yoétgaql.

qlhl nl xatkfk mkigrl dkiek, w qlhl nl gliqyxdnkfk, w hy qlhl my
kpagalikfk: dtaxytl ny gkbqavktli w taihaytli yn hymyl nkm lnnkm, hy ubaéi
én qlxktk hy fliímaxk ckik bi xyhakil dbgrytl; nbycl ny kpagaliktli nk
vlnbiqkh nlm ekubym; w, únqaxkxyiqy, nkm ptbqkm hy mktqéi, ma ym uby my
dlhíki nnkxkt mktqyiym nkm qki ltlihkm gknhytkm; w kmí, mai dlhytnl mbptat
ia myt yi mb xkil rkgyt lqtk glmk, my nnycó k bil hy nlm mlnígaqlm
glgaiytlm, w, gli gltqymym w rkxftayiqkm tkeliym, ny tlcó ny hyokmy xlokt
bi xyihtbcl hy dki yi bik hy kubynnkm lnnkm. k nl uby yn glgaiytl
tymdlihaó:

-rytxkil, ymqy hík il ym hy kubynnlm mlfty ubayi qayiy obtahagaói nk
rkxfty, xytgyh kn tagl gkxkgrl. kdyklm w xatkh ma rkw dlt krí bi gbgrktói,
w ymdbxkh bik cknnaik l hlm, w fbyi dtlvygrl lm rkcki.

-il vyl iaicbil -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-ymdytkh -haol yn glgaiytl-. ¡dygkhlt hy xí, w ubé xynaihtlml w dktk dlgl
hyféam hy myt!

w, hagayihl ymql, kmaó hy bi gknhytl, w, yigkoáihlny yi bik hy nkm xyhakm
qaikokm, mkgó yi én qtym cknnaikm w hlm ckimlm, w haol k mkigrl:

-glxyh, kxacl, w hymkwbiklm gli ymqk ymdbxk, yi qkiql uby my nnyck nk rltk
hyn wkiqkt.

-il qyicl yi ubé ygrktnk -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-dbym nnyvklm -haol yn glgaiytl- nk gbgrktk w qlhl, uby nk taubyek w yn
gliqyiql hy gkxkgrl qlhl nl mbdny.

yi qkiql, dbym, uby ymql dkmkfk mkigrl, ymqkfk hli ubaolqy xatkihl góxl,
dlt bik dktqy hy nk yitkxkhk, yiqtkfki rkmqk hlgy nkftkhltym mlfty hlgy
rytxlmímaxkm wycbkm, gli taglm w vamqlmlm okygym hy gkxdl w gli xbgrlm
gkmgkfynym yi nlm dyqtknym, w qlhlm vymqahlm hy tyclgaol w paymqkm; nlm
gbknym, yi gligytqkhl qtldyn, glttaytli il bik, mail xbgrkm gkttytkm dlt yn
dtkhl, gli tyclgaokhk knckektk w ctaqk, hagayihl:

-¡vavki gkxkgrl w ubaqytak: én qki tagl glxl ynnk rytxlmk, w ynnk nk xám
rytxlmk hyn xbihl!

lwyihl nl gbkn hli ubaolqy, haol yiqty mí:

-fayi dktygy uby émqlm il rki vamql k xa hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby ma nk
rbfaytki vamql, ynnlm my pbytki k nk xkil yi nkm knkfkiekm hymqk mb
ubaqytak.

hy knní k dlgl glxyiektli k yiqtkt dlt havytmkm dktqym hy nk yitkxkhk
xbgrkm w hapytyiqym hkiekm, yiqty nkm gbknym vyiík bik hy ymdkhkm, hy rkmqk
vyaiqy w gbkqtl ekcknym hy cknnkthl dktygyt w ftíl, qlhlm vymqahlm hy
hynckhl w fnkiubímaxl nayiel, gli mbm dkñlm hy qlgkt, nkftkhlm hy vktakm
glnltym hy paik myhk; w kn uby nlm cbakfk, uby ytk bi nacytl xkigyfl,
dtycbiqó bil hy nlm hy nkm wycbkm ma my rkfík rytahl kncbil hy nlm
hkiekiqym.

-dlt krltk, fyihaql myk halm, il my rk rytahl ikhay: qlhlm vkxlm mkilm.

w nbycl glxyieó k yityhktmy gli nlm hyxám glxdkñytlm, gli qkiqkm vbynqkm w
gli qkiqk hymqtyek uby, kbiuby hli ubaolqy ymqkfk rygrl k vyt myxyokiqym
hkiekm, iaicbik ny rkfík dktygahl qki fayi glxl kubénnk.

qkxfaéi ny dktygaó fayi lqtk uby yiqtó hy hligynnkm rytxlmímaxkm, qki xlekm
uby, kn dktygyt, iaicbik fkokfk hy gkqltgy ia nnyckfk k haye w lgrl kñlm,
vymqahkm qlhkm hy dknxannk vythy, nlm gkfynnlm dktqy qtkiekhlm w dktqy
mbynqlm, dytl qlhlm qki tbfalm, uby gli nlm hyn mln dlhíki qyiyt
glxdyqyigak, mlfty nlm gbknym qtkíki cbatiknhkm hy okexaiym, tlmkm,
kxktkiql w xkhtymynvk glxdbymqkm. cbaáfknkm bi vyiytkfny vayol w bik
kigakik xkqtlik, dytl xám nacytlm w mbynqlm uby mbm kñlm dtlxyqíki.
rkgíknym yn mli bik ckaqk ekxltkik, w ynnkm, nnyvkihl yi nlm tlmqtlm w yi
nlm lolm k nk rliymqahkh w yi nlm daym k nk nacytyek, my xlmqtkfki nkm
xyoltym fkankhltkm hyn xbihl.

qtkm émqk yiqtó lqtk hkiek hy ktqapagal w hy nkm uby nnkxki rkfnkhkm. ytk
hy lgrl iaipkm, tydktqahkm yi hlm ranytkm: hy nk bik ranytk ytk cbík yn
halm gbdahl, w hy nk lqtk, yn aiqytém; kubén, khltikhl hy knkm, ktgl,
knokfk w mkyqkm; émqy, vymqahl hy tagkm w havytmkm glnltym hy ltl w myhk.
nkm iaipkm uby kn kxlt mycbíki qtkíki k nkm ymdknhkm, yi dktckxail fnkigl w
nyqtkm ctkihym, ymgtaqlm mbm ilxftym: dlymík ytk yn qíqbnl hy nk dtaxytk,
yn hy nk mycbihk hamgtygaói, yn hy nk qytgytk fbyi naikoy, yn hy nk gbktqk
vknyiqík; hyn xlhl xymxl vyiíki myñknkhkm nkm uby kn aiqytém mycbíki: hygík
nafytknahkh yn qíqbnl hy nk dtaxytk, háhavk yn hy nk mycbihk, qymltl yn hy
nk qytgytk w yn hy nk gbktqk dlmymaói dkgípagk. hynkiqy hy qlhlm vyiík bi
gkmqannl hy xkhytk, k ubayi qatkfki gbkqtl mknvkoym, qlhlm vymqahlm hy
wyhtk w hy gáñkxl qyñahl hy vythy, qki kn ikqbtkn, uby dlt dlgl ymdkiqktki
k mkigrl. yi nk ptliqytk hyn gkmqannl w yi qlhkm gbkqtl dktqym hy mbm
gbkhtlm qtkík ymgtaql: gkmqannl hyn fbyi tygkql. rkgíkinym yn mli gbkqtl
haymqtlm qkñyhltym hy qkxfltan w pnkbqk.

glxyiekfk nk hkiek gbdahl, w, rkfayihl rygrl hlm xbhkiekm, knekfk nlm lolm
w pnygrkfk yn ktgl gliqtk bik hligynnk uby my dliík yiqty nkm knxyikm hyn
gkmqannl, k nk gbkn hymqk mbytqy haol:

   -wl mlw yn halm dlhytlml
   yi yn katy w yi nk qayttk
   w yi yn kigrl xkt bihlml,
   w yi gbkiql yn kfamxl yigayttk
   yi mb fátkqtl ymdkiqlml.
   ibigk glilgí ubé ym xayhl;
   qlhl gbkiql ubaytl dbyhl,
   kbiuby ubaytk nl axdlmafny,
   w yi qlhl nl uby ym dlmafny
   xkihl, ubaql, dlicl w vyhl.

kgkfó nk gldnk, hamdktó bik pnygrk dlt nl knql hyn gkmqannl w tyqatómy k
mb dbymql. mknaó nbycl yn aiqytém, w rael lqtkm hlm xbhkiekm; gknnktli nlm
qkxfltailm, w én haol:

   -mlw ubayi dbyhy xám uby kxlt,
   w ym kxlt yn uby xy cbík;
   mlw hy nk ymqatdy xyolt
   uby yn gaynl yi nk qayttk gtík,
   xám glilgahk w xkwlt.
   mlw yn aiqytém, yi ubayi
   dlglm mbynyi lftkt fayi,
   w lftkt mai xí ym ctki xankctl;
   w gbkn mlw qy xy glimkctl,
   dlt mayxdty okxám, kxéi.

tyqatómy yn aiqytém, w ríelmy khynkiqy nk dlymík; nk gbkn, hymdbém hy rkfyt
rygrl mbm xbhkiekm glxl nlm hyxám, dbymqlm nlm lolm yi nk hligynnk hyn
gkmqannl, haol:

   -yi hbngímaxlm gligydqlm,
   nk hbngímaxk dlymík,
   knqlm, ctkvym w hamgtyqlm,
   myñltk, yn knxk qy yivík
   yivbynqk yiqty xan mliyqlm.
   ma kgkml il qy axdltqbik
   xa dltpík, qb pltqbik,
   hy lqtkm xbgrkm aivahakhk,
   mytá dlt xí nyvkiqkhk
   mlfty yn gytgl hy nk nbik.

hymvaómy nk dlymík, w hy nk dktqy hyn aiqytém mknaó nk nafytknahkh, w,
hymdbém hy rygrkm mbm xbhkiekm, haol:

   -nnkxki nafytknahkh
   kn hkt uby yn ymqtyxl rbwy
   hy nk dtlhacknahkh,
   w hyn gliqtktal, uby ktcbwy
   qafak w pnlok vlnbiqkh.
   xkm wl, dlt qy yictkihygyt,
   hy rlw xám, dtóhack ry hy myt;
   uby, kbiuby ym vagal, ym vagal rlitkhl
   w hy dygrl yikxltkhl,
   uby yi yn hkt my ygrk hy vyt.

hymqy xlhl mknaytli w my tyqatktli qlhkm nkm hlm pacbtkm hy nkm hlm
ymgbkhtkm, w gkhk bil rael mbm xbhkiekm w haol mbm vytmlm, kncbilm
ynyckiqym w kncbilm tahígbnlm, w mónl qlxó hy xyxltak hli ubaolqy -uby nk
qyiík ctkihy- nlm wk typytahlm; w nbycl my xyegnktli qlhlm, rkgayihl w
hymrkgayihl nkelm gli cyiqan hlikaty w hymyivlnqbtk; w gbkihl dkmkfk yn
kxlt dlt hynkiqy hyn gkmqannl, hamdktkfk dlt knql mbm pnygrkm, dytl yn
aiqytém ubyftkfk yi én kngkigíkm hltkhkm.

paiknxyiqy, hymdbém hy rkfyt fkankhl bi fbyi ymdkgal, yn aiqytém mkgó bi
flnmói, uby ny pltxkfk yn dynnyol hy bi ctki ckql tlxkil, uby dktygík ymqkt
nnyil hy haiytlm, w, kttloáihlny kn gkmqannl, gli yn clndy my hymyigkoktli
nkm qkfnkm w my gkwytli, hyokihl k nk hligynnk hymgbfaytqk w mai hypyimk
kncbik. nnycó yn aiqytém gli nkm pacbtkm hy mb vkník, w, ygráihlnk bik ctki
gkhyik hy ltl kn gbynnl, xlmqtktli dtyihytnk, tyihatnk w gkbqavktnk; nl
gbkn vamql dlt yn kxlt w mbm vknyhltym, ragaytli khyxái hy ubaqátmynk; w
qlhkm nkm hyxlmqtkgaliym uby rkgíki ytki kn mli hy nlm qkxfltailm, fkankihl
w hkiekihl gligytqkhkxyiqy. dbmaétlinlm yi dke nlm mknvkoym, nlm gbknym gli
xbgrk dtymqyek vlnvaytli k ktxkt w k yigkokt nkm qkfnkm hyn gkmqannl, w nk
hligynnk my yigyttó yi én glxl hy ibyvl, w gli ymql my kgkfó nk hkiek gli
ctki gliqyiql hy nlm uby nk xatkfki.

dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy k bik hy nkm iaipkm uby ubaéi nk rkfík glxdbymql w
lthyikhl. tymdlihaóny uby bi fyiypagakhl hy kubyn dbyfnl, uby qyiík cyiqan
gknyqty dktk myxyokiqym aivyigaliym.

-wl kdlmqkté -haol hli ubaolqy- uby hyfy hy myt xám kxacl hy gkxkgrl uby hy
fkmanal yn qkn fkgrannyt l fyiypagakhl, w uby hyfy hy qyiyt xám hy mkqítagl
uby hy vímdytkm: ¡fayi rk yigkokhl yi nk hkiek nkm rkfanahkhym hy fkmanal w
nkm taubyekm hy gkxkgrl!

mkigrl dkiek, uby nl ymgbgrkfk qlhl, haol:

-yn tyw ym xa cknnl: k gkxkgrl xy kqyicl.

-yi pai -haol hli ubaolqy-, fayi my dktygy, mkigrl, uby ytym vannkil w hy
kubénnlm uby hagyi: "¡vavk ubayi vyigy!"

-il mé hy nlm uby mlw -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl fayi mé uby ibigk hy lnnkm
hy fkmanal mkgkté wl qki ynyckiqy ymdbxk glxl ym ymqk uby ry mkgkhl hy nkm
hy gkxkgrl.

w yimyñóny yn gknhytl nnyil hy ckimlm w hy cknnaikm, w, kmayihl hy bik,
glxyieó k glxyt gli xbgrl hlikaty w ckik, w haol:

-¡k nk fktfk hy nkm rkfanahkhym hy fkmanal!, uby qkiql vknym gbkiql qayiym,
w qkiql qayiym gbkiql vknym. hlm naikoym mlnlm rkw yi yn xbihl, glxl hygík
bik kcüynk xík, uby mli yn qyiyt w yn il qyiyt, kbiuby ynnk kn hyn qyiyt my
kqyiík; w yn hík hy rlw, xa myñlt hli ubaolqy, kiqym my qlxk yn dbnml kn
rkfyt uby kn mkfyt: bi kmil gbfaytql hy ltl dktygy xyolt uby bi gkfknnl
yiknfkthkhl. kmí uby vbynvl k hygat uby k gkxkgrl xy kqyicl, hy gbwkm lnnkm
mli kfbihkiqym ymdbxkm ckimlm w cknnaikm, nayftym w gliyolm; w hy nkm hy
fkmanal mytái, ma vayiy k xkil, w kbiuby il vyick mail kn day, kcbkgratny.

-¿rkm kgkfkhl qb ktyick, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-rkfténk kgkfkhl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby vyl uby vbymqtk xytgyh tygafy
dymkhbxfty gli ynnk; uby ma ymql il my dbmaytk hy dlt xyhal, lftk rkfík
gltqkhk dktk qtym híkm.

-dnyck k halm, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby wl qy vyk xbhl kiqym uby
xy xbytk.

-kn dkml uby nnyvkxlm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, kiqym uby vbymqtk xytgyh my xbytk
ymqkté wl xkmgkihl fkttl, w yiqligym dlhtá myt uby ymqé qki xbhl uby il
rkfny dknkftk rkmqk nk pai hyn xbihl, l, dlt nl xyilm, rkmqk yn hík hyn
obagal.

-kbiuby yml kmí mbgyhk, ¡lr mkigrl! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ibigk nnycktá
qb manyigal k hl rk nnyckhl nl uby rkm rkfnkhl, rkfnkm w qayiym hy rkfnkt
yi qb vahk; w xám, uby ymqá xbw dbymql yi tkeói ikqbtkn uby dtaxytl nnycby
yn hík hy xa xbytqy uby yn hy nk qbwk; w kmí, okxám dayiml vytqy xbhl, ia
kbi gbkihl ymqém fyfayihl l hbtxayihl, uby ym nl uby dbyhl yigktygyt.

-k fbyik py, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby il rkw uby pakt yi nk
hymgktikhk, hacl, yi nk xbytqy, nk gbkn qkxfaéi glxy glthytl glxl gktiytl;
w k ibymqtl gbtk ry líhl hygat uby gli acbkn day damkfk nkm knqkm qlttym hy
nlm tywym glxl nkm rbxanhym grlekm hy nlm dlftym. qayiy ymqk myñltk xám hy
dlhyt uby hy xynaihty: il ym ikhk kmubytlmk, hy qlhl glxy w k qlhl rkgy, w
hy qlhk mbytqy hy cyiqym, yhkhym w dtyyxaiyigakm raigry mbm knpltokm. il ym
myckhlt uby hbytxy nkm maymqkm, uby k qlhkm rltkm mayck, w gltqk kmí nk
mygk glxl nk vythy wytfk; w il dktygy uby xkmgk, mail uby yicbnny w qtkck
gbkiql my ny dliy hynkiqy, dltuby qayiy rkxfty gkiaik, uby ibigk my rktqk;
w, kbiuby il qayiy fkttack, hk k yiqyihyt uby ymqá rahtódagk w myhayiqk hy
fyfyt mlnkm nkm vahkm hy gbkiqlm vavyi, glxl ubayi my fyfy bi okttl hy kcbk
ptík.

-il xám, mkigrl -haol k ymqy dbiql hli ubaolqy-. qyiqy yi fbyikm, w il qy
hyoym gkyt; uby yi vythkh uby nl uby rkm hagrl hy nk xbytqy dlt qbm
túmqaglm qétxailm ym nl uby dbhaytk hygat bi fbyi dtyhagkhlt. híclqy,
mkigrl uby ma glxl qayiym fbyi ikqbtkn w hamgtygaói, dbhaytkm qlxkt bi
dúndaql yi nk xkil w atqy dlt ymy xbihl dtyhagkihl naihyekm...

-fayi dtyhagk ubayi fayi vavy -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w wl il mé lqtkm
qlnlcíkm.

-ia nkm rkm xyiymqyt -haol hli ubaolqy-; dytl wl il kgkfl hy yiqyihyt ia
kngkiekt góxl, mayihl yn dtaigadal hy nk mkfahbtík yn qyxlt hy halm, qú,
uby qyxym xám k bi nkcktql uby k Én, mkfym qkiql.

-obecby vbymk xytgyh, myñlt, hy mbm gkfknnytíkm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w il my
xyqk yi obeckt hy nlm qyxltym l vknyiqíkm koyikm, uby qki cyiqan qyxytlml
mlw wl hy halm glxl gkhk raol hy vygail; w héoyxy vbymqtk xytgyh hymdkfankt
ymqk ymdbxk, uby nl hyxám qlhkm mli dknkftkm lgalmkm, hy uby ilm rki hy
dyhat gbyiqk yi nk lqtk vahk.

w, hagayihl ymql, glxyieó hy ibyvl k hkt kmknql k mb gknhytl, gli qki
fbyilm knayiqlm uby hymdytqó nlm hy hli ubaolqy, w mai hbhk ny kwbhktk, ma
il nl axdahaytk nl uby ym pbytek my hack khynkiqy.





gkdíqbnl zza. hlihy my dtlmacbyi nkm flhkm hy gkxkgrl, gli lqtlm cbmqlmlm
mbgymlm


gbkihl ymqkfki hli ubaolqy w mkigrl yi nkm tkeliym typytahkm yi yn gkdíqbnl
kiqygyhyiqy, my lwytli ctkihym vlgym w ctki tbahl, w háfkinkm w gkbmáfkiny
nlm hy nkm wycbkm, uby gli nktck gkttytk w ctaqk afki k tygyfat k nlm
ilvalm, uby, tlhykhlm hy xan céiytlm hy aimqtbxyiqlm w hy aivyigaliym,
vyiíki kglxdkñkhlm hyn gbtk, w hy nk dktyiqynk hy yiqtkxflm, w hy qlhk nk
cyiqy xám nbgahk hy nlm nbcktym gatgbivygailm, qlhlm vymqahlm hy paymqk. w
glxl mkigrl val k nk ilvak, haol:

-k fbyik py uby il vayiy vymqahk hy nkftkhltk, mail hy ckttahk dknkgayck.
¡dkthaye, uby mycúi havaml, uby nkm dkqyikm uby rkfík hy qtkyt mli taglm
gltknym, w nk dknxannk vythy hy gbyigk ym qytgaldynl hy qtyaiqk dynlm! ¡w
xliqkm uby nk cbktiagaói ym hy qatkm hy nayiel, fnkigk!, ¡vlql k xí uby ym
hy tkml!; dbym, ¡qlxkhxy nkm xkilm, khltikhkm gli mltqaokm hy kekfkgry!: il
xyhty wl ma il mli kiannlm hy ltl, w xbw hy ltl, w yxdyhtkhlm gli dyntkm
fnkigkm glxl bik gbkokhk, uby gkhk bik hyfy hy vknyt bi lol hy nk gktk. ¡lr
rahydbqk, w ubé gkfynnlm; uby, ma il mli dlmqaelm, il nlm ry vamql xkm
nbyiclm ia xám tbfalm yi qlhk xa vahk! ¡il, mail dliyhnk qkgrk yi yn ftíl w
yi yn qknny, w il nk glxdktéam k bik dknxk uby my xbyvy gktckhk hy tkgaxlm
hy háqanym, uby nl xymxl dktygyi nlm haoym uby qtky dyihayiqym hy nlm
gkfynnlm w hy nk cktckiqk! obtl yi xa áiaxk uby ynnk ym bik grkdkhk xlek, w
uby dbyhy dkmkt dlt nlm fkiglm hy pnkihym.

taómy hli ubaolqy hy nkm túmqagkm knkfkiekm hy mkigrl dkiek; dktygaóny uby,
pbytk hy mb myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, il rkfík vamql xboyt xám rytxlmk
okxám. vyiík nk rytxlmk ubaqytak kncl hymglnltahk, w hyfík hy myt hy nk
xknk ilgry uby mayxdty dkmki nkm ilvakm yi glxdliytmy dktk yn hík vyiahytl
hy mbm flhkm. Ífkimy kgytgkihl k bi qykqtl uby k bi nkhl hyn dtkhl ymqkfk,
khltikhl hy knplxftkm w tkxlm, khlihy my rkfíki hy rkgyt nlm hymdlmltalm, w
hy hlihy rkfíki hy xatkt nkm hkiekm w nkm aivyigaliym; w, k nk mkeói uby
nnyckfki kn dbymql, lwytli k mbm ymdknhkm ctkihym vlgym, w bik uby hygík:

-ymdytklm bi dlgl, cyiqy qki aiglimahytkhk glxl dtymbtlmk.

k gbwkm vlgym w dknkftkm qlhlm vlnvaytli nk gkfyek, w vaytli uby nkm hkfk
bi rlxfty vymqahl, kn dktygyt, hy bi mkwl iyctl, oatlikhl hy gktxymí k
nnkxkm. vyiík gltlikhl -glxl my val nbycl- gli bik gltlik hy pbiymql
gadtém; yi nkm xkilm qtkík bi fkmqói ctkihy. yi nnyckihl xám gytgk, pby
glilgahl hy qlhlm dlt yn cknnkthl fkmanal, w qlhlm ymqbvaytli mbmdyimlm,
ymdytkihl yi ubé rkfíki hy dktkt mbm vlgym w mbm dknkftkm, qyxayihl kncúi
xkn mbgyml hy mb vyiahk yi mkeói myxyokiqy.

nnycó, yi pai, gkimkhl w mai knayiql, w, dbymql hynkiqy hy nlm hymdlmkhlm,
raigkihl yn fkmqói yi yn mbynl, uby qyiík yn gbyiql hy bik dbiqk hy kgytl,
xbhkhk nk glnlt, dbymqlm nlm lolm yi ubaqytak, gli vle qtyxyiqy w tligk,
ymqkm tkeliym haol:

-fayi mkfym, hymglilgahk ubaqytak, uby glipltxy k nk mkiqk nyw uby
dtlpymkxlm, uby vavayihl wl, qú il dbyhym qlxkt ymdlml; w obiqkxyiqy il
aciltkm uby, dlt ymdytkt wl uby yn qayxdl w xa hanacyigak xyoltkmyi nlm
fayiym hy xa pltqbik, il ry ubytahl hyokt hy cbkthkt yn hygltl uby k qb
rlitk glivyiík; dytl qú, ygrkihl k nkm ymdknhkm qlhkm nkm lfnackgaliym uby
hyfym k xa fbyi hymyl, ubaytym rkgyt myñlt hy nl uby ym xíl k lqtl, gbwkm
taubyekm ny matvyi il mónl hy fbyik pltqbik, mail hy fliímaxk vyiqbtk. w
dktk uby nk qyick glnxkhk, w il glxl wl dayiml uby nk xytygy, mail glxl my
nk ubaytyi hkt nlm gaynlm, wl, dlt xam xkilm, hymrkté yn axdlmafny l yn
aiglivyiayiqy uby dbyhy ymqltfátmynk, ubaqáihlxy k xí hy dlt xyhal. ¡vavk,
vavk yn tagl gkxkgrl gli nk aictkqk ubaqytak nktclm w pynagym macnlm, w
xbytk, xbytk yn dlfty fkmanal, gbwk dlftyek gltqó nkm knkm hy mb hagrk w ny
dbml yi nk mydbnqbtk!

w, hagayihl ymql, kmaó hyn fkmqói uby qyiík raigkhl yi yn mbynl, w,
ubyháihlmy nk xaqkh hén yi nk qayttk, xlmqtó uby mytvík hy vkaik k bi
xyhakil ymqluby uby yi én my lgbnqkfk; w, dbymqk nk uby my dlhík nnkxkt
yxdbñkhbtk yi yn mbynl, gli nacytl hymyipkhl w hyqytxaikhl dtldómaql my
kttloó mlfty én, w yi bi dbiql xlmqtó nk dbiqk mkictayiqk k nkm ymdknhkm,
gli nk xaqkh hyn kgytkhk gbgrannk, ubyhkihl yn qtamqy fkñkhl yi mb mkicty w
qyihahl yi yn mbynl, hy mbm xamxkm ktxkm qtkmdkmkhl.

kgbhaytli nbycl mbm kxaclm k pkvltygytny, glihlnahlm hy mb xamytak w
nkmqaxlmk hymctkgak; w, hyokihl hli ubaolqy k tlgaikiqy, kgbhaó k
pkvltygytny w ny qlxó yi mbm ftkelm, w rknnó uby kúi il rkfík ymdatkhl.
ubamaétliny mkgkt yn ymqluby, dytl yn gbtk, uby ymqkfk dtymyiqy, pby hy
dktygyt uby il my ny mkgkmyi kiqym hy glipymktny, dltuby yn mkgátmyny w yn
ymdatkt mytík qlhl k bi qayxdl. dytl, vlnvayihl bi dlgl yi mí fkmanal, gli
vle hlnayiqy w hymxkwkhk haol:

-ma ubamaymym, gtbyn ubaqytak, hktxy yi ymqy únqaxl w pltelml qtkigy nk
xkil hy ymdlmk, kúi dyimktík uby xa qyxytahkh qyihtík hymgbndk, dbym yi
ynnk kngkigé yn fayi hy myt qbwl.

yn gbtk, lwyihl nl gbkn, ny haol uby kqyihaymy k nk mknbh hyn knxk kiqym
uby k nlm cbmqlm hyn gbytdl, w uby dahaymy xbw hy vytkm k halm dythói hy
mbm dygkhlm w hy mb hymymdytkhk hyqytxaikgaói. k nl gbkn tydnagó fkmanal
uby yi iaicbik xkiytk my glipymktík ma dtaxytl ubaqytak il ny hkfk nk xkil
hy myt mb ymdlmk: uby kubyn gliqyiql ny khlfktík nk vlnbiqkh w ny hktík
knayiql dktk glipymktmy.

yi lwyihl hli ubaolqy nk dyqagaói hyn rytahl, yi knqkm vlgym haol uby
fkmanal dyhík bik glmk xbw obmqk w dbymqk yi tkeói, w khyxám, xbw rkgyhytk,
w uby yn myñlt gkxkgrl ubyhktík qki rlitkhl tygafayihl k nk myñltk ubaqytak
vabhk hyn vknytlml fkmanal glxl ma nk tygafaytk hyn nkhl hy mb dkhty:

-kubí il rk hy rkfyt xám hy bi mí, uby il qyick lqtl ypygql uby yn
dtlibigaktny, dbym yn qánkxl hy ymqkm flhkm rk hy myt nk mydbnqbtk.

qlhl nl lík gkxkgrl, w qlhl ny qyiík mbmdyiml w glipbml, mai mkfyt ubé
rkgyt ia ubé hygat; dytl nkm vlgym hy nlm kxaclm hy fkmanal pbytli qkiqkm,
dahaéihlny uby glimaiqaymy uby ubaqytak ny haymy nk xkil hy ymdlmk, dltuby
mb knxk il my dythaymy, dktqayihl hymymdytkhl hymqk vahk, uby ny xlvaytli,
w kbi pltektli, k hygat uby ma ubaqytak ubytík hátmynk, uby én my
gliqyiqkfk, dbym qlhl ytk hankqkt dlt bi xlxyiql yn gbxdnaxayiql hy mbm
hymylm.

nbycl kgbhaytli qlhlm k ubaqytak, w bilm gli tbyclm, w lqtlm gli náctaxkm,
w lqtlm gli ypagkgym tkeliym, nk dytmbkhíki uby haymy nk xkil kn dlfty
fkmanal; w ynnk, xám hbtk uby bi xátxln w xám mymck uby bik ymqkqbk,
xlmqtkfk uby ia mkfík ia dlhík, ia ubytík tymdlihyt dknkftk; ia nk
tymdlihaytk ma yn gbtk il nk haoytk uby my hyqytxaikmy dtymql yi nl uby
rkfík hy rkgyt, dltuby qyiík fkmanal wk yn knxk yi nlm hayiqym, w il hkfk
nbckt k ymdytkt aitymlnbqkm hyqytxaikgaliym.

yiqligym nk rytxlmk ubaqytak, mai tymdlihyt dknkftk kncbik, qbtfkhk, kn
dktygyt qtamqy w dymktlmk, nnycó hlihy fkmanal ymqkfk, wk nlm lolm vbynqlm,
yn knayiql gltql w kdtymbtkhl, xbtxbtkihl yiqty nlm hayiqym yn ilxfty hy
ubaqytak, hkihl xbymqtkm hy xltat glxl cyiqan, w il glxl gtamqakil. nnycó,
yi pai, ubaqytak, w, dbymqk hy tlhannkm, ny dahaó nk xkil dlt myñkm, w il
dlt dknkftkm. hymyigkoó nlm lolm fkmanal, w, xatáihlnk kqyiqkxyiqy, ny
haol:

-¡lr ubaqytak, uby rkm vyiahl k myt dakhlmk k qayxdl gbkihl qb dayhkh rk hy
mytvat hy gbgrannl uby xy kgkfy hy ubaqkt nk vahk, dbym wk il qyicl pbytekm
dktk nnyvkt nk cnltak uby xy hkm yi ymglcytxy dlt qbwl, ia dktk mbmdyihyt
yn hlnlt uby qki kdtaymk xy vk gbftayihl nlm lolm gli nk ymdkiqlmk mlxftk
hy nk xbytqy! nl uby qy mbdnagl ym, ¡lr pkqkn ymqtynnk xík!, uby nk xkil
uby xy dahym w ubaytym hktxy il myk dlt gbxdnaxayiql, ia dktk yickñktxy hy
ibyvl, mail uby glipaymym w hackm uby, mai rkgyt pbytek k qb vlnbiqkh, xy
nk yiqtyckm w xy nk hkm glxl k qb nycíqaxl ymdlml; dbym il ym tkeói uby yi
bi qtkigy glxl émqy xy yickñym, ia bmym hy paicaxayiqlm gli ubayi qkiqkm
vythkhym rk qtkqkhl gliqacl.

yiqty ymqkm tkeliym, my hymxkwkfk, hy xlhl uby qlhlm nlm dtymyiqym dyimkfki
uby gkhk hymxkwl my rkfík hy nnyvkt yn knxk glimacl. ubaqytak, qlhk rliymqk
w qlhk vytclielmk, kmayihl gli mb hytygrk xkil nk hy fkmanal, ny haol:

-iaicbik pbytek pbytk fkmqkiqy k qltgyt xa vlnbiqkh; w kmí, gli nk xám
nafty uby qyicl qy hlw nk xkil hy nycíqaxk ymdlmk, w tygafl nk qbwk, ma ym
uby xy nk hkm hy qb nafty knfyhtíl, mai uby nk qbtfy ia gliqtkmqy nk
gknkxahkh yi uby qb hamgbtml kgynytkhl qy rk dbymql.

-mí hlw -tymdlihaó fkmanal-, il qbtfkhl ia glipbml, mail gli yn gnktl
yiqyihaxayiql uby yn gaynl ubaml hktxy; w kmí, xy hlw w xy yiqtycl dlt qb
ymdlml.

-w wl dlt qb ymdlmk -tymdlihaó ubaqytak-, krltk vavkm nktclm kñlm, krltk qy
nnyvyi hy xam ftkelm k nk mydbnqbtk.

-dktk ymqkt qki rytahl ymqy xkigyfl -haol k ymqy dbiql mkigrl dkiek-, xbgrl
rkfnk; ráckiny uby my hyoy hy tyubayftlm w uby kqayihk k mb knxk, uby, k xa
dktygyt, xám nk qayiy yi nk nyicbk uby yi nlm hayiqym.

ymqkihl, dbym, kmahlm hy nkm xkilm fkmanal w ubaqytak, yn gbtk, qaytil w
nnltlml, nlm ygró nk fyihagaói w dahaó kn gaynl haymy fbyi dlml kn knxk hyn
ibyvl hymdlmkhl; yn gbkn, kmí glxl tygafaó nk fyihagaói, gli dtymqk
nacytyek my nyvkiqó yi day, w gli il vamqk hymyivlnqbtk my mkgó yn ymqluby,
k ubayi mytvík hy vkaik mb gbytdl.

ubyhktli qlhlm nlm gatgbimqkiqym khxatkhlm, w kncbilm hynnlm, xám maxdnym
uby gbtalmlm, yi knqkm vlgym, glxyiektli k hygat:

-¡xankctl, xankctl!

dytl fkmanal tydnagó:

-¡il "xankctl, xankctl", mail aihbmqtak, aihbmqtak!

yn gbtk, hymkqyiqkhl w kqóiaql, kgbhaó gli kxfkm xkilm k qyiqkt nk rytahk,
w rknnó uby nk gbgrannk rkfík dkmkhl, il dlt nk gktiy w glmqannkm hy
fkmanal, mail dlt bi gkñói rbygl hy rayttl uby, nnyil hy mkicty, yi kubyn
nbckt fayi kglxlhkhl qyiík; dtydktkhk nk mkicty, mycúi hymdbém my mbdl, hy
xlhl uby il my rynkmy.

paiknxyiqy, yn gbtk w gkxkgrl, gli qlhlm nlm xám gatgbimqkiqym, my qbvaytli
dlt fbtnkhlm w ymgktiahlm. nk ymdlmk il hal xbymqtkm hy dymktny hy nk
fbtnk; kiqym, lwyihl hygat uby kubyn gkmkxayiql, dlt rkfyt mahl yickñlml,
il rkfík hy myt vknyhytl, haol uby ynnk ny glipatxkfk hy ibyvl; hy nl gbkn
glnacaytli qlhlm uby hy glimyiqaxayiql w mkfahbtík hy nlm hlm my rkfík
qtkekhl kubyn gkml, hy nl uby ubyhó gkxkgrl w mbm vknyhltym qki glttahlm
uby tyxaqaytli mb vyickiek k nkm xkilm, w, hymyivkaikihl xbgrkm ymdkhkm,
kttyxyqaytli k fkmanal, yi gbwl pkvlt yi bi aimqkiqy my hymyivkaiktli gkma
lqtkm qkiqkm. w, qlxkihl nk hynkiqytk k gkfknnl hli ubaolqy, gli nk nkiek
mlfty yn ftkel w fayi gbfaytql hy mb ymgbhl, my rkgík hkt nbckt hy qlhlm.
mkigrl, k ubayi okxám dnbcbaytli ia mlnkektli myxyokiqym pygrbtíkm, my
kglcaó k nkm qaikokm, hlihy rkfík mkgkhl mb kctkhkfny ymdbxk, dktygaéihlny
kubyn nbckt glxl mkctkhl, uby rkfík hy myt qyiahl yi tymdyql. hli ubaolqy,
k ctkihym vlgym, hygík:

-qyiylm, myñltym, qyiylm, uby il ym tkeói qlxéam vyickiek hy nlm kctkvalm
uby yn kxlt ilm rkgy; w khvytqah uby yn kxlt w nk cbyttk mli bik xamxk
glmk, w kmí glxl yi nk cbyttk ym glmk nígaqk w kglmqbxftkhk bmkt hy kthahym
w ymqtkqkcyxkm dktk vyigyt kn yiyxacl, kmí yi nkm gliqayihkm w glxdyqyigakm
kxltlmkm my qayiyi dlt fbyilm nlm yxfbmqym w xktkñkm uby my rkgyi dktk
glimycbat yn pai uby my hymyk, glxl il myki yi xyilmgkfl w hymrlitk hy nk
glmk kxkhk. ubaqytak ytk hy fkmanal, w fkmanal hy ubaqytak, dlt obmqk w
pkvltkfny hamdlmagaói hy nlm gaynlm. gkxkgrl ym tagl, w dlhtá glxdtkt mb
cbmql gbkihl, hlihy w glxl ubamayty. fkmanal il qayiy xám hymqk lvyok, w il
my nk rk hy ubaqkt kncbil, dlt dlhytlml uby myk; uby k nlm hlm uby halm
obiqk il dlhtá mydktkt yn rlxfty; w yn uby nl aiqyiqkty, dtaxytl rk hy
dkmkt dlt nk dbiqk hymqk nkiek.

w, yi ymql, nk fnkihaó qki pbytqy w qki haymqtkxyiqy, uby dbml dkvlt yi
qlhlm nlm uby il ny glilgíki, w qki aiqyimkxyiqy my paoó yi nk axkcaikgaói
hy gkxkgrl yn hymhéi hy ubaqytak, uby my nk flttó hy nk xyxltak yi bi
aimqkiqy; w kmí, qbvaytli nbckt gli én nkm dytmbkmaliym hyn gbtk, uby ytk
vktói dtbhyiqy w fayi aiqyigalikhl, gli nkm gbknym ubyhó gkxkgrl w nlm hy
mb dktgaknahkh dkgípaglm w mlmyckhlm; yi myñkn hy nl gbkn vlnvaytli nkm
ymdkhkm k mbm nbcktym, gbndkihl xám k nk pkganahkh hy ubaqytak uby k nk
aihbmqtak hy fkmanal; rkgayihl hamgbtml gkxkgrl uby ma ubaqytak ubytík fayi
k fkmanal hligynnk, qkxfaéi ny ubamaytk gkmkhk, w uby hyfík hy hkt ctkgakm
kn gaynl, xám dlt rkfétmynk ubaqkhl uby dlt rkfétmynk hkhl.

glimlnkhl, dbym, w dkgípagl gkxkgrl w nlm hy mb xymikhk, qlhlm nlm hy nk hy
fkmanal my mlmycktli, w yn tagl gkxkgrl, dlt xlmqtkt uby il myiqík nk
fbtnk, ia nk ymqaxkfk yi ikhk, ubaml uby nkm paymqkm dkmkmyi khynkiqy glxl
ma tyknxyiqy my hymdlmktk; dytl il ubamaytli kmamqat k ynnkm fkmanal ia mb
ymdlmk ia mygbkgym; w kmí, my pbytli k nk knhyk hy fkmanal, uby qkxfaéi nlm
dlftym vatqblmlm w hamgtyqlm qayiyi ubayi nlm mack, rlity w kxdkty, glxl
nlm taglm qayiyi ubayi nlm namlioyy w kglxdkñy.

nnyvktóimy glimacl k hli ubaolqy, ymqaxáihlny dlt rlxfty hy vknlt w hy dynl
yi dygrl. k mónl mkigrl my ny ymgbtygaó yn knxk, dlt vytmy axdlmafanaqkhl
hy kcbkthkt nk ymdnéihahk glxahk w paymqkm hy gkxkgrl, uby hbtktli rkmqk nk
ilgry; w kmí, kmyihytkhl w qtamqy, macbaó k mb myñlt, uby gli nk gbkhtannk
hy fkmanal afk, w kmí my hyoó kqtám nkm lnnkm hy ycadql, kbiuby nkm nnyvkfk
yi yn knxk, gbwk wk gkma glimbxahk w kgkfkhk ymdbxk, uby yi yn gknhytl
nnyvkfk, ny tydtymyiqkfk nk cnltak w nk kfbihkigak hyn fayi uby dythík; w
kmí, gliclokhl w dyimkqavl, kbiuby mai rkxfty, mai kdyktmy hyn tbgal,
macbaó nkm rbynnkm hy tlgaikiqy.





gkdíqbnl zzaa. hlihy my hk gbyiqk hy nk ctkihy kvyiqbtk hy nk gbyvk hy
xliqymailm, uby ymqá yi yn gltkeói hy nk xkigrk, k ubayi hal pynagy gaxk yn
vknytlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk


ctkihym pbytli w xbgrlm nlm tycknlm uby nlm hymdlmkhlm ragaytli k hli
ubaolqy, lfnackhlm hy nkm xbymqtkm uby rkfík hkhl hypyihayihl mb gkbmk, w
kn dkt hy nk vknyiqík ny ctkhbktli nk hamgtygaói, qyiaéihlny dlt bi gah yi
nkm ktxkm w dlt bi gagytói yi nk ynlgbyigak. yn fbyi mkigrl my typlganó
qtym híkm k glmqk hy nlm ilvalm, hy nlm gbknym my mbdl uby il pby qtkek
glxbiagkhk gli nk rytxlmk ubaqytak yn rytatmy paicahkxyiqy, mail aihbmqtak
hy fkmanal, ymdytkihl hynnk yn xymxl mbgyml uby my rkfík vamql; fayi ym
vythkh uby glipymó uby rkfík hkhl dktqy hy mb dyimkxayiql k kncbilm hy mbm
kxaclm, dktk uby kn qayxdl iygymktal pkvltygaymyi mb aiqyigaói w kflikmyi
mb yickñl.

-il my dbyhyi ia hyfyi nnkxkt yickñlm -haol hli ubaolqy- nlm uby dliyi nk
xatk yi vatqblmlm paiym.

w uby yn hy gkmktmy nlm yikxltkhlm ytk yn pai hy xám yzgynyigak,
khvatqayihl uby yn xkwlt gliqtktal uby yn kxlt qayiy ym nk rkxfty w nk
gliqaibk iygymahkh, dltuby yn kxlt ym qlhl knyctík, tyclgaol w gliqyiql, w
xám gbkihl yn kxkiqy ymqá yi dlmymaói hy nk glmk kxkhk, gliqtk ubayi mli
yiyxaclm ldbymqlm w hygnktkhlm nk iygymahkh w nk dlftyek; w uby qlhl ymql
hygík gli aiqyigaói hy uby my hyokmy yn myñlt fkmanal hy yoytgaqkt nkm
rkfanahkhym uby mkfy, uby, kbiuby ny hkfki pkxk, il ny hkfki haiytlm, w uby
kqyihaymy k ctkioykt rkgayihk dlt xyhalm nígaqlm y aihbmqtalmlm, uby ibigk
pknqki k nlm dtbhyiqym w kdnagkhlm.

-yn dlfty rlitkhl, ma ym uby dbyhy myt rlitkhl yn dlfty, qayiy dtyihk yi
qyiyt xboyt rytxlmk, uby, gbkihl my nk ubaqki, ny ubaqki nk rlitk w my nk
xkqki. nk xboyt rytxlmk w rlitkhk, gbwl xktahl ym dlfty, xytygy myt
gltlikhk gli nkbtynym w dknxkm hy vyigaxayiql w qtabipl. nk rytxlmbtk, dlt
mí mlnk, kqtky nkm vlnbiqkhym hy gbkiqlm nk xatki w glilgyi, w glxl k
myñbynl cbmqlml my ny kfkqyi nkm ácbankm tyknym w nlm dáoktlm knqkiytlm;
dytl ma k nk qkn rytxlmbtk my ny obiqk nk iygymahkh w nk ymqtygryek,
qkxfaéi nk yxfamqyi nlm gbytvlm, nlm xankilm w nkm lqtkm kvym hy tkdañk; w
nk uby ymqá k qkiqlm yigbyiqtlm patxy fayi xytygy nnkxktmy gltlik hy mb
xktahl. xatkh, hamgtyql fkmanal -kñkhaó hli ubaolqy-: ldaiaói pby hy il mé
ubé mkfal uby il rkfík yi qlhl yn xbihl mail bik mlnk xboyt fbyik, w hkfk
dlt glimyol uby gkhk bil dyimkmy w gtywymy uby kubynnk mlnk fbyik ytk nk
mbwk, w kmí vavatík gliqyiql. wl il mlw gkmkhl, ia rkmqk kcltk xy rk vyiahl
yi dyimkxayiql mytnl; w, gli qlhl ymql, xy kqtyvytík k hkt glimyol kn uby
xy nl dahaymy hyn xlhl uby rkfík hy fbmgkt nk xboyt gli ubayi my ubamaymy
gkmkt. nl dtaxytl, ny kglimyoktík uby xatkmy xám k nk pkxk uby k nk
rkgayihk, dltuby nk fbyik xboyt il kngkiek nk fbyik pkxk mlnkxyiqy gli myt
fbyik, mail gli dktygytnl; uby xbgrl xám hkñki k nkm rlitkm hy nkm xboytym
nkm hymyivlnqbtkm w nafytqkhym dúfnagkm uby nkm xknhkhym mygtyqkm. ma qtkym
fbyik xboyt k qb gkmk, págan glmk mytík glimytvktnk, w kbi xyoltktnk, yi
kubynnk flihkh; dytl ma nk qtkym xknk, yi qtkfkol qy dlihtá yn yixyihktnk:
uby il ym xbw rkgyhytl dkmkt hy bi ymqtyxl k lqtl. wl il hacl uby myk
axdlmafny, dytl qéiclnl dlt hapagbnqlml.

lík qlhl ymql mkigrl, w haol yiqty mí:

-ymqy xa kxl, gbkihl wl rkfnl glmkm hy xylnnl w hy mbmqkigak mbyny hygat
uby dlhtík wl qlxkt bi dúndaql yi nkm xkilm w atxy dlt ymy xbihl khynkiqy
dtyhagkihl naihyekm; w wl hacl hén uby gbkihl glxayiek k yirankt myiqyigakm
w k hkt glimyolm, il mónl dbyhy qlxkt dúndaql yi nkm xkilm, mail hlm yi
gkhk hyhl, w kihktmy dlt ymkm dnkekm k ¿ubé ubaytym flgk? ¡vánkqy yn hakfnl
dlt gkfknnytl kihkiqy, uby qkiqkm glmkm mkfym! wl dyimkfk yi xa áiaxk uby
mónl dlhík mkfyt kubynnl uby qlgkfk k mbm gkfknnytíkm, dytl il rkw glmk
hlihy il dauby w hyoy hy xyqyt mb gbgrktkhk.

xbtxbtkfk ymql kncl mkigrl, w yiqtylwóny mb myñlt, w dtycbiqóny:

-¿ubé xbtxbtkm, mkigrl?

-il hacl ikhk, ia xbtxbtl hy ikhk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; mónl ymqkfk hagayihl
yiqty xí uby ubamaytk rkfyt líhl nl uby vbymk xytgyh kubí rk hagrl kiqym
uby xy gkmktk, uby ubaeá haoytk wl kcltk: "yn fbyw mbynql fayi my nkxy".

-¿qki xknk ym qb qytymk, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-il ym xbw xknk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl il ym xbw fbyik; k nl xyilm, il ym
qki fbyik glxl wl ubamaytk.

-xkn rkgym, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, yi hygat xkn hy qb xboyt, uby, yi
ypygql, ym xkhty hy qbm raolm.

-il ilm hyfyxlm ikhk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby qkxfaéi ynnk hagy xkn hy xí
gbkihl my ny kiqlok, ymdygaknxyiqy gbkihl ymqá gynlmk, uby yiqligym múptknk
yn xymxl mkqkiám.

paiknxyiqy, qtym híkm ymqbvaytli gli nlm ilvalm, hlihy pbytli tycknkhlm w
mytvahlm glxl gbytdlm hy tyw. dahaó hli ubaolqy kn haymqtl nagyigakhl ny
haymy bik cbík uby ny yigkxaikmy k nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm, dltuby qyiík
ctki hymyl hy yiqtkt yi ynnk w vyt k lolm vamqkm ma ytki vythkhytkm nkm
xktkvannkm uby hy ynnk my hygíki dlt qlhlm kubynnlm gliqltilm. yn
nagyigakhl ny haol uby ny hktík k bi dtaxl mbwl, pkxlml ymqbhakiqy w xbw
kpagalikhl k nyyt naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, yn gbkn gli xbgrk vlnbiqkh ny
dlihtík k nk flgk hy nk xymxk gbyvk, w ny yimyñktík nkm nkcbikm hy tbahytk,
pkxlmkm kimaxamxl yi qlhk nk xkigrk, w kbi yi qlhk ymdkñk; w híolny uby
nnyvktík gli én cbmqlml yiqtyqyiaxayiql, k gkbmk uby ytk xlel uby mkfík
rkgyt naftlm dktk axdtaxat w dktk hatacatnlm k dtíigadym. paiknxyiqy, yn
dtaxl vail gli bik dlnnaik dtyñkhk, gbwk knfkthk gbftík bi ckwkhl qkdyqy l
ktdannytk. yimannó mkigrl k tlgaikiqy w khytyeó kn tbgal, dtlvywó mbm
knpltokm, k nkm gbknym kglxdkñktli nkm hyn dtaxl, kmaxamxl fayi dtlvyíhkm,
w, yiglxyiháihlmy k halm w hymdyhaéihlmy hy qlhlm, my dbmaytli yi gkxail,
qlxkihl nk hyttlqk hy nk pkxlmk gbyvk hy xliqymailm.

yi yn gkxail dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy kn dtaxl hy ubé céiytl w gknahkh ytki mbm
yoytgagalm, mb dtlpymaói w ymqbhalm; k nl uby én tymdlihaó uby mb
dtlpymaói ytk myt rbxkiamqk; mbm yoytgagalm w ymqbhalm, glxdliyt naftlm
dktk hkt k nk ymqkxdk, qlhlm hy ctki dtlvygrl w il xyilm yiqtyqyiaxayiql
dktk nk tydúfnagk; uby yn bil my aiqaqbnkfk yn hy nkm naftykm, hlihy daiqk
myqygayiqkm w qtym naftykm, gli mbm glnltym, xlqym w gaptkm, hy hlihy
dlhíki mkgkt w qlxkt nkm uby ubamaymyi yi qayxdl hy paymqkm w tyclgaolm nlm
gkfknnytlm gltqymkilm, mai kihktnkm xyihackihl hy ikhay, ia nkxfagkihl,
glxl hagyi, yn gytfynl, dlt mkgktnkm glipltxym k mbm hymylm y aiqyigaliym.

-dltuby hlw kn gynlml, kn hymhyñkhl, kn lnvahkhl w kn kbmyiqy nkm uby nym
glivayiyi, uby nym vyihtái xám obmqkm uby dygkhltkm. lqtl naftl qyicl
qkxfaéi, k ubayi ry hy nnkxkt xyqkxltpómylm, l lvahal ymdkñln, hy aivyigaói
ibyvk w tktk; dltuby yi én, axaqkihl k lvahal k nl fbtnymgl, daiql ubaéi
pby nk catknhk hy myvannk w yn Áicyn hy nk xkhknyik, ubaéi yn gkñl hy
vygaicbyttk, hy góthlfk, ubaéiym nlm qltlm hy cbamkihl, nk mayttk xltyik,
nkm pbyiqym hy nyckiaqlm w nkvkdaém, yi xkhtah, il lnvaháihlxy hy nk hyn
dalol, hy nk hyn gkñl hltkhl w hy nk dtaltk; w ymql, gli mbm knycltíkm,
xyqápltkm w qtkimnkgaliym, hy xlhl uby knyctki, mbmdyihyi w yimyñki k bi
xamxl dbiql. lqtl naftl qyicl, uby ny nnkxl mbdnyxyiql k vatcanal dlnahltl,
uby qtkqk hy nk aivyigaói hy nkm glmkm, uby ym hy ctkihy ytbhagaói w
ymqbhal, k gkbmk uby nkm glmkm uby my hyoó hy hygat dlnahltl hy ctki
mbmqkigak, nkm kvytacbl wl, w nkm hygnktl dlt cyiqan ymqanl. lnvahómyny k
vatcanal hy hygnktktilm ubaéi pby yn dtaxytl uby qbvl gkqkttl yi yn xbihl,
w yn dtaxytl uby qlxó nkm bigaliym dktk gbtktmy hyn xltfl cánagl, w wl nl
hygnktl kn day hy nk nyqtk, w nl kbqltael gli xám hy vyaiqy w gaigl
kbqltym: dltuby vyk vbymk xytgyh ma ry qtkfkokhl fayi w ma rk hy myt úqan
yn qkn naftl k qlhl yn xbihl.

mkigrl, uby rkfík ymqkhl xbw kqyiql k nk ikttkgaói hyn dtaxl, ny haol:

-híckxy, myñlt, kmí halm ny hé fbyik xkihytygrk yi nk axdtymaói hy mbm
naftlm: ¿mkftíkxy hygat, uby mí mkftá, dbym qlhl nl mkfy, ubaéi pby yn
dtaxytl uby my tkmgó yi nk gkfyek, uby wl dktk xí qyicl uby hyfaó hy myt
ibymqtl dkhty khái?

-mí mytík -tymdlihaó yn dtaxl-, dltuby khái il rkw hbhk mail uby qbvl
gkfyek w gkfynnlm; w, mayihl ymql kmí, w mayihl yn dtaxyt rlxfty hyn xbihl,
kncbik vye my tkmgktík.

-kmí nl gtyl wl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; dytl híckxy krltk: ¿ubaéi pby yn dtaxyt
vlnqykhlt hyn xbihl?

-yi vythkh, rytxkil -tymdlihaó yn dtaxl-, uby il xy mkfté hyqytxaikt dlt
krltk, rkmqk uby nl ymqbhay. wl nl ymqbhakté, yi vlnvayihl khlihy qyicl xam
naftlm, w wl lm mkqampkté gbkihl lqtk vye ilm vykxlm, uby il rk hy myt émqk
nk dlmqtytk.

-dbym xaty, myñlt -tydnagó mkigrl-, il qlxy qtkfkol yi ymql, uby krltk ry
gkíhl yi nk gbyiqk hy nl uby ny ry dtycbiqkhl. mydk uby yn dtaxyt vlnqykhlt
hyn xbihl pby nbgapyt, gbkihl ny ygrktli l kttloktli hyn gaynl, uby vail
vlnqykihl rkmqk nlm kfamxlm.

-qayiym tkeói, kxacl -haol yn dtaxl.

w haol hli ubaolqy:

-ymk dtycbiqk w tymdbymqk il ym qbwk, mkigrl: k kncbil nkm rkm líhl hygat.

-gknny, myñlt -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby k fbyik py uby ma xy hlw k dtycbiqkt w
k tymdlihyt, uby il kgkfy hy kubí k xkñkik. mí, uby dktk dtycbiqkt
iygyhkhym w tymdlihyt hamdktkqym il ry xyiymqyt wl kihkt fbmgkihl kwbhk hy
vygailm.

-xám rkm hagrl, mkigrl, hy nl uby mkfym -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby rkw kncbilm
uby my gkimki yi mkfyt w kvytacbkt glmkm uby, hymdbém hy mkfahkm w
kvytacbkhkm, il axdltqki bi kthaqy kn yiqyihaxayiql ia k nk xyxltak.

yi ymqkm w lqtkm cbmqlmkm dnáqagkm my nym dkmó kubyn hík, w k nk ilgry my
knfytcktli yi bik dyubyñk knhyk, khlihy yn dtaxl haol k hli ubaolqy uby
hymhy knní k nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm il rkfík xám hy hlm nycbkm, w uby ma
nnyvkfk hyqytxaikhl hy yiqtkt yi ynnk, ytk xyiymqyt dtlvytmy hy mlckm, dktk
kqktmy w hymglncktmy yi mb dtlpbihahkh.

hli ubaolqy haol uby, kbiuby nnyckmy kn kfamxl, rkfík hy vyt hóihy dktkfk;
w kmí, glxdtktli gkma gayi ftkekm hy mlck, w lqtl hík, k nkm hlm hy nk
qkthy, nnycktli k nk gbyvk, gbwk flgk ym ymdkgalmk w kigrk, dytl nnyik hy
gkxftliytkm w gkftkríclm, hy ektekm w xknyekm, qki ymdymkm w aiqtagkhkm,
uby hy qlhl yi qlhl nk gaycki w yigbftyi. yi vaéihlnk, my kdyktli yn dtaxl,
mkigrl w hli ubaolqy, kn gbkn nlm hlm ny kqktli nbycl pltqímaxkxyiqy gli
nkm mlckm; w, yi qkiql uby ny pkokfki w gyñíki, ny haol mkigrl:

-xaty vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, nl uby rkgy: il my ubaytk mydbnqkt yi
vahk, ia my dlick khlihy dktyegk ptkmgl uby ny dliyi k yiptakt yi kncúi
dlel. mí, uby k vbymqtk xytgyh il ny qlgk ia kqkñy myt yn ymgbhtañkhlt
hymqk uby hyfy hy myt dylt uby xkexlttk.

-kqk w gknnk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby qkn yxdtymk glxl kubémqk, mkigrl
kxacl, dktk xí ymqkfk cbkthkhk.

w yiqligym haol nk cbík:

-mbdnagl k vbymk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby xaty fayi w ymdygbny gli
gayi lolm nl uby rkw knná hyiqtl: ubaeá rkftá glmkm uby nkm dlick wl yi yn
naftl hy xam qtkimpltxkgaliym.

-yi xkilm ymqá yn dkihytl uby ny mkftá fayi qkñyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek.

hagrl ymql w kgkfkhk nk nackhbtk hy hli ubaolqy -uby il pby mlfty yn ktiém,
mail mlfty yn obfói hy ktxkt-, haol hli ubaolqy:

-aikhvytqahlm ryxlm kihkhl yi il rkfytilm dtlvyíhl hy kncúi ymubanói
dyubyñl, uby pbytk kqkhl obiql k xí yi ymqk xymxk mlck, gli gbwl mliahl my
yiqyihaytk uby qlhkvík fkokfk w ymqkfk vavl; dytl, dbym wk il ym dlmafny, k
nk xkil hy halm, uby xy cbíy.

w nbycl my raigó hy tlhannkm w rael bik ltkgaói yi vle fkok kn gaynl,
dahayihl k halm ny kwbhkmy w ny haymy fbyi mbgyml yi kubynnk, kn dktygyt,
dynactlmk w ibyvk kvyiqbtk, w yi vle knqk haol nbycl:

-¡lr myñltk hy xam kggaliym w xlvaxayiqlm, gnktímaxk w mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml! ma ym dlmafny uby nnycbyi k qbm líhlm nkm dnycktakm w tlckgaliym
hymqy qb vyiqbtlml kxkiqy, dlt qb aikbhaqk fynnyek qy tbycl nkm ymgbgrym,
uby il mli lqtkm uby tlcktqy il xy iaycbym qb pkvlt w kxdktl, krltk uby
qkiql ny ry xyiymqyt. wl vlw k hymdyñktxy, k yxdlektxy w k rbihatxy yi yn
kfamxl uby kubí my xy tydtymyiqk, mónl dltuby glilegk yn xbihl uby ma qú xy
pkvltygym, il rkftá axdlmafny k ubayi wl il kglxyqk w kgkfy.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, my kgytgó k nk maxk; val il myt dlmafny hymglncktmy,
ia rkgyt nbckt k nk yiqtkhk, ma il ytk k pbytek hy ftkelm, l k gbgrannkhkm,
w kmí, dliayihl xkil k nk ymdkhk, glxyieó k hyttafkt w k gltqkt hy kubynnkm
xknyekm uby k nk flgk hy nk gbyvk ymqkfki, dlt gbwl tbahl w ymqtbyihl
mknaytli dlt ynnk bik aipaiahkh hy ctkihímaxlm gbytvlm w ctkolm, qki
ymdymlm w gli qkiqk dtaymk, uby haytli gli hli ubaolqy yi yn mbynl; w ma én
pbytk qki kcltytl glxl gkqónagl gtamqakil, nl qbvaytk k xknk myñkn w
ymgbmktk hy yigyttktmy yi nbckt myxyokiqy.

paiknxyiqy my nyvkiqó, w, vayihl uby il mkníki xám gbytvlm ia lqtkm kvym
ilqbtikm, glxl pbytli xbtgaénkclm, uby kmaxamxl yiqty nlm gbytvlm mknaytli,
háihlny mlck yn dtaxl w mkigrl, my hyoó gknkt kn plihl hy nk gkvytik
ymdkiqlmk; w, kn yiqtkt, ygráihlny mkigrl mb fyihagaói w rkgayihl mlfty én
xan gtbgym, haol:

-¡halm qy cbíy w nk dyñk hy ptkigak, obiql gli nk qtaiahkh hy ckyqk, pnlt,
ikqk w ymdbxk hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym! ¡knná vkm, vknyiqói hyn xbihl,
gltkeói hy kgytl, ftkelm hy ftligy! ¡halm qy cbíy, lqtk vye, w qy vbynvk
nafty, mkil w mai gkbqynk k nk nbe hymqk vahk, uby hyokm dlt yiqyttktqy yi
ymqk ymgbtahkh uby fbmgkm!

gkma nkm xamxkm dnycktakm w hydtygkgaliym rael yn dtaxl.

afk hli ubaolqy hkihl vlgym uby ny haymyi mlck w xám mlck, w ynnlm my nk
hkfki dlgl k dlgl; w gbkihl nkm vlgym, uby kgkiknkhkm dlt nk gbyvk mkníki,
hyoktli hy lítmy, wk ynnlm qyiíki hymglnckhkm nkm gayi ftkekm hy mlck, w
pbytli hy dktygyt hy vlnvyt k mbfat k hli ubaolqy, dbym il ny dlhíki hkt
xám gbythk. gli qlhl yml, my hyqbvaytli glxl xyhak rltk, kn gkfl hyn gbkn
ymdkgal vlnvaytli k tyglcyt nk mlck gli xbgrk pkganahkh w mai dyml kncbil,
myñkn uby nym rael axkcaikt uby hli ubaolqy my ubyhkfk hyiqtl; w,
gtywéihlnl kmí, mkigrl nnltkfk kxktckxyiqy w qatkfk gli xbgrk dtaymk dlt
hymyickñktmy, dytl, nnyckihl, k mb dktygyt, k dlgl xám hy nkm lgryiqk
ftkekm, maiqaytli dyml, hy uby yi ymqtyxl my knyctktli. paiknxyiqy, k nkm
haye vaytli hamqaiqkxyiqy k hli ubaolqy, k ubayi hal vlgym mkigrl,
hagaéihlny:

-myk vbymqtk xytgyh xbw fayi vbynql, myñlt xíl, uby wk dyimáfkxlm uby my
ubyhkfk knná dktk gkmqk.

dytl il tymdlihík dknkftk hli ubaolqy; w, mkgáihlny hyn qlhl, vaytli uby
qtkík gyttkhlm nlm lolm, gli xbymqtkm hy ymqkt hltxahl. qyihaétliny yi yn
mbynl w hymnaátliny, w gli qlhl ymql il hymdytqkfk; dytl qkiql ny vlnvaytli
w tyvlnvaytli, mkgbhaytli w xyiyktli, uby kn gkfl hy bi fbyi ymdkgal vlnvaó
yi mí, hymdytyeáihlmy, fayi glxl ma hy kncúi ctkvy w dtlpbihl mbyñl
hymdytqktk; w, xatkihl k bik w lqtk dktqy, glxl ymdkiqkhl, haol:

-halm lm nl dythliy, kxaclm; uby xy rkféam ubaqkhl hy nk xám mkftlmk w
kctkhkfny vahk w vamqk uby iaicúi rbxkil rk vamql ia dkmkhl. yi ypygql,
krltk kgkfl hy glilgyt uby qlhlm nlm gliqyiqlm hymqk vahk dkmki glxl mlxftk
w mbyñl, l my xktgraqki glxl nk pnlt hyn gkxdl. ¡lr hymhagrkhl xliqymailm!
¡lr xkn pytahl hbtkihktqy! ¡lr mai vyiqbtk fynytxk! ¡lr nnltlml cbkhakik, w
vlmlqtkm mai hagrk aokm hy tbahytk, uby xlmqtáam yi vbymqtkm kcbkm nkm uby
nnltktli vbymqtlm rytxlmlm lolm!

ymgbgrkfki yn dtaxl w mkigrl nkm dknkftkm hy hli ubaolqy, uby nkm hygík
glxl ma gli hlnlt aixyiml nkm mkgktk hy nkm yiqtkñkm. mbdnagátliny nym
haymy k yiqyihyt nl uby hygík, w nym haoymy nl uby yi kubyn aipaytil rkfík
vamql.

-¿aipaytil ny nnkxáam? -haol hli ubaolqy-; dbym il ny nnkxéam kimí, dltuby
il nl xytygy, glxl nbycl vytéam.

dahaó uby ny haymyi kncl hy glxyt, uby qtkík ctkihímaxk rkxfty. qyihaytli
nk ktdannytk hyn dtaxl mlfty nk vythy wytfk, kgbhaytli k nk hymdyimk hy mbm
knpltokm, w, myiqkhlm qlhlm qtym yi fbyi kxlt w glxdkñk, xytyihktli w
gyiktli, qlhl obiql. nyvkiqkhk nk ktdannytk, haol hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk:

-il my nyvkiqy ikhay, w ymqkhxy, raolm, qlhlm kqyiqlm.





gkdíqbnl zzaaa. hy nkm khxatkfnym glmkm uby yn ymqtyxkhl hli ubaolqy gliqó
uby rkfík vamql yi nk dtlpbihk gbyvk hy xliqymailm, gbwk axdlmafanahkh w
ctkihyek rkgy uby my qyick ymqk kvyiqbtk dlt kdógtapk


nkm gbkqtl hy nk qkthy mytíki gbkihl yn mln, yiqty ibfym gbfaytql, gli nbe
ymgkmk w qyxdnkhlm tkwlm, hal nbckt k hli ubaolqy dktk uby, mai gknlt w
dymkhbxfty, gliqkmy k mbm hlm gnktímaxlm lwyiqym nl uby yi nk gbyvk hy
xliqymailm rkfík vamql. w glxyieó yi yn xlhl macbayiqy:

-k lftk hy hlgy l gkqltgy ymqkhlm hy nk dtlpbihahkh hymqk xkexlttk, k nk
hytygrk xkil, my rkgy bik gligkvahkh w ymdkgal gkdke hy dlhyt gkfyt yi ynnk
bi ctki gkttl gli mbm xbnkm. Éiqtkny bik dyubyñk nbe dlt bilm tymubagalm l
kcboytlm, uby nyolm ny tymdlihyi, kfaytqlm yi nk mbdytpagay hy nk qayttk.
ymqk gligkvahkh w ymdkgal va wl k qayxdl gbkihl wk afk gkimkhl w xlríil hy
vytxy, dyihayiqy w glnckhl hy nk mlck, gkxaikt dlt kubynnk ymgbtk tycaói
kfkol, mai nnyvkt gaytql ia hyqytxaikhl gkxail; w kmí, hyqytxaié yiqtktxy
yi ynnk w hymgkimkt bi dlgl. ha vlgym, dahaéihllm uby il hymglncámyhym xám
mlck rkmqk uby wl lm nl haoymy, dytl il hyfamqym hy lítxy. pba tyglcayihl
nk mlck uby yivaáfkhym, w, rkgayihl hynnk bik tlmgk l taxytl, xy myiqé
mlfty én, dyimkqavl khyxám, glimahytkihl nl uby rkgyt hyfík dktk gknkt kn
plihl, il qyiayihl ubaéi xy mbmqyiqkmy; w, ymqkihl yi ymqy dyimkxayiql w
glipbmaói, hy tydyiqy w mai dtlgbtktnl, xy mknqyó bi mbyñl dtlpbihímaxl; w,
gbkihl xyilm nl dyimkfk, mai mkfyt góxl ia góxl il, hymdytqé hén w xy rknné
yi nk xaqkh hyn xám fynnl, kxyil w hynyaqlml dtkhl uby dbyhy gtakt nk
ikqbtknyek ia axkcaikt nk xám hamgtyqk axkcaikgaói rbxkik. hymdkfané nlm
lolm, naxdaéxynlm, w va uby il hltxík, mail uby tyknxyiqy ymqkfk hymdaytql;
gli qlhl ymql, xy qyiqé nk gkfyek w nlm dygrlm, dlt gytqapagktxy ma ytk wl
xamxl yn uby knní ymqkfk, l kncbik pkiqkmxk vkik w gliqtkrygrk; dytl yn
qkgql, yn myiqaxayiql, nlm hamgbtmlm gligytqkhlm uby yiqty xí rkgík, xy
gytqapagktli uby wl ytk knní yiqligym yn uby mlw kubí krltk. lptygaómyxy
nbycl k nk vamqk bi tykn w mbiqblml dknkgal l kngáekt, gbwlm xbtlm w
dktyhym dktygíki hy qtkimdktyiqy w gnktl gtamqkn pkftagkhlm; hyn gbkn
kftaéihlmy hlm ctkihym dbytqkm, va uby dlt ynnkm mkník w rkgík xí my vyiík
bi vyiytkfny kigakil, vymqahl gli bi gkdbe hy fkwyqk xltkhk, uby dlt yn
mbynl ny kttkmqtkfk: gyñíkny nlm rlxftlm w nlm dygrlm bik fygk hy glnycakn,
hy tkml vythy; gbftíkny nk gkfyek bik clttk xankiymk iyctk, w nk fktfk,
gkiímaxk, ny dkmkfk hy nk gaiqbtk; il qtkík ktxk iaicbik, mail bi tlmktal
hy gbyiqkm yi nk xkil, xkwltym uby xyhakikm ibygym, w nlm haygym kmaxamxl
glxl rbyvlm xyhakilm hy kvymqtbe; yn gliqaiyiqy, yn dkml, nk ctkvyhkh w nk
kigrímaxk dtymyigak, gkhk glmk hy dlt mí w qlhkm obiqkm, xy mbmdyihaytli w
khxatktli. nnycómy k xí, w nl dtaxytl uby rael pby kftkektxy ymqtygrkxyiqy,
w nbycl hygatxy: ''nbyiclm qayxdlm rk, vknytlml gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, uby nlm uby ymqkxlm yi ymqkm mlnyhkhym yigkiqkhlm ymdytkxlm vytqy,
dktk uby hym ilqagak kn xbihl hy nl uby yigayttk w gbfty nk dtlpbihk gbyvk
dlt hlihy rkm yiqtkhl, nnkxkhk nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm: rkekñk mónl cbkthkhk
dktk myt kglxyqahk hy qb aivyigafny gltkeói w hy qb áiaxl mqbdyihl. vyi
glixacl, myñlt gnktímaxl, uby qy ubaytl xlmqtkt nkm xktkvannkm uby ymqy
qtkimdktyiqy kngáekt mlnkdk, hy ubayi wl mlw kngkahy w cbkthk xkwlt
dytdyqbk, dltuby mlw yn xamxl xliqymailm, hy ubayi nk gbyvk qlxk ilxfty''.
kdyikm xy haol uby ytk xliqymailm, gbkihl ny dtycbiqé ma pby vythkh nl uby
yi yn xbihl hy kgá kttafk my gliqkfk: uby én rkfík mkgkhl hy nk xaqkh hyn
dygrl, gli bik dyubyñk hkck, yn gltkeói hy mb ctkihy kxacl hbtkihktqy w
nnyváhlny k nk myñltk fynytxk, glxl én my nl xkihó kn dbiql hy mb xbytqy.
tymdlihaóxy uby yi qlhl hygíki vythkh, mail yi nk hkck, dltuby il pby hkck,
ia dyubyñk, mail bi dbñkn fbahl, xám kcbhl uby bik nyeik.

-hyfík hy myt -haol k ymqy dbiql mkigrl- yn qkn dbñkn hy tkxói hy rlgym, yn
myvannkil.

-il mé -dtlmacbaó hli ubaolqy-, dytl il mytík hymy dbñknytl, dltuby tkxói
hy rlgym pby kwyt, w nl hy tligymvknnym, hlihy kgliqygaó ymqk hymctkgak, rk
xbgrlm kñlm; w ymqk kvytacbkgaói il ym hy axdltqkigak, ia qbtfk ia knqytk
nk vythkh w gliqymql hy nk ramqltak.

-kmí ym -tymdlihaó yn dtaxl-; dtlmack vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy,
uby ny ymgbgrl gli yn xkwlt cbmql hyn xbihl.

-il gli xyilt nl gbyiql wl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w kmí, hacl uby yn
vyiytkfny xliqymailm xy xyqaó yi yn gtamqknail dknkgal, hlihy yi bik mknk
fkok, ptymubímaxk mlftyxlhl w qlhk hy knkfkmqtl, ymqkfk bi mydbngtl hy
xátxln, gli ctki xkymqtík pkftagkhl, mlfty yn gbkn va k bi gkfknnytl
qyihahl hy nktcl k nktcl, il hy ftligy, ia hy xátxln, ia hy okmdy rygrl,
glxl nlm mbyny rkfyt yi lqtlm mydbngtlm, mail hy dbtk gktiy w hy dbtlm
rbymlm. qyiík nk xkil hytygrk (uby, k xa dktygyt, ym kncl dynbhk w iytvlmk,
myñkn hy qyiyt xbgrkm pbytekm mb hbyñl) dbymqk mlfty yn nkhl hyn gltkeói,
w, kiqym uby dtycbiqkmy ikhk k xliqymailm, vaéihlxy mbmdyiml xatkihl kn hyn
mydbngtl, xy haol: ''Émqy ym xa kxacl hbtkihktqy, pnlt w ymdyol hy nlm
gkfknnytlm yikxltkhlm w vknayiqym hy mb qayxdl; qaéiyny kubí yigkiqkhl,
glxl xy qayiy k xí w k lqtlm xbgrlm w xbgrkm, xytníi, kubyn ptkigém
yigkiqkhlt uby hagyi uby pby raol hyn hakfnl; w nl uby wl gtyl ym uby il
pby raol hyn hakfnl, mail uby mbdl, glxl hagyi, bi dbiql xám uby yn hakfnl.
yn góxl l dktk ubé ilm yigkiqó ikhay nl mkfy, w ynnl hatá kihkihl nlm
qayxdlm, uby il ymqái xbw nyolm, mycúi axkcail. nl uby k xí xy khxatk ym
uby mé, qki gaytql glxl krltk ym hy hík, uby hbtkihktqy kgkfó nlm hy mb
vahk yi xam ftkelm, w uby hymdbém hy xbytql ny mkubé yn gltkeói gli xam
dtldakm xkilm; w yi vythkh uby hyfík hy dymkt hlm naftkm, dltuby, mycúi nlm
ikqbtknym, yn uby qayiy xkwlt gltkeói ym hlqkhl hy xkwlt vknyiqík hyn uby
ny qayiy dyubyñl. dbym mayihl ymql kmí, w uby tyknxyiqy xbtaó ymqy
gkfknnytl, ¿góxl krltk my ubyok w mlmdatk hy gbkihl yi gbkihl, glxl ma
ymqbvaymy vavl?'' ymql hagrl, yn xímytl hbtkihktqy, hkihl bik ctki vle,
haol:

   ''¡lr, xa dtaxl xliqymailm!
   nl dlmqtytl uby lm tlckfk,
   uby gbkihl wl pbyty xbytql,
   w xa áiaxk kttkigkhk,
   uby nnyvéam xa gltkeói
   khlihy fynytxk ymqkfk,
   mkgáihlxyny hyn dygrl,
   wk gli dbñkn, wk gli hkck.''

lwyihl nl gbkn yn vyiytkfny xliqymailm, my dbml hy tlhannkm kiqy yn
nkmqaxkhl gkfknnytl, w, gli náctaxkm yi nlm lolm, ny haol: ''wk, myñlt
hbtkihktqy, gktímaxl dtaxl xíl, wk ragy nl uby xy xkihkmqym yi yn kgakcl
hík hy ibymqtk déthahk: wl lm mkubé yn gltkeói nl xyolt uby dbhy, mai uby
lm hyokmy bik xíiaxk dktqy yi yn dygrl; wl ny naxdaé gli bi dkñaebynl hy
dbiqkm; wl dktqí gli én hy gkttytk dktk ptkigak, rkfaéihllm dtaxytl dbymql
yi yn myil hy nk qayttk, gli qkiqkm náctaxkm, uby pbytli fkmqkiqym k
nkvktxy nkm xkilm w naxdaktxy gli ynnkm nk mkicty uby qyiíki, hy rkfytlm
kihkhl yi nkm yiqtkñkm; w, dlt xám myñkm, dtaxl hy xa knxk, yi yn dtaxytl
nbckt uby qldé, mknayihl hy tligymvknnym, ygré bi dlgl hy mkn yi vbymqtl
gltkeói, dltuby il lnaymy xkn, w pbymy, ma il ptymgl, k nl xyilm kxlokxkhl,
k nk dtymyigak hy nk myñltk fynytxk; nk gbkn, gli vlm, w glixacl, w gli
cbkhakik, vbymqtl ymgbhytl, w gli nk hbyñk tbahytk w mbm mayqy raokm w hlm
mlftaikm, w gli lqtlm xbgrlm hy vbymqtlm glilgahlm w kxaclm, ilm qayiy kubí
yigkiqkhlm yn mkfal xytníi rk xbgrlm kñlm; w, kbiuby dkmki hy ubaiayiqlm,
il my rk xbytql iaicbil hy ilmlqtlm: mlnkxyiqy pknqki tbahytk w mbm raokm w
mlftaikm, nkm gbknym nnltkihl, dlt glxdkmaói uby hyfaó hy qyiyt xytníi
hynnkm, nkm glivatqaó yi lqtkm qkiqkm nkcbikm, uby krltk, yi yn xbihl hy
nlm vavlm w yi nk dtlvaigak hy nk xkigrk, nkm nnkxki nkm nkcbikm hy
tbahytk; nkm mayqy mli hy nlm tywym hy ymdkñk, w nkm hlm mlftaikm, hy nlm
gkfknnytlm hy bik lthyi mkiqímaxk, uby nnkxki hy mki obki. cbkhakik,
vbymqtl ymgbhytl, dnkñyihl kmaxymxl vbymqtk hymctkgak, pby glivytqahl yi bi
tíl nnkxkhl hy mb xymxl ilxfty; yn gbkn, gbkihl nnycó k nk mbdytpagay hy nk
qayttk w val yn mln hyn lqtl gaynl, pby qkiql yn dymkt uby maiqaó hy vyt
uby lm hyokfk, uby my mbxytcaó yi nkm yiqtkñkm hy nk qayttk; dytl, glxl il
ym dlmafny hyokt hy kgbhat k mb ikqbtkn glttayiqy, hy gbkihl yi gbkihl mkny
w my xbymqtk hlihy yn mln w nkm cyiqym ny vyki. vkiny khxaiamqtkihl hy mbm
kcbkm nkm typytahkm nkcbikm, gli nkm gbknym w gli lqtkm xbgrkm uby my
nnycki, yiqtk dlxdlml w ctkihy yi dltqbckn. dytl, gli qlhl ymql, dlt
hlihyubaytk uby vk xbymqtk mb qtamqyek w xynkiglník, w il my dtygak hy
gtakt yi mbm kcbkm dygym tycknkhlm w hy ymqaxk, mail fbthlm w hymkftahlm,
fayi hapytyiqym hy nlm hyn qkol hltkhl; w ymql uby kcltk lm hacl, ¡lr dtaxl
xíl!, lm nl ry hagrl xbgrkm vygym; w, glxl il xy tymdlihéam, axkcail uby il
xy hkam gtéhaql, l il xy lím, hy nl uby wl tygafl qkiqk dyik gbkn halm nl
mkfy. bikm ibyvkm lm ubaytl hkt krltk, nkm gbknym, wk uby il matvki hy
knaval k vbymqtl hlnlt, il lm ny kbxyiqktái yi iaicbik xkiytk. mkfyh uby
qyiéam kubí yi vbymqtk dtymyigak, w kftah nlm lolm w vytéamnl, kubyn ctki
gkfknnytl hy ubayi qkiqkm glmkm qayiy dtlpyqaekhkm yn mkfal xytníi, kubyn
hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, hacl, uby hy ibyvl w gli xkwltym vyiqkokm uby yi
nlm dkmkhlm macnlm rk tymbgaqkhl yi nlm dtymyiqym nk wk lnvahkhk kihkiqy
gkfknnytík, dlt gbwl xyhal w pkvlt dlhtík myt uby ilmlqtlm pbémyxlm
hymyigkiqkhlm; uby nkm ctkihym rkekñkm dktk nlm ctkihym rlxftym ymqái
cbkthkhkm''. ''w gbkihl kmí il myk -tymdlihaó yn nkmqaxkhl hbtkihktqy gli
vle hymxkwkhk w fkok-, gbkihl kmí il myk, ¡lr dtaxl!, hacl, dkgayigak w
fktkokt''. w, vlnvaéihlmy hy nkhl, qltió k mb kglmqbxftkhl manyigal, mai
rkfnkt xám dknkftk. lwétlimy yi ymql ctkihym knktahlm w nnkiqlm,
kglxdkñkhlm hy dtlpbihlm cyxahlm w kicbmqakhlm mlnnlelm; vlnví nk gkfyek, w
va dlt nkm dktyhym hy gtamqkn uby dlt lqtk mknk dkmkfk bik dtlgymaói hy hlm
ranytkm hy rytxlmímaxkm hligynnkm, qlhkm vymqahkm hy nbql, gli qbtfkiqym
fnkiglm mlfty nkm gkfyekm, kn xlhl qbtubymgl. kn gkfl w pai hy nkm ranytkm
vyiík bik myñltk, uby yi nk ctkvyhkh nl dktygík, kmaxamxl vymqahk hy iyctl,
gli qlgkm fnkigkm qki qyihahkm w nktckm, uby fymkfki nk qayttk. mb qbtfkiqy
ytk xkwlt hlm vygym uby yn xkwlt hy kncbik hy nkm lqtkm; ytk gyoaobiqk w nk
iktae kncl grkqk; nk flgk ctkihy, dytl glnltkhlm nlm nkfalm; nlm hayiqym,
uby qkn vye nlm hymgbftík, xlmqtkfki myt tknlm w il fayi dbymqlm, kbiuby
ytki fnkiglm glxl bikm dynkhkm knxyihtkm; qtkík yi nkm xkilm bi nayiel
hynckhl, w yiqty én, k nl uby dbhy havamkt, bi gltkeói hy gktiy xlxak,
mycúi vyiík mygl w kxlokxkhl. híolxy xliqymailm glxl qlhk kubynnk cyiqy hy
nk dtlgymaói ytki matvayiqym hy hbtkihktqy w hy fynytxk, uby knní gli mbm
hlm myñltym ymqkfki yigkiqkhlm, w uby nk únqaxk, uby qtkík yn gltkeói yiqty
yn nayiel w yi nkm xkilm, ytk nk myñltk fynytxk, nk gbkn gli mbm hligynnkm
gbkqtl híkm yi nk myxkik rkgíki kubynnk dtlgymaói w gkiqkfki, l, dlt xyolt
hygat, nnltkfki yihygrkm mlfty yn gbytdl w mlfty yn nkmqaxkhl gltkeói hy mb
dtaxl; w uby ma xy rkfík dktygahl kncl pyk, l il qki rytxlmk glxl qyiík nk
pkxk, ytk nk gkbmk nkm xknkm ilgrym w dyltym híkm uby yi kubyn yigkiqkxyiql
dkmkfk, glxl nl dlhík vyt yi mbm ctkihym loytkm w yi mb glnlt ubyftkhaek.
''w il qlxk lgkmaói mb kxktannye w mbm loytkm hy ymqkt gli yn xkn xyiman,
lthaiktal yi nkm xboytym, dltuby rk xbgrlm xymym, w kbi kñlm, uby il ny
qayiy ia kmlxk dlt mbm dbytqkm, mail hyn hlnlt uby mayiqy mb gltkeói dlt yn
uby hy gliqail qayiy yi nkm xkilm, uby ny tyibyvk w qtky k nk xyxltak nk
hymctkgak hy mb xkn nlctkhl kxkiqy; uby ma ymql il pbytk, kdyikm nk
acbknktk yi rytxlmbtk, hlikaty w ftíl nk ctki hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, qki
gynyftkhk yi qlhlm ymqlm gliqltilm, w kbi yi qlhl yn xbihl''. ''¡gydlm
ubyhlm! -haoy wl yiqligym-, myñlt hli xliqymailm: gbyiqy vbymk xytgyh mb
ramqltak glxl hyfy, uby wk mkfy uby qlhk glxdktkgaói ym lhalmk, w kmí, il
rkw dktk ubé glxdktkt k ikhay gli ikhay. nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml ym
ubayi ym, w nk myñltk hlñk fynytxk ym ubayi ym, w ubayi rk mahl, w ubéhymy
kubí''. k nl uby én xy tymdlihaó: ''myñlt hli ubaolqy, dythóiyxy vbymk
xytgyh, uby wl glipayml uby kihbvy xkn, w il haoy fayi yi hygat uby kdyikm
acbknktk nk myñltk hbngaiyk k nk myñltk fynytxk, dbym xy fkmqkfk k xí rkfyt
yiqyihahl, dlt il mé ubé fkttbiqlm, uby vbymk xytgyh ym mb gkfknnytl, dktk
uby xy xlthaytk nk nyicbk kiqym hy glxdktktnk mail gli yn xamxl gaynl''.
gli ymqk mkqampkgaói uby xy hal yn ctki xliqymailm my ubayqó xa gltkeói hyn
mlftymknql uby tygyfí yi lít uby k xa myñltk nk glxdktkfki gli fynytxk.

-w kbi xy xktkvannl wl -haol mkigrl- hy góxl vbymqtk xytgyh il my mbfaó
mlfty yn vyolqy, w ny xlnaó k glgym qlhlm nlm rbymlm, w ny dynó nkm fktfkm,
mai hyoktny dynl yi ynnkm.

-il, mkigrl kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, il xy ymqkfk k xí fayi rkgyt
yml, dltuby ymqkxlm qlhlm lfnackhlm k qyiyt tymdyql k nlm kigakilm, kbiuby
il myki gkfknnytlm, w dtaigadknxyiqy k nlm uby nl mli w ymqái yigkiqkhlm;
wl mé fayi uby il ilm ubyhkxlm k hyfyt ikhk yi lqtkm xbgrkm hyxkihkm w
tymdbymqkm uby yiqty nlm hlm dkmkxlm.

k ymqk mkeói haol yn dtaxl:

-wl il mé, myñlt hli ubaolqy, góxl vbymqtk xytgyh yi qki dlgl ymdkgal hy
qayxdl glxl rk uby ymqá knná fkol, rkwk vamql qkiqkm glmkm w rkfnkhl w
tymdlihahl qkiql.

-¿gbáiql rk uby fkoé? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-dlgl xám hy bik rltk -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-yml il dbyhy myt -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby knná xy kilgrygaó w
kxkiygaó, w qltió k kilgrygyt w kxkiygyt qtym vygym; hy xlhl uby, k xa
gbyiqk, qtym híkm ry ymqkhl yi kubynnkm dktqym tyxlqkm w ymglihahkm k nk
vamqk ibymqtk.

-vythkh hyfy hy hygat xa myñlt -haol mkigrl-, uby, glxl qlhkm nkm glmkm uby
ny rki mbgyhahl mli dlt yigkiqkxyiql, ubaeá nl uby k ilmlqtlm ilm dktygy bi
rltk, hyfy hy dktygyt knná qtym híkm gli mbm ilgrym.

-kmí mytá -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

-w ¿rk glxahl vbymqtk xytgyh yi qlhl ymqy qayxdl, myñlt xíl? -dtycbiqó yn
dtaxl.

-il xy ry hymkwbikhl hy flgkhl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ia kbi ry qyiahl
rkxfty, ia dlt dyimkxayiql.

-w nlm yigkiqkhlm, ¿glxyi? -haol yn dtaxl.

-il glxyi -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ia qayiyi ymgtyxyiqlm xkwltym; kbiuby ym
ldaiaói uby nym gtygyi nkm bñkm, nkm fktfkm w nlm gkfynnlm.

-¿w hbytxyi, dlt vyiqbtk, nlm yigkiqkhlm, myñlt? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

-il, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; k nl xyilm, yi ymqlm qtym híkm uby
wl ry ymqkhl gli ynnlm, iaicbil rk dyckhl yn lol, ia wl qkxdlgl.

-kubí yigkok fayi yn typtái -haol mkigrl- hy haxy gli ubaéi kihkm, hygatqy
ry ubaéi ytym: áihkmy vbymqtk xytgyh gli yigkiqkhlm kwbilm w vacankiqym,
xatkh ma ym xbgrl uby ia glxk ia hbytxk xayiqtkm gli ynnlm kihbvayty. dytl
dythóiyxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, ma ny hacl uby hy qlhl gbkiql kubí rk
hagrl, nnévyxy halm, uby afk k hygat yn hakfnl, ma ny gtyl glmk kncbik.

-¿góxl il? -haol yn dtaxl-, dbym ¿rkfík hy xyiqat yn myñlt hli ubaolqy,
uby, kbiuby ubamaytk, il rk qyiahl nbckt dktk glxdliyt y axkcaikt qkiql
xannói hy xyiqatkm?

-wl il gtyl uby xa myñlt xayiqy -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-ma il, ¿ubé gtyym? -ny dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-gtyl -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby kubyn xytníi, l kubynnlm yigkiqkhltym uby
yigkiqktli k qlhk nk grbmxk uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy uby rk vamql w
glxbiagkhl knná fkol, ny yigkoktli yi yn xkcíi l nk xyxltak qlhk ymk
xáubaik uby ilm rk gliqkhl, w qlhl kubynnl uby dlt gliqkt ny ubyhk.

-qlhl yml dbhaytk myt, mkigrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dytl il ym kmí, dltuby
nl uby ry gliqkhl nl va dlt xam dtldalm lolm w nl qlubé gli xam xamxkm
xkilm. dytl, ¿ubé hatám gbkihl qy hack wl krltk góxl, yiqty lqtkm aipaiaqkm
glmkm w xktkvannkm uby xy xlmqtó xliqymailm, nkm gbknym hymdkgal w k mbm
qayxdlm qy nkm até gliqkihl yi yn hamgbtml hy ibymqtl vakoy, dlt il myt
qlhkm hymqy nbckt, xy xlmqtó qtym nkftkhltkm uby dlt kubynnlm kxyiímaxlm
gkxdlm afki mknqkihl w ftaigkihl glxl gkftkm; w, kdyikm nkm rbfy vamql,
gbkihl glilgí myt nk bik nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, w nkm lqtkm hlm
kubynnkm xamxkm nkftkhltkm uby vyiíki gli ynnk, uby rkfnkxlm k nk mknahk
hyn qlflml? dtycbiqé k xliqymailm ma nkm glilgík, tymdlihaóxy uby il, dytl
uby én axkcaikfk uby hyfíki hy myt kncbikm myñltkm dtaigadknym yigkiqkhkm,
uby dlglm híkm rkfík uby yi kubynnlm dtkhlm rkfíki dktygahl; w uby il xy
xktkvannkmy hymql, dltuby knní ymqkfki lqtkm xbgrkm myñltkm hy nlm dkmkhlm
w dtymyiqym macnlm, yigkiqkhkm yi hapytyiqym w ymqtkñkm pacbtkm, yiqty nkm
gbknym glilgík én k nk tyaik caiyftk w mb hbyñk ubaiqkñlik, ymgkigakihl yn
vail k nkiektlqy,

gbkihl hy ftyqkñk vail.

gbkihl mkigrl dkiek lwó hygat ymql k mb kxl, dyimó dythyt yn obagal, l
xltatmy hy tamk; uby, glxl én mkfík nk vythkh hyn paicahl yigkiql hy
hbngaiyk, hy ubayi én rkfík mahl yn yigkiqkhlt w yn nyvkiqkhlt hy qkn
qymqaxlial, kgkfó hy glilgyt aihbfaqkfnyxyiqy uby mb myñlt ymqkfk pbytk hy
obagal w nlgl hy qlhl dbiql; w kmí, ny haol:

-yi xknk glwbiqbtk w yi dylt mkeói w yi kgakcl hík fkoó vbymqtk xytgyh,
gktl dkqtói xíl, kn lqtl xbihl, w yi xkn dbiql my yigliqtó gli yn myñlt
xliqymailm, uby qkn ilm ny rk vbynql. fayi my ymqkfk vbymqtk xytgyh kgá
kttafk gli mb yiqytl obagal, qkn gbkn halm my ny rkfík hkhl, rkfnkihl
myiqyigakm w hkihl glimyolm k gkhk dkml, w il kcltk, gliqkihl nlm xkwltym
hamdktkqym uby dbyhyi axkcaiktmy.

-glxl qy glilegl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, il rkcl gkml hy qbm
dknkftkm.

-ia wl qkxdlgl hy nkm hy vbymqtk xytgyh -tydnagó mkigrl-, maubaytk xy
raytk, maubaytk xy xkqy dlt nkm uby ny ry hagrl, l dlt nkm uby ny dayiml
hygat ma yi nkm mbwkm il my glttacy w yixayihk. dytl híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh,
krltk uby ymqkxlm yi dke: ¿góxl l yi ubé glilgaó k nk myñltk ibymqtk kxk? w
ma nk rkfnó, ¿ubé haol, w ubé ny tymdlihaó?

-glilgínk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- yi uby qtky nlm xymxlm vymqahlm uby qtkík
gbkihl qú xy ny xlmqtkmqy. rkfnénk, dytl il xy tymdlihaó dknkftk; kiqym, xy
vlnvaó nkm ymdknhkm, w my pby rbwyihl gli qkiqk dtaymk, uby il nk kngkiektk
bik oktk. ubamy mycbatnk, w nl ragaytk, ma il xy kglimyoktk xliqymailm uby
il xy gkimkmy yi ynnl, dltuby mytík yi fknhy, w xám dltuby my nnyckfk nk
rltk hlihy xy glivyiík vlnvyt k mknat hy nk maxk. híolxy kmaxymxl uby,
kihkihl yn qayxdl, my xy hktík kvaml góxl rkfíki hy myt hymyigkiqkhlm én, w
fynytxk w hbtkihktqy, gli qlhlm nlm uby knní ymqkfki; dytl nl uby xám dyik
xy hal, hy nkm uby knní va w ilqé, pby uby, ymqáihlxy hagayihl xliqymailm
ymqkm tkeliym, my nnycó k xí dlt bi nkhl, mai uby wl nk vaymy vyiat, bik hy
nkm hlm glxdkñytkm hy nk mai vyiqbtk hbngaiyk, w, nnyilm nlm lolm hy
náctaxkm, gli qbtfkhk w fkok vle, xy haol: ''xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml
fymk k vbymqtk xytgyh nkm xkilm, w mbdnagk k vbymqtk xytgyh my nk rkck hy
rkgytnk mkfyt góxl ymqá; w uby, dlt ymqkt yi bik ctki iygymahkh, kmaxamxl
mbdnagk k vbymqtk xytgyh, gbki yigktygahkxyiqy dbyhy, myk mytvahl hy
dtymqktny mlfty ymqy pknhynníi uby kubí qtkacl, hy glqliík, ibyvl, xyhak
hlgyik hy tyknym, l nlm uby vbymqtk xytgyh qbvayty, uby ynnk hk mb dknkftk
hy vlnvétmynlm gli xbgrk ftyvyhkh''. mbmdyihaóxy w khxatóxy yn qkn tygkhl,
w, vlnvaéihlxy kn myñlt xliqymailm, ny dtycbiqé: ''¿ym dlmafny, myñlt
xliqymailm, uby nlm yigkiqkhlm dtaigadknym dkhygyi iygymahkh?'' k nl uby én
xy tymdlihaó: ''gtékxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, uby
émqk uby nnkxki iygymahkh khlihyubaytk my bmk, w dlt qlhl my ymqayihy, w k
qlhlm kngkiek, w kbi rkmqk nlm yigkiqkhlm il dythlik; w, dbym nk myñltk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml yivík k dyhat ymlm myam tyknym, w nk dtyihk ym fbyik,
mycúi dktygy, il rkw mail hátmynlm; uby, mai hbhk, hyfy hy ymqkt dbymqk yi
kncúi ctkihy kdtayql''. ''dtyihk, il nk qlxkté wl -ny tymdlihí-, ia xyilm
ny hkté nl uby dahy, dltuby il qyicl mail mlnlm gbkqtl tyknym''; nlm gbknym
ny ha (uby pbytli nlm uby qú, mkigrl, xy hamqy yn lqtl hík dktk hkt naxlmik
k nlm dlftym uby qldkmy dlt nlm gkxailm), w ny haoy: ''hygah, kxack xík, k
vbymk myñltk uby k xí xy dymk yi yn knxk hy mbm qtkfkolm, w uby ubamaytk
myt bi púgkt dktk tyxyhaktnlm; w uby ny rkcl mkfyt uby wl il dbyhl ia hyfl
qyiyt mknbh gktygayihl hy mb kctkhkfny vamqk w hamgtyqk glivytmkgaói, w uby
ny mbdnagl, gbki yigktygahkxyiqy dbyhl, myk mytvahk mb xytgyh hy hyoktmy
vyt w qtkqkt hymqy mb gkbqavl mytvahlt w kmyihytykhl gkfknnytl. hatéamny
qkxfaéi uby, gbkihl xyilm my nl dayimy, latá hygat glxl wl ry rygrl bi
obtkxyiql w vlql, k xlhl hy kubyn uby rael yn xktubém hy xkiqbk, hy vyickt
k mb mlftail fknhlvailm, gbkihl ny rknnó dktk ymdatkt yi xaqkh hy nk
xliqañk, uby pby hy il glxyt dki k xkiqynym, gli nkm lqtkm ektkihkokm uby
knní kñkhaó, rkmqk vyicktny; w kmí ny rkté wl hy il mlmyckt, w hy kihkt nkm
mayqy dktqahkm hyn xbihl, gli xám dbiqbknahkh uby nkm kihbvl yn aipkiqy hli
dyhtl hy dltqbckn, rkmqk hymyigkiqktnk''. ''qlhl yml, w xám, hyfy vbymqtk
xytgyh k xa myñltk'', xy tymdlihaó nk hligynnk. w, qlxkihl nlm gbkqtl
tyknym, yi nbckt hy rkgytxy bik tyvytyigak, rael bik gkftalnk, uby my
nyvkiqó hlm vktkm hy xyhat yi yn katy.

-¡lr mkiql halm! -haol k ymqy qayxdl hkihl bik ctki vle mkigrl-. ¿ym
dlmafny uby qkn rkw yi yn xbihl, w uby qyicki yi én qkiqk pbytek nlm
yigkiqkhltym w yigkiqkxyiqlm, uby rkwki qtlgkhl yn fbyi obagal hy xa myñlt
yi bik qki hamdktkqkhk nlgbtk? ¡lr myñlt, myñlt, dlt ubayi halm ym, uby
vbymqtk xytgyh xaty dlt mí w vbynvk dlt mb rlitk, w il hé gtéhaql k ymkm
vkgayhkhym uby ny qayiyi xyicbkhl w hymgkfknkhl yn myiqahl!

-glxl xy ubaytym fayi, mkigrl, rkfnkm hymk xkiytk -haol hli ubaolqy-; w,
glxl il ymqám yzdytaxyiqkhl yi nkm glmkm hyn xbihl, qlhkm nkm glmkm uby
qayiyi kncl hy hapagbnqkh qy dktygyi axdlmafnym; dytl kihktá yn qayxdl,
glxl lqtk vye ry hagrl, w wl qy gliqkté kncbikm hy nkm uby knná kfkol ry
vamql, uby qy rktái gtyyt nkm uby kubí ry gliqkhl, gbwk vythkh ia khxaqy
tédnagk ia hamdbqk.





gkdíqbnl zzav. hlihy my gbyiqki xan ektkihkokm qki axdytqaiyiqym glxl
iygymktakm kn vythkhytl yiqyihaxayiql hymqk ctkihy ramqltak


hagy yn uby qtkhbol ymqk ctkihy ramqltak hyn ltacaikn, hy nk uby ymgtafaó
mb dtaxyt kbqlt gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna, uby, nnyckihl kn gkdíqbnl hy nk
kvyiqbtk hy nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm, yi yn xktcyi hén ymqkfki ymgtaqkm, hy
xkil hyn xymxl rkxyqy, ymqkm xamxkm tkeliym:

''il xy dbyhl hkt k yiqyihyt, ia xy dbyhl dytmbkhat, uby kn vknytlml hli
ubaolqy ny dkmkmy dbiqbknxyiqy qlhl nl uby yi yn kiqygyhyiqy gkdíqbnl ubyhk
ymgtaql: nk tkeói ym uby qlhkm nkm kvyiqbtkm rkmqk kubí mbgyhahkm rki mahl
gliqaicafnym w vytamíxanym, dytl émqk hymqk gbyvk il ny rknnl yiqtkhk
kncbik dktk qyiytnk dlt vythkhytk, dlt at qki pbytk hy nlm qétxailm
tkelikfnym. dbym dyimkt wl uby hli ubaolqy xaiqaymy, mayihl yn xám
vythkhytl rahkncl w yn xám ilfny gkfknnytl hy mbm qayxdlm, il ym dlmafny;
uby il haoytk én bik xyiqatk ma ny kmkyqyktki. dlt lqtk dktqy, glimahytl
uby én nk gliqó w nk haol gli qlhkm nkm gatgbimqkigakm hagrkm, w uby il
dbhl pkftagkt yi qki ftyvy ymdkgal qki ctki xáubaik hy hamdktkqym; w ma
ymqk kvyiqbtk dktygy kdógtapk, wl il qyicl nk gbndk; w kmí, mai kpatxktnk
dlt pknmk l vythkhytk, nk ymgtafl. qú, nyqlt, dbym ytym dtbhyiqy, obeck nl
uby qy dktygayty, uby wl il hyfl ia dbyhl xám; dbymql uby my qayiy dlt
gaytql uby kn qayxdl hy mb pai w xbytqy hagyi uby my tyqtkqó hynnk, w haol
uby én nk rkfík aivyiqkhl, dlt dktygytny uby glivyiík w gbkhtkfk fayi gli
nkm kvyiqbtkm uby rkfík nyíhl yi mbm ramqltakm''.

w nbycl dtlmacby, hagayihl:

ymdkiqómy yn dtaxl, kmí hyn kqtyvaxayiql hy mkigrl dkiek glxl hy nk
dkgayigak hy mb kxl, w obecó uby hyn gliqyiql uby qyiík hy rkfyt vamql k mb
myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, kbiuby yigkiqkhk, ny ikgík kubynnk glihagaói
fnkihk uby yiqligym xlmqtkfk; dltuby, ma kmí il pbytk, dknkftkm w tkeliym
ny haol mkigrl, uby xytygíki xlnytny k dknlm; dltuby tyknxyiqy ny dktygaó
uby rkfík kihkhl kqtyvahannl gli mb myñlt, k ubayi ny haol:

-wl, myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, hlw dlt fayi yxdnykhímaxk nk oltikhk
uby gli vbymqtk xytgyh ry rygrl, dltuby yi ynnk ry ctkioykhl gbkqtl glmkm.
nk dtaxytk, rkfyt glilgahl k vbymqtk xytgyh, uby nl qyicl k ctki pynagahkh.
nk mycbihk, rkfyt mkfahl nl uby my yigayttk yi ymqk gbyvk hy xliqymailm,
gli nkm xbqkgaliym hy cbkhakik w hy nkm nkcbikm hy tbahytk, uby xy mytvatái
dktk yn lvahal ymdkñln uby qtkacl yiqty xkilm. nk qytgytk, yiqyihyt nk
kiqacüyhkh hy nlm ikadym, uby, dlt nl xyilm, wk my bmkfki yi qayxdl hyn
yxdytkhlt gktnlxkcil, mycúi dbyhy glnycatmy hy nkm dknkftkm uby vbymk
xytgyh hagy uby haol hbtkihktqy, gbkihl, kn gkfl hy kubyn ctkihy ymdkgal
uby ymqbvl rkfnkihl gli én xliqymailm, én hymdytqó hagayihl: ''dkgayigak w
fktkokt''; w ymqk tkeói w xlhl hy rkfnkt il nk dbhl kdtyihyt yigkiqkhl,
mail gbkihl il nl ymqkfk, yi ptkigak w yi qayxdl hyn typytahl yxdytkhlt
gktnlxkcil. w ymqk kvytacbkgaói xy vayiy daiqadktkhk dktk yn lqtl naftl uby
vlw glxdliayihl , uby ym mbdnyxyiql hy vatcanal dlnahltl, yi nk aivyigaói
hy nkm kiqacüyhkhym; w gtyl uby yi yn mbwl il my kglthó hy dliyt nk hy nlm
ikadym, glxl nk dlihté wl krltk, uby mytá hy xbgrk axdltqkigak, w xám
knyckihl kbqlt qki ctkvy w qki vythkhytl glxl ym yn myñlt hbtkihktqy. nk
gbktqk ym rkfyt mkfahl gli gytqahbxfty yn ikgaxayiql hyn tíl cbkhakik,
rkmqk krltk aciltkhl hy nkm cyiqym.

-vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy tkeói -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl ubyttík wl mkfyt, wk
uby halm ny rkck xytgyh hy uby my ny hé nagyigak dktk axdtaxat ymlm mbm
naftlm, uby nl hbhl, k ubaéi dayimk hatacatnlm.

-myñltym w ctkihym rkw yi ymdkñk k ubayi dbyhki hatacatmy -haol yn dtaxl.

-il xbgrlm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w il dltuby il nl xytyegki, mail uby il
ubaytyi khxaqatnlm, dlt il lfnacktmy k nk mkqampkgaói uby dktygy my hyfy kn
qtkfkol w gltqymík hy mbm kbqltym. bi dtíigady glilegl wl uby dbyhy mbdnat
nk pknqk hy nlm hyxám, gli qkiqkm vyiqkokm uby, ma xy kqtyvayty k hygatnkm,
ubaeá hymdytqktk nk aivahak yi xám hy gbkqtl cyiytlmlm dygrlm; dytl ubéhymy
ymql kubí dktk lqtl qayxdl xám góxlhl, w vkxlm k fbmgkt khlihy tyglcytilm
ymqk ilgry.

-il nyolm hy kubí -tymdlihaó yn dtaxl- ymqá bik ytxaqk, hlihy rkgy mb
rkfaqkgaói bi ytxaqkñl, uby hagyi rk mahl mlnhkhl, w ymqá yi ldaiaói hy myt
bi fbyi gtamqakil, w xbw hamgtyql w gktaqkqavl khyxám. obiql gli nk ytxaqk
qayiy bik dyubyñk gkmk, uby én rk nkftkhl k mb glmqk; dytl, gli qlhl,
kbiuby gragk, ym gkdke hy tygafat rbémdyhym.

-¿qayiy dlt vyiqbtk cknnaikm yn qkn ytxaqkñl? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

-dlglm ytxaqkñlm ymqái mai ynnkm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby il mli nlm
uby kcltk my bmki glxl kubynnlm hy nlm hymaytqlm hy ycadql, uby my vymqíki
hy rlokm hy dknxk w glxíki tkígym hy nk qayttk. w il my yiqayihk uby dlt
hygat fayi hy kubénnlm il nl hacl hy kubémqlm, mail uby ubaytl hygat uby kn
taclt w ymqtygryek hy yiqligym il nnycki nkm dyiaqyigakm hy nlm hy kcltk;
dytl il dlt ymql hyoki hy myt qlhlm fbyilm; k nl xyilm, wl dlt fbyilm nlm
obecl; w, gbkihl qlhl glttk qbtfal, xyilm xkn rkgy yn radógtaqk uby my
paicy fbyil uby yn dúfnagl dygkhlt.

ymqkihl yi ymql, vaytli uby rkgak hlihy ynnlm ymqkfki vyiík bi rlxfty k
day, gkxaikihl kdtaymk, w hkihl vktkelm k bi xkgrl uby vyiík gktckhl hy
nkiekm w hy knkfkthkm. gbkihl nnycó k ynnlm, nlm mknbhó w dkmó hy nktcl.
hli ubaolqy ny haol:

-fbyi rlxfty, hyqyiylm, uby dktygy uby vkam gli xám hanacyigak uby ymy
xkgrl rk xyiymqyt.

-il xy dbyhl hyqyiyt, myñlt -tymdlihaó yn rlxfty-, dltuby nkm ktxkm uby
vyam uby kubí nnyvl rki hy mytvat xkñkik; w kmí, xy ym pltelml yn il
hyqyiytxy, w k halm. dytl ma ubamaétyhym mkfyt dktk ubé nkm nnyvl, yi nk
vyiqk uby ymqá xám kttafk hy nk ytxaqk dayiml knlokt ymqk ilgry; w ma ym
uby rkgéam ymqy xymxl gkxail, knní xy rknnktéam, hlihy lm gliqkté
xktkvannkm. w k halm lqtk vye.

w hy qkn xkiytk kcbaoó yn xkgrl, uby il qbvl nbckt hli ubaolqy hy
dtycbiqktny ubé xktkvannkm ytki nkm uby dyimkfk hygatnym; w, glxl én ytk
kncl gbtalml w mayxdty ny pkqackfki hymylm hy mkfyt glmkm ibyvkm, lthyió
uby kn xlxyiql my dktqaymyi w pbymyi k dkmkt nk ilgry yi nk vyiqk, mai
qlgkt yi nk ytxaqk, hlihy ubamaytk yn dtaxl uby my ubyhktki.

ríelmy kmí, mbfaytli k gkfknnl, w macbaytli qlhlm qtym yn hytygrl gkxail hy
nk vyiqk, k nk gbkn nnycktli bi dlgl kiqym hy kilgrygyt. haol yn dtaxl k
hli ubaolqy uby nnyckmyi k ynnk k fyfyt bi qtkcl. kdyikm lwó ymql mkigrl
dkiek, gbkihl yigkxaió yn tbgal k nk ytxaqk, w nl xamxl ragaytli hli
ubaolqy w yn dtaxl; dytl nk xknk mbytqy hy mkigrl dktygy uby lthyió uby yn
ytxaqkñl il ymqbvaymy yi gkmk; uby kmí my nl haol bik mlqkytxaqkñl uby yi
nk ytxaqk rknnktli. dahaétliny hy nl gktl; tymdlihaó uby mb myñlt il nl
qyiík, dytl uby ma ubytíki kcbk fktkqk, uby my nk hktík hy xbw fbyik ckik.

-ma wl nk qbvaytk hy kcbk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dlelm rkw yi yn gkxail,
hlihy nk rbfaytk mkqampygrl. ¡kr flhkm hy gkxkgrl w kfbihkigak hy nk gkmk
hy hli haycl, w gbáiqkm vygym lm qyicl hy ygrkt xyilm!

gli ymql, hyoktli nk ytxaqk w dagktli rkgak nk vyiqk; w k dlgl qtygrl
qldktli bi xkigyfaql, uby hynkiqy hynnlm afk gkxaikihl il gli xbgrk dtaymk;
w kmí, ny kngkiektli. nnyvkfk nk ymdkhk mlfty yn rlxftl, w yi ynnk dbymql
bi fbnql l yivlnqltal, kn dktygyt hy mbm vymqahlm; uby, kn dktygyt, hyfíki
hy myt nlm gkneliym l ctycbymglm, w ryttytbynl, w kncbik gkxamk, dltuby
qtkík dbymqk bik tldannk hy qytgaldynl gli kncbikm vamnbxftym hy tkml, w nk
gkxamk, hy pbytk; nkm xyhakm ytki hy myhk, w nlm ekdkqlm gbkhtkhlm, k bml
hy gltqy; nk yhkh nnycktík k haye w lgrl l haye w ibyvy kñlm; knycty hy
tlmqtl, w, kn dktygyt, ácan hy mb dytmlik. afk gkiqkihl mycbahannkm, dktk
yiqtyqyiyt yn qtkfkol hyn gkxail. gbkihl nnycktli k én, kgkfkfk hy gkiqkt
bik, uby yn dtaxl qlxó hy xyxltak, uby hagyi uby hygík:

   k nk cbyttk xy nnyvk
   xa iygymahkh;
   ma qbvaytk haiytlm,
   il pbytk, yi vythkh.

yn dtaxytl uby ny rkfnó pby hli ubaolqy, hagaéihlny:

-xbw k nk nacytk gkxaik vbymk xytgyh, myñlt cknái. w ¿khóihy fbyil?
mydkxlm, ma ym uby cbmqk hygatnl.

k nl uby yn xlel tymdlihaó:

-yn gkxaikt qki k nk nacytk nl gkbmk yn gknlt w nk dlftyek, w yn khóihy vlw
ym k nk cbyttk.

-¿góxl nk dlftyek? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy-; uby dlt yn gknlt fayi dbyhy myt.

-myñlt -tydnagó yn xkigyfl-, wl nnyvl yi ymqy yivlnqltal bilm ctycbymglm hy
qytgaldynl, glxdkñytlm hymqk tldannk; ma nlm ckmql yi yn gkxail, il xy
dlhté rlitkt gli ynnlm yi nk gabhkh, w il qyicl gli ubé glxdtkt lqtlm; w,
kmí dlt ymql glxl dlt ltyktxy, vlw hymqk xkiytk, rkmqk kngkiekt bikm
glxdkñíkm hy aipkiqytík uby il ymqái hlgy nycbkm hy kubí, hlihy kmyiqkté xa
dnkek, w il pknqktái fkckoym yi uby gkxaikt hy knní khynkiqy rkmqk yn
yxfktgkhytl, uby hagyi rk hy myt yi gktqkcyik. w xám ubaytl qyiyt dlt kxl w
dlt myñlt kn tyw, w mytvatny yi nk cbyttk, uby il k bi dynói yi nk gltqy.

-w ¿nnyvk vbymk xytgyh kncbik vyiqkok dlt vyiqbtk? -dtycbiqó yn dtaxl.

-ma wl rbfaytk mytvahl k kncúi ctkihy hy ymdkñk, l kncúi dtaigadkn
dytmlikoy -tymdlihaó yn xlel-, k fbyi mycbtl uby wl nk nnyvktk, uby yml
qayiy yn mytvat k nlm fbyilm: uby hyn qaiynl mbynyi mknat k myt knpétye l
gkdaqkiym, l gli kncúi fbyi yiqtyqyiaxayiql; dytl wl, hymvyiqbtkhl, mytví
mayxdty k gkqkttafytkm w k cyiqy khvyiyhaek, hy tkgaói w ubaqkgaói qki
xímytk w kqyibkhk, uby yi dkckt yn knxahlikt bi gbynnl my glimbxík nk xaqkh
hynnk; w mytík qyiahl k xankctl uby bi dkoy kvyiqbtytl kngkiekmy kncbik
maubaytk tkelikfny vyiqbtk.

-w híckxy, dlt mb vahk, kxacl -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy-: ¿ym dlmafny uby yi
nlm kñlm uby matvaó il rk dlhahl kngkiekt kncbik naftyk?

-hlm xy rki hkhl -tymdlihaó yn dkoy-; dytl, kmí glxl yn uby my mkny hy
kncbik tynacaói kiqym hy dtlpymkt ny ubaqki yn ráfaql w ny vbynvyi mbm
vymqahlm, kmí xy vlnvíki k xí nlm xílm xam kxlm, uby, kgkfkhlm nlm iyclgalm
k uby vyiíki k nk gltqy, my vlnvíki k mbm gkmkm w tyglcíki nkm naftykm uby
dlt mlnk lmqyiqkgaói rkfíki hkhl.

-ilqkfny ymdanltgrytík, glxl hagy yn aqknakil -haol hli ubaolqy-; dytl, gli
qlhl yml, qyick k pynagy vyiqbtk yn rkfyt mknahl hy nk gltqy gli qki fbyik
aiqyigaói glxl nnyvk; dltuby il rkw lqtk glmk yi nk qayttk xám rlitkhk ia
hy xám dtlvygrl uby mytvat k halm, dtaxytkxyiqy, w nbycl, k mb tyw w myñlt
ikqbtkn, ymdygaknxyiqy yi yn yoytgagal hy nkm ktxkm, dlt nkm gbknym my
kngkieki, ma il xám taubyekm, k nl xyilm, xám rlitk uby dlt nkm nyqtkm,
glxl wl qyicl hagrl xbgrkm vygym; uby, dbymql uby rki pbihkhl xám
xkwltkeclm nkm nyqtkm uby nkm ktxkm, qlhkvík nnyvki bi il mé ubé nlm hy nkm
ktxkm k nlm hy nkm nyqtkm, gli bi mí mé ubé hy ymdnyihlt uby my rknnk yi
ynnlm, uby nlm kvyiqkok k qlhlm. w ymql uby krltk ny ubaytl hygat nnévynl
yi nk xyxltak, uby ny mytá hy xbgrl dtlvygrl w knaval yi mbm qtkfkolm; w ym
uby, kdktqy nk axkcaikgaói hy nlm mbgymlm khvytmlm uby ny dlhtái vyiat, uby
yn dylt hy qlhlm ym nk xbytqy, w glxl émqk myk fbyik, yn xyolt hy qlhlm ym
yn xltat. dtycbiqátliny k obnal gémkt, kubyn vknytlml yxdytkhlt tlxkil,
gbán ytk nk xyolt xbytqy; tymdlihaó uby nk axdyimkhk, nk hy tydyiqy w il
dtyvamqk; w, kbiuby tymdlihaó glxl cyiqan w koyil hyn glilgaxayiql hyn
vythkhytl halm, gli qlhl yml, haol fayi, dktk krlttktmy hyn myiqaxayiql
rbxkil; uby, dbymql gkml uby lm xkqyi yi nk dtaxytk pkggaói w typtayck, l
wk hy bi qatl hy ktqannytík, l vlnkhl hy bik xaik, ¿ubé axdltqk? qlhl ym
xltat, w kgkfómy nk lftk; w, mycúi qytyigal, xám fayi dktygy yn mlnhkhl
xbytql yi nk fkqknnk uby vavl w mknvl yi nk rbahk; w qkiql kngkiek hy pkxk
yn fbyi mlnhkhl gbkiql qayiy hy lfyhayigak k mbm gkdaqkiym w k nlm uby
xkihktny dbyhyi. w khvytqah, raol, uby kn mlnhkhl xyolt ny ymqá yn lnyt k
dónvltk uby kncknak, w uby ma nk vyoye lm glcy yi ymqy rlitlml yoytgagal,
kbiuby myk nnyil hy rytahkm w ymqtldykhl l glol, k nl xyilm il lm dlhtá
glcyt mai rlitk, w qkn, uby il lm nk dlhtá xyilmgkfkt nk dlftyek; gbkiql
xám, uby wk my vk hkihl lthyi góxl my yiqtyqyicki w tyxyhayi nlm mlnhkhlm
vayolm w ymqtldykhlm, dltuby il ym fayi uby my rkck gli ynnlm nl uby mbynyi
rkgyt nlm uby krlttki w hki nafytqkh k mbm iyctlm gbkihl wk mli vayolm w il
dbyhyi mytvat, w, ygráihlnlm hy gkmk gli qíqbnl hy naftym, nlm rkgyi
ymgnkvlm hy nk rkxfty, hy ubayi il dayimki krlttktmy mail gli nk xbytqy. w
dlt krltk il lm ubaytl hygat xám, mail uby mbfáam k nkm kigkm hymqy xa
gkfknnl rkmqk nk vyiqk, w knní gyiktéam glixacl, w dlt nk xkñkik mycbatéam
yn gkxail, uby lm ny hé halm qki fbyil glxl vbymqtlm hymylm xytygyi.

yn dkoy il kgydqó yn glivaqy hy nkm kigkm, kbiuby mí yn hy gyikt gli én yi
nk vyiqk; w, k ymqk mkeói, hagyi uby haol mkigrl yiqty mí:

-¡vánkqy halm dlt myñlt! w ¿ym dlmafny uby rlxfty uby mkfy hygat qknym,
qkiqkm w qki fbyikm glmkm glxl kubí rk hagrl, hack uby rk vamql nlm
hamdktkqym axdlmafnym uby gbyiqk hy nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm? krltk fayi,
ynnl hatá.

w yi ymql, nnycktli k nk vyiqk, k qayxdl uby kilgrygík, w il mai cbmql hy
mkigrl, dlt vyt uby mb myñlt nk obecó dlt vythkhytk vyiqk, w il dlt
gkmqannl, glxl mlník. il rbfaytli fayi yiqtkhl, gbkihl hli ubaolqy dtycbiqó
kn vyiqytl dlt yn rlxfty hy nkm nkiekm w knkfkthkm; yn gbkn ny tymdlihaó
uby yi nk gkfknnytaek ymqkfk kglxlhkihl yn xkgrl. nl xamxl ragaytli hy mbm
obxyiqlm yn dtaxl w mkigrl, hkihl k tlgaikiqy yn xyolt dymyfty w yn xyolt
nbckt hy nk gkfknnytaek.





gkdíqbnl zzv. hlihy my kdbiqk nk kvyiqbtk hyn tyfbeil w nk ctkgalmk hyn
qaqytytl, gli nkm xyxltkfnym khavaikiekm hyn xlil khavail


il my ny glgík yn dki k hli ubaolqy, glxl mbyny hygatmy, rkmqk lít w mkfyt
nkm xktkvannkm dtlxyqahkm hyn rlxfty glihbqlt hy nkm ktxkm. pbyny k fbmgkt
hlihy yn vyiqytl ny rkfík hagrl uby ymqkfk, w rknnóny, w híolny uby yi qlhl
gkml ny haoymy nbycl nl uby ny rkfík hy hygat hymdbém, kgytgk hy nl uby ny
rkfík dtycbiqkhl yi yn gkxail. yn rlxfty ny tymdlihaó:

-xám hymdkgal, w il yi day, my rk hy qlxkt yn gbyiql hy xam xktkvannkm:
héoyxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt fbyil, kgkfkt hy hkt tygkhl k xa fymqak, uby
wl ny haté glmkm uby ny khxatyi.

-il ubyhy dlt yml -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby wl lm kwbhkté k qlhl.

w kmí nl rael, krygráihlny nk gyfkhk w naxdakihl yn dymyfty, rbxanhkh uby
lfnacó kn rlxfty k gliqktny gli fbyik vlnbiqkh nl uby ny dyhík; w,
myiqáihlmy yi bi dlwl w hli ubaolqy obiql k én, qyiayihl dlt myikhl w
kbhaqltal kn dtaxl, kn dkoy, k mkigrl dkiek w kn vyiqytl, glxyieó k hygat
hymqk xkiytk:

-«mkftái vbymkm xytgyhym uby yi bi nbckt uby ymqá gbkqtl nycbkm w xyhak
hymqk vyiqk mbgyhaó uby k bi tycahlt hén, dlt aihbmqtak w yickñl hy bik
xbgrkgrk gtakhk mbwk, w ymql ym nktcl hy gliqkt, ny pknqó bi kmil, w,
kbiuby yn qkn tycahlt rael nkm hanacyigakm dlmafnym dlt rknnktny, il pby
dlmafny. ubaigy híkm mytíki dkmkhlm, mycúi ym dúfnagk vle w pkxk,- uby yn
kmil pknqkfk, gbkihl, ymqkihl yi nk dnkek yn tycahlt dythahlml, lqtl
tycahlt hyn xamxl dbyfnl ny haol: ''hkhxy knftagakm, glxdkhty, uby vbymqtl
obxyiql rk dktygahl''. ''wl lm nkm xkihl w fbyikm, glxdkhty -tymdlihaó yn
lqtl-, dytl mydkxlm hóihy rk dktygahl''. ''yi yn xliqy -tymdlihaó yn
rknnkhlt-, ny va ymqk xkñkik, mai knfkthk w mai kdktyol kncbil, w qki pnkgl
uby ytk bik glxdkmaói xatknny. ubímyny kiqyglcyt hynkiqy hy xí w qtkétlmny,
dytl ymqá wk qki xliqktke w qki rbtkñl, uby, gbkihl nnycé k én, my pby
rbwyihl w my yiqtó yi nl xám ymglihahl hyn xliqy. ma ubytéam uby vlnvkxlm
nlm hlm k fbmgktny, hyokhxy dliyt ymqk flttagk yi xa gkmk, uby nbycl
vbynvl''. ''xbgrl dnkgyt xy rktéam -haol yn hyn obxyiql-, y wl dtlgbtkté
dkcátlmnl yi nk xymxk xliyhk''. gli ymqkm gatgbimqkigakm qlhkm, w hy nk
xymxk xkiytk uby wl nl vlw gliqkihl, nl gbyiqki qlhlm kubynnlm uby ymqái
yiqytkhlm yi nk vythkh hymqy gkml. yi tymlnbgaói, nlm hlm tycahltym, k day
w xkil k xkil, my pbytli kn xliqy, w, nnyckihl kn nbckt w maqal hlihy
dyimktli rknnkt yn kmil, il ny rknnktli, ia dktygaó dlt qlhlm kubynnlm
gliqltilm, kbiuby xám ny fbmgktli. vayihl, dbym, uby il dktygík, haol yn
tycahlt uby ny rkfík vamql kn lqtl: ''xatkh, glxdkhty: bik qtkek xy rk
vyiahl kn dyimkxayiql, gli nk gbkn mai hbhk kncbik dlhtyxlm hymgbftat ymqy
kiaxkn, kbiuby ymqé xyqahl yi nkm yiqtkñkm hy nk qayttk, il uby hyn xliqy;
w ym uby wl mé tyfbeikt xktkvannlmkxyiqy; w ma vlm mkféam kncúi qkiql, hkh
yn rygrl dlt glignbahl''. ''¿kncúi qkiql hygím, glxdkhty? -haol yn lqtl-;
dlt halm, uby il hé nk vyiqkok k ikhay, ia kbi k nlm xymxlm kmilm''.
''krltk nl vytyxlm -tymdlihaó yn tycahlt mycbihl-, dltuby qyicl hyqytxaikhl
uby lm vkam vlm dlt bik dktqy hyn xliqy w wl dlt lqtk, hy xlhl uby ny
tlhyyxlm w kihyxlm qlhl, w hy qtygrl yi qtygrl tyfbeiktéam vlm w tyfbeikté
wl, w il dlhtá myt xyilm mail uby yn kmil ilm lwk w ilm tymdlihk, ma ym uby
ymqá yi yn xliqy''. k nl uby tymdlihaó yn hbyñl hyn obxyiql: ''hacl,
glxdkhty, uby nk qtkek ym yzgynyiqy w hacik hy vbymqtl ctki aicyial''. w,
havahaéihlmy nlm hlm mycúi yn kgbythl, mbgyhaó uby gkma k bi xymxl qayxdl
tyfbeiktli, w gkhk bil yickñkhl hyn tyfbeil hyn lqtl, kgbhaytli k fbmgktmy,
dyimkihl uby wk yn obxyiql rkfík dktygahl; w, yi vaéihlmy, haol yn
dythahlml: ''¿ym dlmafny, glxdkhty, uby il pby xa kmil yn uby tyfbeió?''
''il pby, mail wl'', tymdlihaó yn lqtl. ''krltk hacl -haol yn hbyñl-, uby
hy vlm k bi kmil, glxdkhty, il rkw kncbik hapytyigak, yi gbkiql qlgk kn
tyfbeikt, dltuby yi xa vahk ry vamql ia líhl glmk xám dtldak''. ''ymkm
knkfkiekm w yigktygaxayiql -tymdlihaó yn hy nk qtkek-, xyolt lm kqkñyi w
qlgki k vlm uby k xí, glxdkhty; uby dlt yn halm uby xy gtaó uby dlhéam hkt
hlm tyfbeilm hy vyiqkok kn xkwlt w xám dytaql tyfbeikhlt hyn xbihl; dltuby
yn mliahl uby qyiéam ym knql; nl mlmqyiahl hy nk vle, k mb qayxdl w glxdám;
nlm hyolm, xbgrlm w kdtymbtkhlm, w, yi tymlnbgaói, wl xy hlw dlt vyigahl w
lm taihl nk dknxk w hlw nk fkihytk hymqk tktk rkfanahkh''. ''krltk hacl
-tymdlihaó yn hbyñl-, uby xy qyihté w ymqaxkté yi xám hy kubí khynkiqy, w
dyimkté uby mé kncbik glmk, dbym qyicl kncbik ctkgak; uby, dbymql uby
dyimktk uby tyfbeikfk fayi, ibigk yiqyihí uby nnyckfk yn ymqtyxl uby
hygím''. ''qkxfaéi haté wl krltk -tymdlihaó yn mycbihl- uby rkw tktkm
rkfanahkhym dythahkm yi yn xbihl, w uby mli xkn yxdnykhkm yi kubynnlm uby
il mkfyi kdtlvygrktmy hynnkm''. ''nkm ibymqtkm -tymdlihaó yn hbyñl-, ma il
ym yi gkmlm myxyokiqym glxl yn uby qtkyxlm yiqty xkilm, il ilm dbyhyi
mytvat yi lqtlm, w kbi yi émqy dnyck k halm uby ilm myki hy dtlvygrl''.
ymql hagrl, my qltiktli k havahat w k vlnvyt k mbm tyfbeilm, w k gkhk dkml
my yickñkfki w vlnvíki k obiqktmy, rkmqk uby my haytli dlt gliqtkmyñl uby,
dktk yiqyihyt uby ytki ynnlm, w il yn kmil, tyfbeikmyi hlm vygym, bik qtkm
lqtk. gli ymql, hlfnkihl k gkhk dkml nlm tyfbeilm, tlhyktli qlhl yn xliqy
mai uby yn dythahl obxyiql tymdlihaymy, ia kbi dlt myñkm. xkm, ¿góxl rkfík
hy tymdlihyt yn dlfty w xkn nlctkhl, ma ny rknnktli yi nl xám ymglihahl hyn
flmuby, glxahl hy nlflm? w, yi vaéihlny, haol mb hbyñl: ''wk xy xktkvannkfk
wl hy uby én il tymdlihík, dbym k il ymqkt xbytql, én tyfbeiktk ma ilm
lwytk, l il pbytk kmil; dytl, k qtbygl hy rkfytlm líhl tyfbeikt gli qkiqk
ctkgak, glxdkhty, hlw dlt fayi yxdnykhl yn qtkfkol uby ry qyiahl yi
fbmgktny, kbiuby ny ry rknnkhl xbytql''. ''yi fbyik xkil ymqá, glxdkhty
-tymdlihaó yn lqtl-, dbym ma fayi gkiqk yn kfkh, il ny vk yi ekck yn
xlikgannl''. gli ymql, hymglimlnkhlm w tliglm, my vlnvaytli k mb knhyk,
khlihy gliqktli k mbm kxaclm, vygailm w glilgahlm gbkiql nym rkfík
kgliqygahl yi nk fbmgk hyn kmil, yzkcytkihl yn bil nk ctkgak hyn lqtl yi yn
tyfbeikt; qlhl nl gbkn my mbdl w my ymqyihaó dlt nlm nbcktym gatgbivygailm.
w yn hakfnl, uby il hbytxy, glxl ym kxacl hy myxftkt w hyttkxkt tyigannkm w
hamglthak dlt hlubaytk, nyvkiqkihl gktkxannlm yi yn vayiql w ctkihym
ubaxytkm hy ilikhk, lthyió y rael uby nkm cyiqym hy nlm lqtlm dbyfnlm, yi
vayihl k kncbil hy ibymqtk knhyk, tyfbeikmy, glxl háihlnym yi tlmqtl gli yn
tyfbeil hy ibymqtlm tycahltym. haytli yi ynnl nlm xbgrkgrlm, uby pby hkt yi
xkilm w yi flgkm hy qlhlm nlm hyxlialm hyn aipaytil, w pby gbihayihl yn
tyfbeil hy yi bil yi lqtl dbyfnl, hy xkiytk uby mli glilgahlm nlm ikqbtknym
hyn dbyfnl hyn tyfbeil, glxl mli glilgahlm w hapytyigakhlm nlm iyctlm hy
nlm fnkiglm; w rk nnyckhl k qkiql nk hymctkgak hymqk fbtnk, uby xbgrkm
vygym gli xkil ktxkhk w pltxkhl ymgbkhtói rki mknahl gliqtk nlm fbtnkhltym
nlm fbtnkhlm k hktmy nk fkqknnk, mai dlhytnl tyxyhakt tyw ia tluby, ia
qyxlt ia vytcüyiek. wl gtyl uby xkñkik l ymlqtl hík rki hy mknat yi gkxdkñk
nlm hy xa dbyfnl, uby mli nlm hyn tyfbeil, gliqtk lqtl nbckt uby ymqá k hlm
nycbkm hyn ibymqtl, uby ym bil hy nlm uby xám ilm dytmacbyi: w, dlt mknat
fayi kdytgyfahlm, nnyvl glxdtkhkm ymqkm nkiekm w knkfkthkm uby rkféam
vamql.» w émqkm mli nkm xktkvannkm uby haoy uby lm rkfík hy gliqkt, w ma il
lm nl rki dktygahl, il mé lqtkm.

w gli ymql hal pai k mb dnáqagk yn fbyi rlxfty; w, yi ymql, yiqtó dlt nk
dbytqk hy nk vyiqk bi rlxfty qlhl vymqahl hy gkxbek, xyhakm, ctycbymglm w
obfói, w gli vle nyvkiqkhk haol:

-myñlt rbémdyh, ¿rkw dlmkhk? uby vayiy kubí yn xlil khavail w yn tyqkfnl hy
nk nafytqkh hy xynamyihtk.

-¡gbytdl hy qkn -haol yn vyiqytl-, uby kubí ymqá yn myñlt xkmy dyhtl! fbyik
ilgry my ilm kdktyok.

lnvaháfkmyxy hy hygat glxl yn qkn xkmy dyhtl qtkík gbfaytql yn lol
aeubaythl, w gkma xyhal gkttannl, gli bi dktgry hy qkpyqái vythy, myñkn uby
qlhl kubyn nkhl hyfík hy ymqkt yipytxl; w yn vyiqytl dtlmacbaó, hagayihl:

-myk fayi vyiahl vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xkmy dyhtl. ¿khóihy ymqá yn xlil w
yn tyqkfnl, uby il nlm vyl?

-wk nnycki gytgk -tymdlihaó yn qlhl gkxbek-, mail uby wl xy ry khynkiqkhl,
k mkfyt ma rkw dlmkhk.

-kn xamxl hbuby hy knfk my nk ubaqktk dktk hátmynk kn myñlt xkmy dyhtl
-tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl-; nnycby yn xlil w yn tyqkfnl, uby cyiqy rkw ymqk
ilgry yi nk vyiqk uby dkcktá yn vytny w nkm rkfanahkhym hyn xlil.

-myk yi fbyi rltk -tymdlihaó yn hyn dktgry-, uby wl xlhytkté yn dtygal, w
gli mlnk nk glmqk xy hkté dlt fayi dkckhl; w wl vbynvl k rkgyt uby gkxaiy
nk gkttyqk hlihy vayiy yn xlil w yn tyqkfnl.

w nbycl my vlnvaó k mknat hy nk vyiqk.

dtycbiqó nbycl hli ubaolqy kn vyiqytl ubé xkmy dyhtl ytk kubén, w ubé
tyqkfnl w ubé xlil qtkík. k nl uby tymdlihaó yn vyiqytl:

-Émqy ym bi pkxlml qaqytytl, uby rk xbgrlm híkm uby kihk dlt ymqk xkigrk hy
ktkcói yimyñkihl bi tyqkfnl hy xynamyihtk, nafytqkhk dlt yn pkxlml hli
ckapytlm, uby ym bik hy nkm xyoltym w xám fayi tydtymyiqkhkm ramqltakm uby
hy xbgrlm kñlm k ymqk dktqy yi ymqy tyail my rki vamql. qtky kmaxamxl
glimacl bi xlil hy nk xám tktk rkfanahkh uby my val yiqty xlilm, ia my
axkcaió yiqty rlxftym, dltuby ma ny dtycbiqki kncl, ymqá kqyiql k nl uby ny
dtycbiqki w nbycl mknqk mlfty nlm rlxftlm hy mb kxl, w, nnycáihlmyny kn
líhl, ny hagy nk tymdbymqk hy nl uby ny dtycbiqki, w xkymy dyhtl nk hygnktk
nbycl; w hy nkm glmkm dkmkhkm hagy xbgrl xám uby hy nkm uby ymqái dlt
vyiat; w, kbiuby il qlhkm vygym kgaytqk yi qlhkm, yi nkm xám il wyttk, hy
xlhl uby ilm rkgy gtyyt uby qayiy yn hakfnl yi yn gbytdl. hlm tyknym nnyvk
dlt gkhk dtycbiqk, ma ym uby yn xlil tymdlihy; ubaytl hygat, ma tymdlihy yn
kxl dlt én, hymdbém hy rkfytny rkfnkhl kn líhl; w kmí, my gtyy uby yn qkn
xkymy dyhtl ymqk taubímaxl; w ym rlxfty cknkiqy, glxl hagyi yi aqknak w fli
glxdkñl, w hkmy nk xyolt vahk hyn xbihl; rkfnk xám uby myam w fyfy xám uby
hlgy, qlhl k glmqk hy mb nyicbk w hy mb xlil w hy mb tyqkfnl.

yi ymql, vlnvaó xkymy dyhtl, w yi bik gkttyqk vyiík yn tyqkfnl, w yn xlil,
ctkihy w mai glnk, gli nkm dlmkhytkm hy paynqtl, dytl il hy xknk gktk; w,
kdyikm ny val hli ubaolqy, gbkihl ny dtycbiqó:

-híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt khavail: ¿ubé dyoy dannkxl? ¿ubé rk hy myt hy
ilmlqtlm?. w vyk kubí xam hlm tyknym.

w xkihó k mkigrl uby my nlm haymy k xkymy dyhtl, yn gbkn tymdlihaó dlt yn
xlil, w haol:

-myñlt, ymqy kiaxkn il tymdlihy ia hk ilqagak hy nkm glmkm uby ymqái dlt
vyiat; hy nkm dkmkhkm mkfy kncl, w hy nkm dtymyiqym, kncúi qkiql.

-¡vlql k tbm -haol mkigrl-, il hé wl bi kthaqy dltuby xy hacki nl uby dlt
xí rk dkmkhl!; dltuby, ¿ubaéi nl dbyhy mkfyt xyolt uby wl xymxl? w dkckt wl
dltuby xy hacki nl uby mé, mytík bik ctki iygyhkh; dytl, dbym mkfy nkm
glmkm dtymyiqym, ry kubí xam hlm tyknym, w híckxy yn myñlt xliímaxl ubé
rkgy krltk xa xboyt qytymk dkiek, w yi ubé my yiqtyqayiy.

il ubaml qlxkt xkymy dyhtl yn haiytl, hagayihl:

-il ubaytl tygyfat khynkiqkhlm nlm dtyxalm, mai uby rkwki dtygyhahl nlm
mytvagalm.

w, hkihl gli nk xkil hytygrk hlm clndym mlfty yn rlxftl aeubaythl, yi bi
ftaigl my ny dbml yn xlil yi én, w, nnyckihl nk flgk kn líhl, hkfk hayiqy
gli hayiqy xbw kdtaymk; w, rkfayihl rygrl ymqy khyxái dlt ymdkgal hy bi
gtyhl, hy lqtl ftaigl my dbml yi yn mbynl, w kn dbiql, gli ctkihímaxk
dtaymk, my pby xkymy dyhtl k dliyt hy tlhannkm kiqy hli ubaolqy, w,
kftkeáihlny nkm daytikm, haol:

-ymqkm daytikm kftkel, fayi kmí glxl ma kftkektk nkm hlm glnbikm hy
rétgbnym, ¡lr tymbgaqkhlt aimaciy hy nk wk dbymqk yi lnvahl kihkiqy
gkfknnytík!; ¡lr il okxám glxl my hyfy knkfkhl gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, áiaxl hy nlm hymxkwkhlm, kttaxl hy nlm uby vki k gkyt, ftkel hy nlm
gkíhlm, fágbnl w glimbynl hy qlhlm nlm hymhagrkhlm!

ubyhó dkmxkhl hli ubaolqy, kfmltql mkigrl, mbmdyiml yn dtaxl, kqóiaql yn
dkoy, kflfkhl yn hyn tyfbeil, glipbml yn vyiqytl, w, paiknxyiqy, ymdkiqkhlm
qlhlm nlm uby lwytli nkm tkeliym hyn qaqytytl, yn gbkn dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-w qú, ¡lr fbyi mkigrl dkiek!, yn xyolt ymgbhytl w hyn xyolt gkfknnytl hyn
xbihl, knéctkqy, uby qb fbyik xboyt qytymk ymqá fbyik, w émqk ym nk rltk yi
uby ynnk ymqá tkmqtannkihl bik naftk hy nail, w, dlt xám myñkm, qayiy k mb
nkhl aeubaythl bi okttl hymflgkhl uby gkfy bi fbyi dltubé hy vail, gli uby
my yiqtyqayiy yi mb qtkfkol.

-yml gtyl wl xbw fayi -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby ym ynnk bik
fayikvyiqbtkhk, w, k il myt gynlmk, il nk qtlgktk wl dlt nk cackiqk
kihkihlik, uby, mycúi xa myñlt, pby bik xboyt xbw gkfkn w xbw hy dtl; w ym
xa qytymk hy kubynnkm uby il my hyoki xkn dkmkt, kbiuby myk k glmqk hy mbm
rytyhytlm.

-krltk hacl -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, uby yn uby nyy xbgrl w kihk
xbgrl, vyy xbgrl w mkfy xbgrl. hacl ymql dltuby, ¿ubé dytmbkmaói pbytk
fkmqkiqy dktk dytmbkhatxy uby rkw xlilm yi yn xbihl uby khavaiyi, glxl nl
ry vamql krltk dlt xam dtldalm lolm? dltuby wl mlw yn xymxl hli ubaolqy hy
nk xkigrk uby ymqy fbyi kiaxkn rk hagrl, dbymql uby my rk ymqyihahl kncúi
qkiql yi xam knkfkiekm; dytl glxlubaytk uby wl xy myk, hlw ctkgakm kn
gaynl, uby xy hlqó hy bi áiaxl fnkihl w glxdkmavl, aignaikhl mayxdty k
rkgyt fayi k qlhlm, w xkn k iaicbil.

-ma wl qbvaytk haiytlm -haol yn dkoy-, dtycbiqktk kn myñlt xlil ubé xy rk
hy mbgyhyt yi nk dytyctaikgaói uby nnyvl.

k nl uby tymdlihaó xkymy dyhtl, uby wk my rkfík nyvkiqkhl hy nlm daym hy
hli ubaolqy:

-wk ry hagrl uby ymqk fymqyebynk il tymdlihy k nl dlt vyiat; uby ma
tymdlihaytk, il axdltqktk il rkfyt haiytlm; uby, dlt mytvagal hyn myñlt hli
ubaolqy, uby ymqá dtymyiqy, hyoktk wl qlhlm nlm aiqytymym hyn xbihl. w
kcltk, dltuby my nl hyfl, w dlt hktny cbmql, ubaytl ktxkt xa tyqkfnl w hkt
dnkgyt k gbkiqlm ymqái yi nk vyiqk, mai dkck kncbik.

lwyihl nl gbkn yn vyiqytl, knycty mlftyxkiytk, myñknó yn nbckt hlihy my
dlhík dliyt yn tyqkfnl, uby yi bi dbiql pby rygrl.

hli ubaolqy il ymqkfk xbw gliqyiql gli nkm khavaikiekm hyn xlil, dlt
dktygytny il myt k dtldómaql uby bi xlil khavaikmy, ia nkm hy dlt vyiat, ia
nkm dkmkhkm glmkm; w kmí, yi qkiql uby xkymy dyhtl kglxlhkfk yn tyqkfnl, my
tyqató hli ubaolqy gli mkigrl k bi taigói hy nk gkfknnytaek, hlihy, mai myt
líhlm hy ikhay, ny haol:

-xatk, mkigrl, wl ry glimahytkhl fayi nk ymqtkñk rkfanahkh hymqy xlil, w
rknnl dlt xa gbyiqk uby mai hbhk ymqy xkymy dyhtl, mb kxl, hyfy hy qyiyt
rygrl dkgql, qágaql l ymdtyml, gli yn hyxlial.

-ma yn dkqal ym ymdyml w hyn hyxlial -haol mkigrl-, mai hbhk hyfy hy myt
xbw mbgal dkqal; dytl, ¿hy ubé dtlvygrl ny ym kn qkn xkymy dyhtl qyiyt ymlm
dkqalm?

-il xy yiqayihym, mkigrl: il ubaytl hygat mail uby hyfy hy qyiyt rygrl
kncúi gligaytql gli yn hyxlial hy uby aipbihk ymk rkfanahkh yi yn xlil, gli
uby ckiy hy glxyt, w hymdbém uby ymqé tagl ny hktá mb knxk, uby ym nl uby
ymqy biavytmkn yiyxacl dtyqyihy. w rágyxy gtyyt ymql yn vyt uby yn xlil il
tymdlihy mail k nkm glmkm dkmkhkm l dtymyiqym, w nk mkfahbtík hyn hakfnl il
my dbyhy ymqyihyt k xám, uby nkm dlt vyiat il nkm mkfy ma il ym dlt
glioyqbtkm, w il qlhkm vygym; uby k mlnl halm ymqá tymytvkhl glilgyt nlm
qayxdlm w nlm xlxyiqlm, w dktk Én il rkw dkmkhl ia dltvyiat, uby qlhl ym
dtymyiqy. w, mayihl ymql kmí, glxl nl ym, ymqá gnktl uby ymqy xlil rkfnk
gli yn ymqanl hyn hakfnl; w ymqlw xktkvannkhl góxl il ny rki kgbmkhl kn
mkiql lpagal, w yzkxaiáhlny w mkgáhlny hy gbkol yi vatqbh hy ubaéi khavaik;
dltuby gaytql ymqá uby ymqy xlil il ym kmqtónlcl, ia mb kxl ia én kneki, ia
mkfyi knekt, ymqkm pacbtkm uby nnkxki obhagaktakm, uby qkiql krltk my bmki
yi ymdkñk, uby il rkw xboytgannk, ia dkoy, ia ekdkqytl hy vayol uby il
dtymbxk hy knekt bik pacbtk, glxl ma pbytk bik mlqk hy ikadym hyn mbynl,
ygrkihl k dythyt gli mbm xyiqatkm y aciltkigakm nk vythkh xktkvannlmk hy nk
gayigak. hy bik myñltk mé wl uby dtycbiqó k bil hymqlm pacbtytlm uby ma bik
dyttannk hy pknhk dyubyñk, uby qyiík, ma my yxdtyñktík w dktatík, w gbáiqlm
w hy ubé glnlt mytíki nlm dyttlm uby dktaymy. k nl uby yn myñlt obhagaktal,
hymdbém hy rkfyt knekhl nk pacbtk, tymdlihaó uby nk dyttagk my yxdtyñktík,
w dktatík qtym dyttaglm, yn bil vythy, yn lqtl yigktikhl w yn lqtl hy
xyegnk, gli qkn glihagaói uby nk qkn dyttk my gbftaymy yiqty nkm ligy w
hlgy hyn hík, l hy nk ilgry, w uby pbymy yi nbiym l yi máfkhl; w nl uby
mbgyhaó pby uby hy knní k hlm híkm my xltík nk dyttk hy kríqk, w yn myñlt
nyvkiqkhlt ubyhó kgtyhaqkhl yi yn nbckt dlt kgytqkhímaxl obhagaktal, glxl
nl ubyhki qlhlm l nlm xám nyvkiqkhltym.

-gli qlhl yml, ubyttík -haol mkigrl- uby vbymqtk xytgyh haoymy k xkymy
dyhtl dtycbiqkmy k mb xlil ma ym vythkh nl uby k vbymqtk xytgyh ny dkmó yi
nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm; uby wl dktk xí qyicl, gli dythói hy vbymqtk xytgyh,
uby qlhl pby yxfynygl w xyiqatk, l dlt nl xyilm, glmkm mlñkhkm.

-qlhl dlhtík myt -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dytl wl rkté nl uby xy kglimyokm,
dbymql uby xy rk hy ubyhkt bi il mé ubé hy ymgtúdbnl.

ymqkihl yi ymql, nnycó xkymy dyhtl k fbmgkt k hli ubaolqy w hygatny uby wk
ymqkfk yi lthyi yn tyqkfnl; uby mb xytgyh vaiaymy k vytny, dltuby nl
xytygík. hli ubaolqy ny glxbiagó mb dyimkxayiql, w ny tlcó dtycbiqkmy nbycl
k mb xlil ny haoymy ma gaytqkm glmkm uby rkfík dkmkhl yi nk gbyvk hy
xliqymailm rkfíki mahl mlñkhkm l vythkhytkm; dltuby k én ny dktygík uby
qyiíki hy qlhl. k nl uby xkymy dyhtl, mai tymdlihyt dknkftk, vlnvaó k qtkyt
yn xlil, w, dbymql hynkiqy hy hli ubaolqy w hy mkigrl, haol:

-xatkh, myñlt xlil, uby ymqy gkfknnytl ubayty mkfyt ma gaytqkm glmkm uby ny
dkmktli yi bik gbyvk nnkxkhk hy xliqymailm, ma pbytli pknmkm l vythkhytkm.

w, rkgaéihlny nk kglmqbxftkhk myñkn, yn xlil my ny mbfaó yi yn rlxftl
aeubaythl, w, rkfnáihlny, kn dktygyt, yi yn líhl, haol nbycl xkymy dyhtl:

-yn xlil hagy uby dktqy hy nkm glmkm uby vbymk xytgyh val, l dkmó, yi nk
hagrk gbyvk mli pknmkm, w dktqy vytamíxanym; w uby ymql ym nl uby mkfy, w
il lqtk glmk, yi gbkiql k ymqk dtycbiqk; w uby ma vbymk xytgyh ubamayty
mkfyt xám, uby yn vaytiym vyiahytl tymdlihytá k qlhl nl uby my ny
dtycbiqkty, uby dlt krltk my ny rk kgkfkhl nk vatqbh, uby il ny vyihtá
rkmqk yn vaytiym, glxl hagrl qayiy.

-¿il nl hygík wl -haol mkigrl-, uby il my xy dlhík kmyiqkt uby qlhl nl uby
vbymk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, rk hagrl hy nlm kgliqygaxayiqlm hy nk gbyvk ytk
vythkh, ia kbi nk xaqkh?

-nlm mbgymlm nl hatái, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; uby yn qayxdl,
hymgbftahlt hy qlhkm nkm glmkm, il my hyok iaicbik uby il nkm mkuby k nk
nbe hyn mln, kbiuby ymqé ymglihahk yi nlm myilm hy nk qayttk. w, dlt rltk,
fkmqy ymql, w váxlilm k vyt yn tyqkfnl hyn fbyi xkymy dyhtl, uby dktk xí
qyicl uby hyfy hy qyiyt kncbik ilvyhkh.

-¿góxl kncbik? -tymdlihaó xkymy dyhtl-: mymyiqk xan yigayttk yi mí ymqy xa
tyqkfnl; híclny k vbymk xytgyh, xa myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby ym bik hy nkm
glmkm xám hy vyt uby rlw qayiy yn xbihl, w ldytafbm gtyhaqy, yq ili vytfam;
w xkilm k nkflt, uby my rkgy qkthy w qyiyxlm xbgrl uby rkgyt w uby hygat w
uby xlmqtkt.

lfyhygaétliny hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, w vaiaytli hlihy wk ymqkfk yn tyqkfnl
dbymql w hymgbfaytql, nnyil dlt qlhkm dktqym hy gkihynannkm hy gytk
yigyihahkm, uby ny rkgíki vamqlml w tymdnkihygayiqy. yi nnyckihl, my xyqaó
xkymy dyhtl hyiqtl hén, uby ytk yn uby rkfík hy xkiyokt nkm pacbtkm hyn
ktqapagal, w pbytk my dbml bi xbgrkgrl, gtakhl hyn xkymy dyhtl, dktk mytvat
hy aiqétdtyqy w hygnktkhlt hy nlm xamqytalm hyn qkn tyqkfnl: qyiík bik
vktannk yi nk xkil, gli uby myñknkfk nkm pacbtkm uby mkníki.

dbymqlm, dbym, qlhlm gbkiqlm rkfík yi nk vyiqk, w kncbilm yi day, ptliqytl
hyn tyqkfnl, w kglxlhkhlm hli ubaolqy, mkigrl, yn dkoy w yn dtaxl yi nlm
xyoltym nbcktym, yn qtbokxái glxyieó k hygat nl uby latá w vytá yn uby ny
lwyty l vayty yn gkdíqbnl macbayiqy.





gkdíqbnl zzva. hlihy my dtlmacby nk ctkgalmk kvyiqbtk hyn qaqytytl, gli
lqtkm glmkm yi vythkh rktql fbyikm


gknnktli qlhlm, qatalm w qtlwkilm; ubaytl hygat, dyihayiqym ymqkfki qlhlm
nlm uby yn tyqkfnl xatkfki hy nk flgk hyn hygnktkhlt hy mbm xktkvannkm,
gbkihl my lwytli mlikt yi yn tyqkfnl gkiqahkh hy kqkfknym w qtlxdyqkm, w
hamdktktmy xbgrk ktqannytík, gbwl tbxlt dkmó yi qayxdl ftyvy, w nbycl kneó
nk vle yn xbgrkgrl, w haol:

-ymqk vythkhytk ramqltak uby kubí k vbymkm xytgyhym my tydtymyiqk ym mkgkhk
kn day hy nk nyqtk hy nkm gltóiagkm ptkigymkm w hy nlm tlxkigym ymdkñlnym
uby kihki yi flgk hy nkm cyiqym, w hy nlm xbgrkgrlm, dlt ymkm gknnym. qtkqk
hy nk nafytqkh uby hal yn myñlt hli ckapytlm k mb ymdlmk xynamyihtk, uby
ymqkfk gkbqavk yi ymdkñk, yi dlhyt hy xltlm, yi nk gabhkh hy mkimbyñk, uby
kmí my nnkxkfk yiqligym nk uby rlw my nnkxk ektkclek; w vyki vbymkm
xytgyhym knní góxl ymqá obckihl k nkm qkfnkm hli ckapytlm, mycúi kubynnl
uby my gkiqk:

   obckihl ymqá k nkm qkfnkm hli ckapytlm,
   uby wk hy xynamyihtk ymqá lnvahkhl.

w kubyn dytmlikoy uby knní kmlxk, gli gltlik yi nk gkfyek w gydqtl yi nkm
xkilm, ym yn yxdytkhlt gktnlxkcil, dkhty dbqkqavl hy nk qkn xynamyihtk, yn
gbkn, xlríil hy vyt yn lgal w hymgbahl hy mb wytil, ny mkny k tyñat; w
khvaytqki gli nk vyryxyigak w kríigl uby ny tañy, uby il dktygy mail uby ny
ubayty hkt gli yn gydqtl xyhak hlgyik hy glmglttliym, w kbi rkw kbqltym uby
hagyi uby my nlm hal, w xbw fayi hkhlm; w, hymdbém hy rkfytny hagrl xbgrkm
glmkm kgytgk hyn dynactl uby glttík mb rlitk yi il dtlgbtkt nk nafytqkh hy
mb ymdlmk, hagyi uby ny haol:

"rktql lm ry hagrl: xatkhnl".

xatyi vbymqtkm xytgyhym qkxfaéi góxl yn yxdytkhlt vbynvy nkm ymdknhkm w
hyok hymdygrkhl k hli ckapytlm, yn gbkn wk vyi glxl kttlok, axdkgayiqy hy
nk gónytk, nyolm hy mí yn qkfnytl w nkm qkfnkm, w dahy kdtaymk nkm ktxkm, w
k hli tlnhái, mb dtaxl, dahy dtymqkhk mb ymdkhk hbtaihkik, w góxl hli
tlnhái il my nk ubayty dtymqkt, lptygaéihlny mb glxdkñík yi nk hapígan
yxdtymk yi uby my dliy; dytl yn vknytlml yilokhl il nl ubayty kgydqkt;
kiqym, hagy uby én mlnl ym fkmqkiqy dktk mkgkt k mb ymdlmk, ma fayi
ymqbvaymy xyqahk yi yn xám rlihl gyiqtl hy nk qayttk; w, gli ymql, my yiqtk
k ktxkt, dktk dliytmy nbycl yi gkxail. vbynvki vbymqtkm xytgyhym nlm lolm k
kubynnk qltty uby knní dktygy, uby my dtymbdliy uby ym bik hy nkm qlttym
hyn kngáekt hy ektkclek, uby krltk nnkxki nk knokpytík; w kubynnk hkxk uby
yi kubyn fkngói dktygy, vymqahk k nl xltl, ym nk mai dkt xynamyihtk, uby
hymhy knní xbgrkm vygym my dliík k xatkt yn gkxail hy ptkigak, w, dbymqk nk
axkcaikgaói yi dktím w yi mb ymdlml, my glimlnkfk yi mb gkbqavytal. xatyi
qkxfaéi bi ibyvl gkml uby krltk mbgyhy, ubaeá il vamql okxám. ¿il vyyi
kubyn xltl uby gknnkihagl w dkmaql k dkml, dbymql yn hyhl yi nk flgk, my
nnyck dlt nkm ymdknhkm hy xynamyihtk? dbym xatyi góxl nk hk bi fyml yi
xaqkh hy nlm nkfalm, w nk dtaymk uby ynnk my hk k ymgbdat, w k naxdaátmynlm
gli nk fnkigk xkick hy mb gkxamk, w góxl my nkxyiqk, w my kttkigk hy dymkt
mbm rytxlmlm gkfynnlm, glxl ma ynnlm qbvaytki nk gbndk hyn xknypagal. xatyi
qkxfaéi góxl kubyn ctkvy xltl uby ymqá yi kubynnlm glttyhltym ym yn tyw
xktmanal hy mkimbyñk; yn gbkn, dlt rkfyt vamql nk aimlnyigak hyn xltl,
dbymql uby ytk bi dktayiqy w ctki dtavkhl mbwl, ny xkihó nbycl dtyihyt, w
uby ny hyi hlgayiqlm kelqym, nnyváihlny dlt nkm gknnym kglmqbxftkhkm hy nk
gabhkh,

   gli grannkhltym hynkiqy
   w yivktkxayiql hyqtám;

w vyam kubí hlihy mknyi k yoygbqkt nk myiqyigak, kbi fayi kdyikm il
rkfayihl mahl dbymqk yi yoygbgaói nk gbndk; dltuby yiqty xltlm il rkw
"qtkmnkhl k nk dktqy", ia "k dtbyfk w ymqémy", glxl yiqty ilmlqtlm.

-iañl, iañl -haol gli vle knqk k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, mycbah vbymqtk
ramqltak níiyk tygqk, w il lm xyqáam yi nkm gbtvkm l qtkimvytmknym; uby,
dktk mkgkt bik vythkh yi naxdal, xyiymqyt mli xbgrkm dtbyfkm w tydtbyfkm.

qkxfaéi haol xkymy dyhtl hymhy hyiqtl:

-xbgrkgrl, il qy xyqkm yi hafbolm, mail rke nl uby ymy myñlt qy xkihk, uby
mytá nl xám kgytqkhl; macby qb gkiql nnkil, w il qy xyqkm yi gliqtkdbiqlm,
uby my mbynyi ubyftkt hy mlqanym.

-wl nl rkté kmí -tymdlihaó yn xbgrkgrl; w dtlmacbaó, hagayihl-: ymqk pacbtk
uby kubí dktygy k gkfknnl, gbfaytqk gli bik gkdk ckmglik, ym nk xymxk hy
hli ckapytlm, k ubayi mb ymdlmk, wk vyickhk hyn kqtyvaxayiql hyn yikxltkhl
xltl, gli xyolt w xám mlmyckhl myxfnkiqy, my rk dbymql k nlm xatkhltym hy
nk qltty, w rkfnk gli mb ymdlml, gtywyihl uby ym kncúi dkmkoytl, gli ubayi
dkmó qlhkm kubynnkm tkeliym w glnlubalm hy kubyn tlxkigy uby hagyi:

   gkfknnytl, ma k ptkigak ahym,
   dlt ckapytlm dtycbiqkh;

nkm gbknym il hacl wl krltk, dltuby hy nk dtlnaoahkh my mbyny yicyihtkt yn
pkmqahal; fkmqk vyt góxl hli ckapytlm my hymgbfty, w uby dlt nlm khyxkiym
knyctym uby xynamyihtk rkgy my ilm hk k yiqyihyt uby ynnk ny rk glilgahl, w
xám krltk uby vyyxlm my hymgbynck hyn fkngói, dktk dliytmy yi nkm kigkm hyn
gkfknnl hy mb fbyi ymdlml. xkm, ¡kw, mai vyiqbtk!, uby my ny rk kmahl bik
dbiqk hyn pknhynníi hy bil hy nlm rayttlm hyn fkngói, w ymqá dyihayiqy yi
yn katy, mai dlhyt nnyckt kn mbynl. dytl vyam góxl yn dakhlml gaynl mlgltty
yi nkm xkwltym iygymahkhym, dbym nnyck hli ckapytlm, w, mai xatkt ma my
tkmcktá l il yn tagl pknhynníi, kmy hynnk, w xkn mb ctkhl nk rkgy fkokt kn
mbynl, w nbycl, hy bi ftaigl, nk dliy mlfty nkm kigkm hy mb gkfknnl, k
rltgkokhkm glxl rlxfty, w nk xkihk uby my qyick pbytqyxyiqy w ny ygry nlm
ftkelm dlt nkm ymdknhkm, hy xlhl uby nlm gtbgy yi yn dygrl, dltuby il my
gkack, k gkbmk uby il ymqkfk nk myñltk xynamyihtk kglmqbxftkhk k myxyokiqym
gkfknnytíkm. vyam qkxfaéi góxl nlm tynaigrlm hyn gkfknnl hki myñknym uby vk
gliqyiql gli nk vknayiqy w rytxlmk gktck uby nnyvk yi mb myñlt w yi mb
myñltk. vyam góxl vbynvyi nkm ymdknhkm w mknyi hy nk gabhkh, w knyctym w
tyclgaokhlm qlxki hy dktím nk vík. ¡vkam yi dke, lr dkt mai dkt hy
vythkhytlm kxkiqym! ¡nnycbéam k mknvkxyiql k vbymqtk hymykhk dkqtak, mai
uby nk pltqbik dlick ymqltfl yi vbymqtl pynagy vakoy! ¡nlm lolm hy vbymqtlm
kxaclm w dktayiqym lm vyki clekt yi dke qtkiubank nlm híkm, uby nlm hy
iémqlt myki, uby lm ubyhki hy nk vahk!

kubí kneó lqtk vye nk vle xkymy dyhtl, w haol:

-nnkiyek, xbgrkgrl; il qy yigbxftym, uby qlhk kpygqkgaói ym xknk.

il tymdlihaó ikhk yn aiqétdtyqy; kiqym, dtlmacbaó, hagayihl:

-il pknqktli kncbilm lgalmlm lolm, uby nl mbynyi vyt qlhl, uby il vaymyi nk
fkokhk w nk mbfahk hy xynamyihtk, hy ubayi haytli ilqagak kn tyw xktmanal,
yn gbkn xkihó nbycl qlgkt kn ktxk; w xatyi gli ubé dtaymk, uby wk nk gabhkh
my rbihy gli yn mli hy nkm gkxdkikm uby yi qlhkm nkm qlttym hy nkm
xyeubaqkm mbyiki.

-¡yml il! -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-: yi ymql hy nkm gkxdkikm kihk xbw
axdtldal xkymy dyhtl, dltuby yiqty xltlm il my bmki gkxdkikm, mail
kqkfknym, w bi céiytl hy hbnekaikm uby dktygyi ibymqtkm grataxíkm; w ymql
hy mlikt gkxdkikm yi mkimbyñk mai hbhk uby ym bi ctki hamdktkqy.

nl gbkn líhl dlt xkymy dyhtl, gymó yn qlgkt w haol:

-il xaty vbymk xytgyh yi iañytíkm, myñlt hli ubaolqy, ia ubaytk nnyvkt nkm
glmkm qki dlt yn gkfl uby il my ny rknny. ¿il my tydtymyiqki dlt krí, gkma
hy lthaiktal, xan glxyhakm nnyikm hy xan axdtldayhkhym w hamdktkqym, w, gli
qlhl yml, glttyi pynagímaxkxyiqy mb gkttytk, w my ymgbgrki il mónl gli
kdnkbml, mail gli khxatkgaói w qlhl? dtlmacby, xbgrkgrl, w hyok hygat; uby,
glxl wl nnyiy xa qknycl, ma ubayty tydtymyiqy xám axdtldayhkhym uby qayiy
áqlxlm yn mln.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tydnagó hli ubaolqy.

w yn xbgrkgrl haol:

-xatyi gbáiqk w gbái nbgahk gkfknnytík mkny hy nk gabhkh yi macbaxayiql hy
nlm hlm gkqónaglm kxkiqym, gbáiqkm qtlxdyqkm uby mbyiki, gbáiqkm hbnekaikm
uby qlgki w gbáiqlm kqkfknym w kqkxfltym uby tyqbxfki. qéxlxy uby nlm rki
hy kngkiekt, w nlm rki hy vlnvyt kqkhlm k nk glnk hy mb xamxl gkfknnl, uby
mytík bi rlttyihl ymdyqágbnl.

vayihl w lwyihl, dbym, qkiqk xltamxk w qkiql ymqtbyihl hli ubaolqy,
dktygaóny myt fayi hkt kwbhk k nlm uby rbíki; w, nyvkiqáihlmy yi day, yi
vle knqk, haol:

-il glimyiqaté wl yi xam híkm w yi xa dtymyigak my ny rkck mbdytgrytík k
qki pkxlml gkfknnytl w k qki kqtyvahl yikxltkhl glxl hli ckapytlm.
¡hyqyiylm, xkn ikgahk gkiknnk; il ny macáam ia dytmacáam; ma il, glixacl
mlam yi nk fkqknnk!

w, hagayihl w rkgayihl, hymyivkaió nk ymdkhk, w hy bi ftaigl my dbml obiql
kn tyqkfnl, w, gli kgynytkhk w ibigk vamqk pbtak, glxyieó k nnlvyt
gbgrannkhkm mlfty nk qaqytytk xltamxk, hyttafkihl k bilm, hymgkfyekihl k
lqtlm, ymqtldykihl k émqy, hymqtlekihl k kubén, w, yiqty lqtlm xbgrlm, qató
bi knqafkol qkn, uby ma xkymy dyhtl il my kfkok, my yiglcy w kckekdk, ny
gytgyiktk nk gkfyek gli xám pkganahkh uby ma pbytk rygrk hy xkmk hy
xkekdái. hkfk vlgym xkymy dyhtl, hagayihl:

-hyqéickmy vbymk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, w khvaytqk uby ymqlm uby
hyttafk, hymqtlek w xkqk il mli vythkhytlm xltlm, mail bikm pacbtannkm hy
dkmqk. ¡xaty, dygkhlt hy xí, uby xy hymqtbwy w ygrk k dythyt qlhk xa
rkgayihk!

xkm il dlt ymql hyokfk hy xyibhykt hli ubaolqy gbgrannkhkm, xkihlfnym,
qkolm w tyvymym glxl nnlvahlm. paiknxyiqy, yi xyilm hy hlm gtyhlm hal gli
qlhl yn tyqkfnl yi yn mbynl, rygrkm dyhkelm w hymxyibekhkm qlhkm mbm
oktgakm w pacbtkm: yn tyw xktmanal, xkn rytahl, w yn yxdytkhlt gktnlxkcil,
dktqahk nk gltlik w nk gkfyek yi hlm dktqym. knfltlqómy yn myikhl hy nlm
lwyiqym, rbwómy yn xlil dlt nlm qyokhlm hy nk vyiqkik, qyxaó yn dtaxl,
kglfkthómy yn dkoy, w rkmqk yn xymxl mkigrl dkiek qbvl dkvlt ctkihímaxl,
dltuby, glxl én obtó hymdbém hy dkmkhk nk flttkmgk, okxám rkfík vamql k mb
myñlt gli qki hymkqaikhk gónytk. rygrl, dbym, yn cyiytkn hymqtlel hyn
tyqkfnl, mlmycómy bi dlgl hli ubaolqy w haol:

-ubamaytk wl qyiyt kubí hynkiqy yi ymqy dbiql qlhlm kubynnlm uby il gtyyi,
ia ubaytyi gtyyt, hy gbáiql dtlvygrl myki yi yn xbihl nlm gkfknnytlm
kihkiqym: xatyi, ma il xy rknnktk wl kubí dtymyiqy, ubé pbytk hyn fbyi hli
ckapytlm w hy nk rytxlmk xynamyihtk; k fbyi mycbtl uby émqk pbytk wk nk
rltk uby nlm rbfaytki kngkiekhl ymqlm gkiym, w nym rbfaytki rygrl kncúi
hymkcbamkhl. yi tymlnbgaói, ¡vavk nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík mlfty gbkiqkm glmkm
rlw vavyi yi nk qayttk!

-¡vavki yi rltk fbyik -haol k ymqk mkeói gli vle yipytxaek xkymy dyhtl-, w
xbytk wl, dbym mlw qki hymhagrkhl uby dbyhl hygat gli yn tyw hli tlhtacl:

   kwyt pba myñlt hy ymdkñk...
   w rlw il qyicl bik knxyik
   uby dbyhk hygat uby ym xík!

il rk xyhak rltk, ia kbi bi xyhakil xlxyiql, uby xy va myñlt hy tywym w hy
yxdytkhltym, nnyikm xam gkfknnytaekm w xam glptym w mkglm hy aipaiaqlm
gkfknnlm w hy aiibxytkfnym cknkm, w kcltk xy vyl hymlnkhl w kfkqahl, dlfty
w xyihacl, w, mlfty qlhl, mai xa xlil, uby k py uby dtaxytl uby ny vbynvk k
xa dlhyt xy rki hy mbhkt nlm hayiqym; w qlhl dlt nk pbtak xkn glimahytkhk
hymqy myñlt gkfknnytl, hy ubayi my hagy uby kxdktk dbdanlm, w yihytyek
qbytqlm, w rkgy lqtkm lftkm gktaqkqavkm; w yi xí mlnl rk vyiahl k
pknqkt mb aiqyigaói cyiytlmk, uby myki fyihaqlm w knkfkhlm nlm gaynlm, knná
hlihy qayiyi xám nyvkiqkhlm mbm kmayiqlm. yi pai, yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy
pacbtk rkfík hy myt kubyn uby rkfík hy hympacbtkt nkm xíkm.

yiqytiygaómy mkigrl dkiek gli nkm tkeliym hy xkymy dyhtl, w híolny:

-il nnltym, xkymy dyhtl, ia qy nkxyiqym, uby xy ubayftkm yn gltkeói; dltuby
qy rkcl mkfyt uby ym xa myñlt hli ubaolqy qki gkqónagl w ymgtbdbnlml
gtamqakil, uby ma én gky yi nk gbyiqk hy uby qy rk rygrl kncúi kctkval, qy
nl mkftá w qy nl ubyttá dkckt w mkqampkgyt gli xbgrkm vyiqkokm.

-gli uby xy dkckmy yn myñlt hli ubaolqy kncbik dktqy hy nkm rygrbtkm uby xy
rk hymrygrl, ubyhktík gliqyiql, w mb xytgyh kmycbtktík mb gligayigak,
dltuby il my dbyhy mknvkt ubayi qayiy nl koyil gliqtk nk vlnbiqkh hy mb
hbyñl w il nl tymqaqbwy.

-kmí ym -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl rkmqk krltk wl il mé uby qyick ikhk
vbymqtl, xkymy dyhtl.

-¿góxl il? -tymdlihaó xkymy dyhtl-; w ymqkm tynaubakm uby ymqái dlt ymqy
hbtl w ymqétan mbynl, ¿ubaéi nkm ymdktgaó w kiaubanó, mail nk pbytek
aivyigafny hymy dlhytlml ftkel?, w ¿gúwlm ytki mbm gbytdlm mail xílm?, w
¿gli ubaéi xy mbmqyiqkfk wl mail gli ynnlm?

-krltk kgkfl hy gtyyt -haol k ymqy dbiql hli ubaolqy- nl uby lqtkm xbgrkm
vygym ry gtyíhl: uby ymqlm yigkiqkhltym uby xy dytmacbyi il rkgyi mail
dliytxy nkm pacbtkm glxl ynnkm mli hynkiqy hy nlm lolm, w nbycl xy nkm
xbhki w qtbygki yi nkm uby ynnlm ubaytyi. tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy lm hacl,
myñltym uby xy lím, uby k xí xy dktygaó qlhl nl uby kubí rk dkmkhl uby
dkmkfk kn day hy nk nyqtk: uby xynamyihtk ytk xynamyihtk, hli ckapytlm hli
ckapytlm, xktmanal xktmanal, w gktnlxkcil gktnlxkcil: dlt yml my xy knqytó
nk gónytk, w, dlt gbxdnat gli xa dtlpymaói hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy, ubamy hkt
kwbhk w pkvlt k nlm uby rbíki, w gli ymqy fbyi dtldómaql ragy nl uby rkféam
vamql; ma xy rk mknahl kn tyvém, il ym gbndk xík, mail hy nlm xknlm uby xy
dytmacbyi; w, gli qlhl ymql, hymqy xa wyttl, kbiuby il rk dtlgyhahl hy
xknagak, ubaytl wl xamxl glihyiktxy yi glmqkm: vyk xkymy dyhtl nl uby
ubayty dlt nkm pacbtkm hymrygrkm, uby wl xy lptyegl k dkcátmynl nbycl, yi
fbyik w glttayiqy xliyhk gkmqynnkik.

aignaiómyny xkymy dyhtl, hagaéihlny:

-il ymdytkfk wl xyilm hy nk aikbhaqk gtamqakihkh hyn vknytlml hli ubaolqy
hy nk xkigrk, vythkhytl mlglttyhlt w kxdktl hy qlhlm nlm iygymaqkhlm w
xyiymqytlmlm vkckxbihlm; w kubí yn myñlt vyiqytl w yn ctki mkigrl mytái
xyhakiytlm w kdtygakhltym, yiqty vbymk xytgyh w xí, hy nl uby vknyi l
dlhíki vknyt nkm wk hymrygrkm pacbtkm.

yn vyiqytl w mkigrl haoytli uby kmí nl rktíki, w nbycl xkymy dyhtl kneó hyn
mbynl, gli nk gkfyek xyilm, kn tyw xktmanal hy ektkclek, w haol:

-wk my vyy gbái axdlmafny ym vlnvyt k ymqy tyw k mb myt dtaxytl; w kmí, xy
dktygy, mknvl xyolt obagal, uby my xy hé dlt mb xbytqy, pai w kgkfkxayiql
gbkqtl tyknym w xyhal.

-¡khynkiqy! -haol hli ubaolqy.

-dbym dlt ymqk kfytqbtk hy kttafk kfkol -dtlmacbaó xkymy dyhtl, qlxkihl yi
nkm xkilm kn dktqahl yxdytkhlt gktnlxkcil-, il mytík xbgrl uby dahaymy wl
gaigl tyknym w bi gbktqannl.

-il ym dlgl -haol mkigrl.

-ia xbgrl -tydnagó yn vyiqytl-; xéhaymy nk dktqahk w myñányimyny gaigl
tyknym.

-héimyny qlhlm gaigl w gbktqannl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby il ymqá yi bi
gbktqannl xám k xyilm nk xliqk hymqk ilqkfny hymctkgak; w kgkfy dtymql
xkymy dyhtl, uby my rkgy rltk hy gyikt, w wl qyicl gaytqlm fkttbiqlm hy
rkxfty.

-dlt ymqk pacbtk -haol xkymy dyhtl- uby ymqá mai iktagym w bi lol xyilm,
uby ym hy nk rytxlmk xynamyihtk, ubaytl, w xy dlicl yi nl obmql, hlm tyknym
w hlgy xktkvyhím.

-kbi krí mytík yn hakfnl -haol hli ubaolqy-, ma wk il ymqbvaymy xynamyihtk
gli mb ymdlml, dlt nl xyilm, yi nk tkwk hy ptkigak; dltuby yn gkfknnl yi
uby afki, k xí xy dktygaó uby kiqym vlnkfk uby glttík; w kmí, il rkw dktk
ubé vyihytxy k xí yn ckql dlt nayfty, dtymyiqáihlxy kubí k xynamyihtk
hymiktackhk, ymqkihl nk lqtk, ma vayiy k xkil, krltk rlncáihlmy yi ptkigak
gli mb ymdlml k daytik qyihahk. kwbhy halm gli nl mbwl k gkhk bil, myñlt
xkymy dyhtl, w gkxaiyxlm qlhlm gli day nnkil w gli aiqyigaói mkik. w
dtlmack.

xkymy dyhtl, uby val uby hli ubaolqy aeubaythykfk w uby vlnvík k mb
dtaxyt qyxk, il ubaml uby my ny ymgkdkmy; w kmí, ny haol:

-Émqk il hyfy hy myt xynamyihtk, mail kncbik hy nkm hligynnkm uby nk
mytvíki; w kmí, gli mymyiqk xktkvyhím uby xy hyi dlt ynnk ubyhkté gliqyiql
w fayi dkckhl.

hymqk xkiytk pby dliayihl dtygal k lqtkm xbgrkm hymqtlekhkm pacbtkm, uby
hymdbém nlm xlhytktli nlm hlm obygym átfaqtlm, gli mkqampkgaói hy nkm
dktqym, uby nnycktli k gbktyiqk tyknym w qtym gbktqannlm; w, khyxám hymql,
uby nbycl nl hymyxflnmó mkigrl, dahaó xkymy dyhtl hlm tyknym dlt yn qtkfkol
hy qlxkt yn xlil.

-hámynlm, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, il dktk qlxkt yn xlil, mail nk xlik; w
hlgayiqlm haytk wl krltk yi knftagakm k ubayi xy haoytk gli gytqahbxfty uby
nk myñltk hlñk xynamyihtk w yn myñlt hli ckapytlm ymqkfki wk yi ptkigak w
yiqty nlm mbwlm.

-iaicbil ilm nl dlhtá hygat xyolt uby xa xlil -haol xkymy dyhtl-, dytl il
rkftá hakfnl uby krltk ny qlxy; kbiuby axkcail uby yn gktañl w nk rkxfty ny
rki hy pltekt k uby xy fbmuby ymqk ilgry, w kxkiygytá halm w vytéxlilm.

yi tymlnbgaói, nk flttkmgk hyn tyqkfnl my kgkfó w qlhlm gyiktli yi dke w yi
fbyik glxdkñík, k glmqk hy hli ubaolqy, uby ytk nafytkn yi qlhl ymqtyxl.

kiqym uby kxkiygaymy, my pby yn uby nnyvkfk nkm nkiekm w nkm knkfkthkm, w
wk hymdbém hy kxkiygahl, my vaiaytli k hymdyhat hy hli ubaolqy yn dtaxl w
yn dkoy: yn bil, dktk vlnvytmy k mb qayttk; w yn lqtl, k dtlmycbat mb
gkxail, dktk kwbhk hyn gbkn ny hal hli ubaolqy bik hlgyik hy tyknym. xkymy
dyhtl il ubaml vlnvyt k yiqtkt yi xám haxym ia hatyqym gli hli ubaolqy, k
ubayi én glilgík xbw fayi, w kmí, xkhtbcó kiqym uby yn mln, w, glcayihl nkm
tynaubakm hy mb tyqkfnl w k mb xlil, my pby qkxfaéi k fbmgkt mbm kvyiqbtkm.
yn vyiqytl, uby il glilgík k hli ubaolqy, qki khxatkhl ny qyiíki mbm
nlgbtkm glxl mb nafytknahkh. paiknxyiqy, mkigrl ny dkcó xbw fayi, dlt lthyi
hy mb myñlt, w, hymdahaéihlmy hén, gkma k nkm lgrl hyn hík hyoktli nk vyiqk
w my dbmaytli yi gkxail, hlihy nlm hyoktyxlm at; uby kmí glivayiy dktk hkt
nbckt k gliqkt lqtkm glmkm dytqyiygayiqym k nk hygnktkgaói hymqk pkxlmk
ramqltak.





gkdíqbnl zzvaa. hlihy my hk gbyiqk ubaéiym ytki xkymy dyhtl w mb xlil, gli
yn xkn mbgyml uby hli ubaolqy qbvl yi nk kvyiqbtk hyn tyfbeil, uby il nk
kgkfó glxl én ubamaytk w glxl nl qyiík dyimkhl


yiqtk gahy rkxyqy, gltliamqk hymqk ctkihy ramqltak, gli ymqkm dknkftkm yi
ymqy gkdíqbnl: ''obtl glxl gkqónagl gtamqakil...''; k nl uby mb qtkhbgqlt
hagy uby yn obtkt gahy rkxyqy glxl gkqónagl gtamqakil, mayihl én xltl, glxl
mai hbhk nl ytk, il ubaml hygat lqtk glmk mail uby, kmí glxl yn gkqónagl
gtamqakil gbkihl obtk, obtk, l hyfy obtkt, vythkh, w hygatnk yi nl uby
haoyty, kmí én nk hygík, glxl ma obtktk glxl gtamqakil gkqónagl, yi nl uby
ubytík ymgtafat hy hli ubaolqy, ymdygaknxyiqy yi hygat ubaéi ytk xkymy
dyhtl, w ubaéi yn xlil khavail uby qtkík khxatkhlm qlhlm kubynnlm dbyfnlm
gli mbm khavaikiekm.

hagy, dbym, uby fayi my kglthktá, yn uby rbfayty nyíhl nk dtaxytk dktqy
hymqk ramqltak, hy kubyn caiém hy dkmkxliqy, k ubayi, yiqty lqtlm cknylqym,
hal nafytqkh hli ubaolqy yi mayttk xltyik, fyiypagal uby hymdbém ny pby xkn
kctkhygahl w dylt dkckhl hy kubynnk cyiqy xknacik w xkn kglmqbxftkhk. ymqy
caiém hy dkmkxliqy, k ubayi hli ubaolqy nnkxkfk caiymannl hy dktkdannk, pby
yn uby rbtqó k mkigrl dkiek yn tbgal; uby, dlt il rkfytmy dbymql yn góxl ia
yn gbáihl yi nk dtaxytk dktqy, dlt gbndk hy nlm axdtymltym, rk hkhl yi ubé
yiqyihyt k xbgrlm, uby kqtafbíki k dlgk xyxltak hyn kbqlt nk pknqk hy
yxdtyiqk. dytl, yi tymlnbgaói, caiém ny rbtqó, ymqkihl mlfty én hbtxayihl
mkigrl dkiek, bmkihl hy nk qtkek w xlhl uby bmó ftbiynl gbkihl, ymqkihl
mkgtadkiqy mlfty knftkgk, ny mkgó yn gkfknnl hy yiqty nkm daytikm, w
hymdbém ny glftó mkigrl, glxl my rk gliqkhl. ymqy caiém, dbym, qyxytlml hy
il myt rknnkhl hy nk obmqagak, uby ny fbmgkfk dktk gkmqacktny hy mbm
aipaiaqkm fynnkubytíkm w hynaqlm, uby pbytli qkiqlm w qknym, uby én xamxl
glxdbml bi ctki vlnbxyi gliqáihlnlm, hyqytxaió dkmktmy kn tyail hy ktkcói w
gbftatmy yn lol aeubaythl, kglxlháihlmy kn lpagal hy qaqytytl; uby ymql w
yn obckt hy xkilm nl mkfík rkgyt dlt ymqtyxl.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby hy bilm gtamqakilm wk naftym uby vyiíki hy fytfytík
glxdtó kubyn xlil, k ubayi yimyñó uby, yi rkgaéihlny gaytqk myñkn, my ny
mbfaymy yi yn rlxftl w ny xbtxbtkmy, l nl dktygaymy, kn líhl. rygrl ymql,
kiqym uby yiqtkmy yi yn nbckt hlihy yiqtkfk gli mb tyqkfnl w xlil, my
aipltxkfk yi yn nbckt xám gytgkil, l hy ubayi én xyolt dlhík, ubé glmkm
dktqagbnktym rbfaymyi mbgyhahl yi yn qkn nbckt, w k ubé dytmlikm; w,
nnyváihlnkm fayi yi nk xyxltak, nl dtaxytl uby rkgík ytk xlmqtkt mb
tyqkfnl, yn gbkn bikm vygym ytk hy bik ramqltak, w lqtkm hy lqtk; dytl
qlhkm knyctym w tyclgaokhkm w glilgahkm. kgkfkhk nk xbymqtk, dtldliík nkm
rkfanahkhym hy mb xlil, hagayihl kn dbyfnl uby khavaikfk qlhl nl dkmkhl w
nl dtymyiqy; dytl uby yi nl hy dlt vyiat il my hkfk xkñk. dlt nk tymdbymqk
hy gkhk dtycbiqk dyhík hlm tyknym, w hy kncbikm rkgík fktkql, mycúi qlxkfk
yn dbnml k nlm dtycbiqkiqym; w glxl qkn vye nnyckfk k nkm gkmkm hy ubayi én
mkfík nlm mbgymlm hy nlm uby yi ynnk xltkfki, kbiuby il ny dtycbiqkmyi ikhk
dlt il dkcktny, én rkgík nk myñk kn xlil, w nbycl hygík uby ny rkfík hagrl
qkn w qkn glmk, uby vyiík hy xlnhy gli nl mbgyhahl. gli ymql glftkfk
gtéhaql aiypkfny, w kiháfkimy qlhlm qtkm én. lqtkm vygym, glxl ytk qki
hamgtyql, tymdlihík hy xkiytk uby nkm tymdbymqkm vyiíki fayi gli nkm
dtycbiqkm; w, glxl ikhay ny kdbtkfk ia kdtyqkfk k uby haoymy góxl khyvaikfk
mb xlil, k qlhlm rkgík xlikm, w nnyikfk mbm ymubytlm.

kmí glxl yiqtó yi nk vyiqk, glilgaó k hli ubaolqy w k mkigrl, dlt gbwl
glilgaxayiql ny pby págan dliyt yi khxatkgaói k hli ubaolqy w k mkigrl
dkiek, w k qlhlm nlm uby yi ynnk ymqkfki; dytl rbfaétkny hy glmqkt gktl ma
hli ubaolqy fkoktk bi dlgl xám nk xkil gbkihl gltqó nk gkfyek kn tyw
xktmanal w hymqtbwó qlhk mb gkfknnytík, glxl ubyhk hagrl yi yn kiqygyhyiqy
gkdíqbnl.

ymql ym nl uby rkw uby hygat hy xkymy dyhtl w hy mb xlil.

w, vlnvayihl k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, hacl uby, hymdbém hy rkfyt mknahl
hy nk vyiqk, hyqytxaió hy vyt dtaxytl nkm tafytkm hyn tíl yftl w qlhlm
kubynnlm gliqltilm, kiqym hy yiqtkt yi nk gabhkh hy ektkclek, dbym ny hkfk
qayxdl dktk qlhl yn xbgrl uby pknqkfk hymhy knní k nkm obmqkm. gli ymqk
aiqyigaói macbaó mb gkxail, dlt yn gbkn kihbvl hlm híkm mai kgliqygytny
glmk hacik hy dliytmy yi ymgtaqbtk, rkmqk uby kn qytgytl, kn mbfat hy bik
nlxk, lwó bi ctki tbxlt hy kqkxfltym, hy qtlxdyqkm w ktgkfbgym. kn
dtaigadal dyimó uby kncúi qytgal hy mlnhkhlm dkmkfk dlt kubynnk dktqy, w
dlt vytnlm dagó k tlgaikiqy w mbfaó nk nlxk kttafk; w gbkihl ymqbvl yi nk
gbxfty, val kn day hynnk, k mb dktygyt, xám hy hlgayiqlm rlxftym ktxkhlm hy
hapytyiqym mbytqym hy ktxkm, glxl ma haoémyxlm nkieliym, fknnymqkm,
dktqymkikm, knkfkthkm w dagkm, w kncbilm ktgkfbgym, w xbgrkm tlhynkm. fkoó
hyn tygbymql w kgytgómy kn ymgbkhtói, qkiql, uby hamqaiqkxyiqy val nkm
fkihytkm, obecó hy nkm glnltym w ilqó nkm yxdtymkm uby yi ynnkm qtkíki,
ymdygaknxyiqy bik uby yi bi ymqkihktqy l oatói hy tkml fnkigl vyiík, yi yn
gbkn ymqkfk daiqkhl xbw kn vavl bi kmil glxl bi dyubyñl mkthymgl, nk gkfyek
nyvkiqkhk, nk flgk kfaytqk w nk nyicbk hy pbytk, yi kgql w dlmqbtk glxl ma
ymqbvaytk tyfbeikihl; kntyhyhlt hén ymqkfki ymgtaqlm hy nyqtkm ctkihym
ymqlm hlm vytmlm:

   il tyfbeiktli yi fknhy
   yn bil w yn lqtl kngknhy.

dlt ymqk aimaciak mkgó hli ubaolqy uby kubynnk cyiqy hyfík hy myt hyn
dbyfnl hyn tyfbeil, w kmí my nl haol k mkigrl, hygnktáihlny nl uby yi yn
ymqkihktqy vyiík ymgtaql. híolny qkxfaéi uby yn uby nym rkfík hkhl ilqagak
hy kubyn gkml my rkfík yttkhl yi hygat uby hlm tycahltym rkfíki mahl nlm
uby tyfbeiktli; dytl uby, mycúi nlm vytmlm hyn ymqkihktqy, il rkfíki mahl
mail kngknhym. k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek:

-myñlt, yi yml il rkw uby tydktkt, uby fayi dbyhy myt uby nlm tycahltym uby
yiqligym tyfbeiktli vaiaymyi gli yn qayxdl k myt kngknhym hy mb dbyfnl, w
kmí, my dbyhyi nnkxkt gli yiqtkxflm qíqbnlm; gbkiql xám, uby il rkgy kn
gkml k nk vythkh hy nk ramqltak myt nlm tyfbeikhltym kngknhym l tycahltym,
glxl ynnlm bik dlt bik rkwki tyfbeikhl; dltuby qki k dauby ymqá hy tyfbeikt
bi kngknhy glxl bi tycahlt.

paiknxyiqy, glilgaytli w mbdaytli glxl yn dbyfnl glttahl mkník k dynykt gli
lqtl uby ny glttík xám hy nl obmql w hy nl uby my hyfík k nk fbyik
vygaihkh.

pbymy nnyckihl k ynnlm hli ubaolqy, il gli dlgk dymkhbxfty hy mkigrl, uby
ibigk pby kxacl hy rknnktmy yi myxyokiqym oltikhkm. nlm hyn ymgbkhtói ny
tyglcaytli yi xyhal, gtywyihl uby ytk kncbil hy nlm hy mb dktgaknahkh. hli
ubaolqy, knekihl nk vamytk, gli cyiqan ftíl w gliqaiyiqy, nnycó rkmqk yn
ymqkihktqy hyn kmil, w knní my ny dbmaytli kntyhyhlt qlhlm nlm xám
dtaigadknym hyn yoétgaql, dlt vytny, khxatkhlm gli nk khxatkgaói
kglmqbxftkhk yi uby gkíki qlhlm kubynnlm uby nk vye dtaxytk ny xatkfki. hli
ubaolqy, uby nlm val qki kqyiqlm k xatktny, mai uby iaicbil ny rkfnkmy ia
ny dtycbiqkmy ikhk, ubaml kdtlvygrktmy hy kubyn manyigal, w, tlxdayihl yn
mbwl, kneó nk vle w haol:

-fbyilm myñltym, gbki yigktygahkxyiqy dbyhl, lm mbdnagl uby il aiqyttbxdáam
bi tkelikxayiql uby ubaytl rkgytlm, rkmqk uby vyáam uby lm hamcbmqk w
yipkhk; uby ma ymql mbgyhy, gli nk xám xíiaxk myñkn uby xy rkcáam dlihté bi
mynnl yi xa flgk w ygrkté bik xlthkek k xa nyicbk.

qlhlm ny haoytli uby haoymy nl uby ubamaymy, uby hy fbyik ckik ny
ymgbgrktíki. hli ubaolqy, gli ymqk nagyigak, dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

wl, myñltym xílm, mlw gkfknnytl kihkiqy, gbwl yoytgagal ym yn hy nkm ktxkm,
w gbwk dtlpymaói nk hy pkvltygyt k nlm iygymaqkhlm hy pkvlt w kgbhat k nlm
xyiymqytlmlm. híkm rk uby ry mkfahl vbymqtk hymctkgak w nk gkbmk uby lm
xbyvy k qlxkt nkm ktxkm k gkhk dkml, dktk vyicktlm hy vbymqtlm yiyxaclm; w,
rkfayihl hamgbttahl bik w xbgrkm vygym yi xa yiqyihaxayiql mlfty vbymqtl
iyclgal, rknnl, mycúi nkm nywym hyn hbynl, uby ymqáam yickñkhlm yi qyiytlm
dlt kptyiqkhlm, dltuby iaicúi dktqagbnkt dbyhy kptyiqkt k bi dbyfnl yiqytl,
ma il ym tyqáihlny hy qtkahlt dlt obiql, dltuby il mkfy yi dktqagbnkt ubaéi
glxyqaó nk qtkagaói dlt uby ny tyqk. yoyxdnl hymql qyiyxlm yi hli haycl
lthóñye hy nktk, uby tyqó k qlhl yn dbyfnl ekxltkil, dltuby aciltkfk uby
mlnl vynnahl hlnplm rkfík glxyqahl nk qtkagaói hy xkqkt k mb tyw; w kmí,
tyqó k qlhlm, w k qlhlm qlgkfk nk vyickiek w nk tymdbymqk; kbiuby fayi ym
vythkh uby yn myñlt hli haycl kihbvl kncl hyxkmakhl, w kbi dkmó xbw
khynkiqy hy nlm níxaqym hyn tyql, dltuby il qyiík dktk ubé tyqkt k nlm
xbytqlm, k nkm kcbkm, ia k nlm dkiym, ia k nlm uby ymqkfki dlt ikgyt, ia k
nkm lqtkm xyibhyigakm uby knní my hygnktki; dytl, ¡vkwk!, dbym gbkihl nk
gónytk mkny hy xkhty, il qayiy nk nyicbk dkhty, kwl ia ptyil uby nk
glttaok. mayihl, dbym, ymql kmí, uby bil mlnl il dbyhy kptyiqkt k tyail,
dtlvaigak, gabhkh, tydúfnagk ia dbyfnl yiqytl, ubyhk yi naxdal uby il rkw
dktk ubé mknat k nk vyickiek hyn tyql hy nk qkn kptyiqk, dbym il nl ym;
dltuby, ¡fbyil mytík uby my xkqkmyi k gkhk dkml nlm hyn dbyfnl hy nk tynlok
gli ubayi my nl nnkxk, ia nlm gkelnytlm, fytyioyiytlm, fknnyikqlm,
okfliytlm, ia nlm hy lqtlm ilxftym w kdynnahlm uby kihki dlt krí yi flgk hy
nlm xbgrkgrlm w hy cyiqy hy dlgl xám k xyilm! ¡fbyil mytík, dlt gaytql, uby
qlhlm ymqlm aimaciym dbyfnlm my glttaymyi w vyickmyi, w kihbvaymyi gliqail
rygrkm nkm ymdkhkm mkgkfbgrym k gbknubayt dyihyigak, dlt dyubyñk uby pbymy!
il, il, ia halm nl dytxaqk l ubaytk. nlm vktliym dtbhyiqym, nkm tydúfnagkm
fayi gligytqkhkm, dlt gbkqtl glmkm rki hy qlxkt nkm ktxkm w hymyivkaikt nkm
ymdkhkm, w dliyt k taymcl mbm dytmlikm, vahkm w rkgayihkm: nk dtaxytk, dlt
hypyihyt nk py gkqónagk; nk mycbihk, dlt hypyihyt mb vahk, uby ym hy nyw
ikqbtkn w havaik; nk qytgytk, yi hypyimk hy mb rlitk, hy mb pkxanak w
rkgayihk; nk gbktqk, yi mytvagal hy mb tyw, yi nk cbyttk obmqk; w ma ny
ubamaétyxlm kñkhat nk ubaiqk, uby my dbyhy gliqkt dlt mycbihk, ym yi
hypyimk hy mb dkqtak. k ymqkm gaigl gkbmkm, glxl gkdaqknym, my dbyhyi
kctyckt kncbikm lqtkm uby myki obmqkm w tkelikfnym, w uby lfnacbyi k qlxkt
nkm ktxkm; dytl qlxktnkm dlt iañytíkm w dlt glmkm uby kiqym mli hy tamk w
dkmkqayxdl uby hy kptyiqk, dktygy uby ubayi nkm qlxk gktygy hy qlhl
tkelikfny hamgbtml; gbkiql xám, uby yn qlxkt vyickiek aiobmqk, uby obmqk il
dbyhy rkfyt kncbik uby nl myk, vk hytygrkxyiqy gliqtk nk mkiqk nyw uby
dtlpymkxlm, yi nk gbkn my ilm xkihk uby rkckxlm fayi k ibymqtlm yiyxaclm w
uby kxyxlm k nlm uby ilm kflttygyi; xkihkxayiql uby, kbiuby dktygy kncl
hapagbnqlml hy gbxdnat, il nl ym mail dktk kubynnlm uby qayiyi xyilm hy
halm uby hyn xbihl, w xám hy gktiy uby hy ymdítaqb; dltuby oymbgtamql, halm
w rlxfty vythkhytl, uby ibigk xaiqaó, ia dbhl ia dbyhy xyiqat, mayihl
nycamnkhlt ibymqtl, haol uby mb wbcl ytk mbkvy w mb gktck navakik; w kmí,
il ilm rkfík hy xkihkt glmk uby pbymy axdlmafny yn gbxdnatnk. kmí uby, xam
myñltym, vbymkm xytgyhym ymqái lfnackhlm dlt nywym havaikm w rbxkikm k
mlmycktmy.

-yn hakfnl xy nnyvy -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl yiqty mí- ma ymqy xa kxl il
ym qónlcl; w ma il nl ym, uby nl dktygy glxl bi cüyvl k lqtl.

qlxó bi dlgl hy knayiql hli ubaolqy, w, vayihl uby qlhkvík ny dtymqkfki
manyigal, ubaml dkmkt khynkiqy yi mb dnáqagk, glxl dkmktk ia il my dbmayty
yi xyhal nk kcbhyek hy mkigrl, yn gbkn, vayihl uby mb kxl my hyqyiík, qlxó
nk xkil dlt én, hagayihl:

-xa myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, uby bi qayxdl my nnkxó yn gkfknnytl hy
nk qtamqy pacbtk w krltk my nnkxk yn gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym, ym bi rahkncl
xbw kqyiqkhl, uby mkfy nkqíi w tlxkigy glxl bi fkgrannyt, w yi qlhl gbkiql
qtkqk w kglimyok dtlgyhy glxl xbw fbyi mlnhkhl, w qayiy qlhkm nkm nywym w
lthyikiekm hy nl uby nnkxki yn hbynl yi nk bñk; w kmí, il rkw xám uby rkgyt
mail hyoktmy nnyvkt dlt nl uby én haoyty, w mlfty xí ma nl yttktyi; gbkiql
xám, uby ynnl my ymqá hagrl uby ym iygyhkh glttytmy dlt mónl lít bi
tyfbeil, uby wl xy kgbythl, gbkihl xbgrkgrl, uby tyfbeikfk gkhk w gbkihl
uby my xy kiqlokfk, mai uby ikhay xy pbymy k nk xkil, w gli qkiqk ctkgak w
dtldayhkh uby, yi tyfbeikihl wl, tyfbeikfki qlhlm nlm kmilm hyn dbyfnl, w
il dlt yml hyokfk hy myt raol hy xam dkhtym, uby ytki rlitkhímaxlm; w,
kbiuby dlt ymqk rkfanahkh ytk aivahakhl hy xám hy gbkqtl hy nlm ymqatkhlm
hy xa dbyfnl, il my xy hkfk hlm kthaqym. w, dltuby my vyk uby hacl vythkh,
ymdytyi w ymgbgryi, uby ymqk gayigak ym glxl nk hyn ikhkt: uby, bik vye
kdtyihahk, ibigk my lnvahk.

w nbycl, dbymqk nk xkil yi nkm iktagym, glxyieó k tyfbeikt qki tygakxyiqy,
uby qlhlm nlm gytgkilm vknnym tyqbxfktli. dytl bil hy nlm uby ymqkfki obiql
k én, gtywyihl uby rkgík fbtnk hynnlm, kneó bi vktkdknl uby yi nk xkil
qyiík, w halny qkn clndy gli én, uby, mai myt dlhytlml k lqtk glmk, hal gli
mkigrl dkiek yi yn mbynl. hli ubaolqy, uby val qki xkndktkhl k mkigrl,
kttyxyqaó kn uby ny rkfík hkhl, gli nk nkiek mlfty xkil, dytl pbytli qkiqlm
nlm uby my dbmaytli yi xyhal, uby il pby dlmafny vyicktny; kiqym, vayihl
uby nnlvík mlfty én bi ibfnkhl hy dayhtkm, w uby ny kxyikekfki xan
yigktkhkm fknnymqkm w il xyilm gkiqahkh hy ktgkfbgym, vlnvaó nkm tayihkm k
tlgaikiqy, w k qlhl nl uby mb cknldy dbhl, my mknaó hy yiqty ynnlm,
yiglxyiháihlmy hy qlhl gltkeói k halm, uby hy kubyn dynactl ny naftkmy,
qyxayihl k gkhk dkml il ny yiqtkmy kncbik fknk dlt nkm ymdknhkm w ny
mknaymy kn dygrl; w k gkhk dbiql tyglcík yn knayiql, dlt vyt ma ny pknqkfk.

dytl nlm hyn ymgbkhtói my gliqyiqktli gli vytny rbat, mai qatktny. k mkigrl
ny dbmaytli mlfty mb obxyiql, kdyikm vbynql yi mí, w ny hyoktli at qtkm mb
kxl, il dltuby én qbvaymy myiqahl dktk tycatny; dytl yn tbgal macbaó nkm
rbynnkm hy tlgaikiqy, mai yn gbkn il my rknnkfk bi dbiql. knlickhl, dbym,
hli ubaolqy fbyi qtygrl, vlnvaó nk gkfyek w val uby mkigrl vyiík, w
kqyihaóny, vayihl uby iaicbil ny mycbík.

nlm hyn ymgbkhtói my ymqbvaytli knní rkmqk nk ilgry, w, dlt il rkfyt mknahl
k nk fkqknnk mbm gliqtktalm, my vlnvaytli k mb dbyfnl, tyclgaokhlm w
knyctym; w ma ynnlm mbdaytki nk glmqbxfty kiqacbk hy nlm ctayclm,
nyvkiqktki yi kubyn nbckt w maqal bi qtlpyl.





gkdíqbnl zzvaaa. hy glmkm uby hagy fyiyicyna uby nkm mkftá ubayi ny nywyty,
ma nkm nyy gli kqyigaói


gbkihl yn vknayiqy rbwy, nk mbdytgrytík ymqá hymgbfaytqk, w ym hy vktliym
dtbhyiqym cbkthktmy dktk xyolt lgkmaói. ymqk vythkh my vytapagó yi hli
ubaolqy, yn gbkn, hkihl nbckt k nk pbtak hyn dbyfnl w k nkm xknkm
aiqyigaliym hy kubyn aihacikhl ymgbkhtói, dbml daym yi dlnvltlmk, w, mai
kglthktmy hy mkigrl ia hyn dynactl yi uby ny hyokfk, my kdktqó qkiql gbkiql
ny dktygaó uby fkmqkfk dktk ymqkt mycbtl. mycbíkny mkigrl, kqtkvymkhl yi mb
obxyiql, glxl ubyhk typytahl. nnycó, yi pai, wk vbynql yi mb kgbythl, w kn
nnyckt, my hyoó gkyt hyn tbgal k nlm daym hy tlgaikiqy, qlhl kimalml, qlhl
xlnahl w qlhl kdknykhl. kdyómy hli ubaolqy dktk gkqktny nkm pytahkm; dytl,
glxl ny rknnkmy mkil hy nlm daym k nk gkfyek, gli kmke gónytk ny haol:

-¡qki yi rltk xknk mbdamqym vlm tyfbeikt, mkigrl! w ¿hóihy rknnkmqym vlm
myt fbyil yn ilxftkt nk mlck yi gkmk hyn krltgkhl? k xúmagk hy tyfbeilm,
¿ubé gliqtkdbiql my rkfík hy nnyvkt mail hy vktkdknlm? w hkh ctkgakm k
halm, mkigrl, uby wk uby lm mkiqacbktli gli bi dknl, il lm ragaytli yn dyt
macibx gtbgam gli bi knpkioy.

-il ymqlw dktk tymdlihyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby xy dktygy uby rkfnl dlt
nkm ymdknhkm. mbfkxlm w kdktqéxlilm hy kubí, uby wl dlihté manyigal yi xam
tyfbeilm, dytl il yi hyokt hy hygat uby nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym rbwyi, w
hyoki k mbm fbyilm ymgbhytlm xlnahlm glxl knryñk, l glxl gafytk, yi dlhyt
hy mbm yiyxaclm.

-il rbwy yn uby my tyqatk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby rkm hy mkfyt,
mkigrl, uby nk vknyiqík uby il my pbihk mlfty nk fkmk hy nk dtbhyigak my
nnkxk qyxytahkh, w nkm rkekñkm hyn qyxytktal xám my kqtafbwyi k nk fbyik
pltqbik uby k mb áiaxl. w kmí, wl glipayml uby xy ry tyqatkhl, dytl il
rbahl; w yi ymql ry axaqkhl k xbgrlm vknayiqym, uby my rki cbkthkhl dktk
qayxdlm xyoltym, w hymql ymqái nkm ramqltakm nnyikm, nkm gbknym, dlt il
mytqy k qa hy dtlvygrl ia k xí hy cbmql, il qy nkm typaytl krltk.

yi ymql, wk ymqkfk k gkfknnl mkigrl, kwbhkhl hy hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn
kmaxamxl mbfaó yi tlgaikiqy, w dlgl k dlgl my pbytli k yxflmgkt yi bik
knkxyhk uby rkmqk bi gbktql hy nycbk hy knní my dktygík. hy gbkihl yi
gbkihl hkfk mkigrl bilm kwym dtlpbihímaxlm w bilm cyxahlm hlnltlmlm; w,
dtycbiqáihlny hli ubaolqy nk gkbmk hy qki kxktcl myiqaxayiql, tymdlihaó
uby, hymhy nk dbiqk hyn ymdaikel rkmqk nk ibgk hyn gynyftl, ny hlník hy
xkiytk uby ny mkgkfk hy myiqahl.

-nk gkbmk hymy hlnlt hyfy hy myt, mai hbhk -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby, glxl
ytk yn dknl gli uby qy haytli nktcl w qyihahl, qy glcaó qlhkm nkm ymdknhkm,
hlihy yiqtki qlhkm ymkm dktqym uby qy hbynyi; w ma xám qy glcaytk, xám qy
hlnaytk.

-¡dlt halm -haol mkigrl-, uby vbymk xytgyh xy rk mkgkhl hy bik ctki hbhk, w
uby xy nk rk hygnktkhl dlt naihlm qétxailm! ¡gbytdl hy xí! ¿qki yigbfaytqk
ymqkfk nk gkbmk hy xa hlnlt uby rk mahl xyiymqyt hygatxy uby xy hbyny qlhl
qlhl kubynnl uby kngkieó yn dknl? ma xy hlnaytki nlm qlfannlm, kúi dbhaytk
myt uby my kihbvaytk khavaikihl yn dltubé xy hlníki, dytl hlnytxy nl uby xy
xlnaytli il ym xbgrl khavaikt. k nk py, myñlt ibymqtl kxl, yn xkn koyil hy
dynl gbynck, w gkhk hík vlw hymgbftayihl qayttk hy nl dlgl uby dbyhl
ymdytkt hy nk glxdkñík uby gli vbymqtk xytgyh qyicl; dltuby ma ymqk vye xy
rk hyokhl kdknykt, lqtk w lqtkm gayiql vlnvytyxlm k nlm xkiqykxayiqlm hy
xkttkm w k lqtkm xbgrkgrytíkm, uby ma krltk xy rki mknahl k nkm ymdknhkm,
hymdbém xy mknhtái k nlm lolm. rktql xyolt rktík wl, mail uby mlw bi
fátfktl, w il rkté ikhk uby fbyil myk yi qlhk xa vahk; rktql xyolt rktík
wl, vbynvl k hygat, yi vlnvytxy k xa gkmk, w k xa xboyt, w k xam raolm, w
mbmqyiqktnk w gtaktnlm gli nl uby halm pby mytvahl hy hktxy, w il kihktxy
qtkm vbymk xytgyh dlt gkxailm mai gkxail w dlt myihkm w gkttytkm uby il nkm
qayiyi, fyfayihl xkn w glxayihl dylt. dbym, ¡qlxkhxy yn hltxat! gliqkh,
rytxkil ymgbhytl, mayqy daym hy qayttk, w ma ubamaétyhym xám, qlxkh lqtlm
qkiqlm, uby yi vbymqtk xkil ymqá ymgbhannkt, w qyihylm k qlhl vbymqtl fbyi
qknkiqy; uby ubyxkhl vyk wl w rygrl dlnvlm kn dtaxytl uby hal dbiqkhk yi nk
kihkiqy gkfknnytík, l, k nl xyilm, kn dtaxytl uby ubaml myt ymgbhytl hy
qknym qliqlm glxl hyfaytli myt qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym dkmkhlm. hy
nlm dtymyiqym il hacl ikhk, uby, dlt myt vbymqtk xytgyh bil hynnlm, nlm
qyicl tymdyql, w dltuby mé uby mkfy vbymk xytgyh bi dbiql xám uby yn hakfnl
yi gbkiql rkfnk w yi gbkiql dayimk.

-rktík wl bik fbyik kdbymqk gli vlm, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-: uby krltk
uby vkam rkfnkihl mai uby ikhay lm vkwk k nk xkil, uby il lm hbyny ikhk yi
qlhl vbymqtl gbytdl. rkfnkh, raol xíl, qlhl kubynnl uby lm vaiayty kn
dyimkxayiql w k nk flgk; uby, k qtbygl hy uby k vlm il lm hbynk ikhk,
qyihté wl dlt cbmql yn yipkhl uby xy hki vbymqtkm axdytqaiyigakm. w ma
qkiql hymyáam vlnvytlm k vbymqtk gkmk gli vbymqtk xboyt w raolm, il dytxaqk
halm uby wl lm nl axdahk; haiytlm qyiéam xílm: xatkh gbáiql rk uby ymqk
qytgytk vye mknaxlm hy ibymqtl dbyfnl, w xatkh nl uby dlhéam w hyféam ckikt
gkhk xym, w dkcklm hy vbymqtk xkil.

-gbkihl wl mytvík -tymdlihaó mkigrl- k qlxé gkttkmgl, yn dkhty hyn
fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, uby vbymqtk xytgyh fayi glilgy, hlm hbgkhlm
ckikfk gkhk xym, kxéi hy nk glxahk; gli vbymqtk xytgyh il mé nl uby dbyhl
ckikt, dbymql uby mé uby qayiy xám qtkfkol yn ymgbhytl hyn gkfknnytl
kihkiqy uby yn uby matvy k bi nkftkhlt; uby, yi tymlnbgaói, nlm uby
mytvaxlm k nkftkhltym, dlt xbgrl uby qtkfkoyxlm hy hík, dlt xkn uby mbgyhk,
k nk ilgry gyikxlm lnnk w hltxaxlm yi gkxk, yi nk gbkn il ry hltxahl
hymdbém uby rk uby matvl k vbymqtk xytgyh. ma il rk mahl yn qayxdl ftyvy
uby ymqbvaxlm yi gkmk hy hli haycl hy xatkihk, w nk oatk uby qbvy gli nk
ymdbxk uby mkubé hy nkm lnnkm hy gkxkgrl, w nl uby glxí w fyfí w hltxí yi
gkmk hy fkmanal, qlhl yn lqtl qayxdl ry hltxahl yi nk hbtk qayttk, kn gaynl
kfaytql, mboyql k nl uby hagyi aignyxyigakm hyn gaynl, mbmqyiqáihlxy gli
tkokm hy ubyml w xyihtbclm hy dki, w fyfayihl kcbkm, wk hy kttlwlm, wk hy
pbyiqym, hy nkm uby yigliqtkxlm dlt ymlm kihbttaknym hlihy kihkxlm.

-glipayml -haol hli ubaolqy- uby qlhl nl uby hagym, mkigrl, myk vythkh.
¿gbáiql dktygy uby lm hyfl hkt xám hy nl uby lm hkfk qlxé gkttkmgl?

-k xa dktygyt -haol mkigrl-, gli hlm tyknym xám uby vbymqtk xytgyh kñkhaymy
gkhk xym xy qyihtík dlt fayi dkckhl. ymql ym gbkiql kn mknktal hy xa
qtkfkol; dytl, yi gbkiql k mkqampkgytxy k nk dknkftk w dtlxymk uby vbymqtk
xytgyh xy qayiy rygrk hy hktxy yn clfaytil hy bik íimbnk, mytík obmql uby
my xy kñkhaymyi lqtlm myam tyknym, uby dlt qlhlm mytíki qtyaiqk.

-ymqá xbw fayi -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-; w, glipltxy kn mknktal uby vlm lm
rkféam myñknkhl, 23 híkm rk uby mknaxlm hy ibymqtl dbyfnl: gliqkh, mkigrl,
tkqk dlt gkiqahkh, w xatkh nl uby lm hyfl, w dkcklm, glxl lm qyicl hagrl,
hy vbymqtk xkil.

-¡lr, gbytdl hy xí! -haol mkigrl-, uby vk vbymqtk xytgyh xbw yttkhl yi ymqk
gbyiqk, dltuby yi nl hy nk dtlxymk hy nk íimbnk my rk hy gliqkt hymhy yn
hík uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy nk dtlxyqaó rkmqk nk dtymyiqy rltk yi uby
ymqkxlm.

-dbym, ¿ubé qkiql rk, mkigrl, uby lm nk dtlxyqí? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-ma wl xkn il xy kgbythl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, hyfy hy rkfyt xám hy vyaiqy
kñlm, qtym híkm xám k xyilm.

halmy hli ubaolqy bik ctki dknxkhk yi nk ptyiqy, w glxyieó k tyít xbw hy
ckik, w haol:

-dbym il kihbvy wl yi mayttk xltyik, ia yi qlhl yn hamgbtml hy ibymqtkm
mknahkm, mail hlm xymym kdyikm, w ¿hagym, mkigrl, uby rk vyaiqy kñlm uby qy
dtlxyqí nk íimbnk? krltk hacl uby ubaytym uby my glimbxki yi qbm mknktalm
yn haiytl uby qayiym xíl; w ma ymql ym kmí, w qú cbmqkm hynnl, hymhy kubí
qy nl hlw, w fbyi dtlvygrl qy rkck; uby, k qtbygl hy vytxy mai qki xkn
ymgbhytl, rlncktéxy hy ubyhktxy dlfty w mai fnkigk. dytl haxy, dtyvktagkhlt
hy nkm lthyikiekm ymgbhytanym hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, ¿hóihy rkm vamql
qú, l nyíhl, uby iaicúi ymgbhytl hy gkfknnytl kihkiqy my rkwk dbymql gli mb
myñlt yi qkiql xám gbáiql xy rkféam hy hkt gkhk xym dltuby lm matvk?
Éiqtkqy, éiqtkqy, xknkihtíi, plnnói w vymqacnl, uby qlhl nl dktygym;
éiqtkqy, hacl, dlt yn xkty xkcibx hy mbm ramqltakm, w ma rknnktym uby kncúi
ymgbhytl rkwk hagrl, ia dyimkhl, nl uby kubí rkm hagrl, ubaytl uby xy ny
gnkvym yi nk ptyiqy, w, dlt kñkhahbtk, xy rkckm gbkqtl xkxlikm mynnkhkm yi
xa tlmqtl. vbynvy nkm tayihkm, l yn gkfymqtl, kn tbgal, w vbénvyqy k qb
gkmk, dltuby bi mlnl dkml hymhy kubí il rkm hy dkmkt xám khynkiqy glixacl.
¡lr dki xkn glilgahl! ¡lr dtlxymkm xkn glnlgkhkm! ¡lr rlxfty uby qayiy xám
hy fymqak uby hy dytmlik! ¿krltk, gbkihl wl dyimkfk dliytqy yi ymqkhl, w
qkn, uby k dymkt hy qb xboyt qy nnkxktki myñltík, qy hymdahym? ¿krltk qy
vkm, gbkihl wl vyiík gli aiqyigaói patxy w vknyhytk hy rkgytqy myñlt hy nk
xyolt íimbnk hyn xbihl? yi pai, glxl qú rkm hagrl lqtkm vygym, il ym nk
xayn... yqg. kmil ytym, w kmil rkm hy myt, w yi kmil rkm hy dktkt gbkihl my
qy kgkfy yn gbtml hy nk vahk; uby dktk xí qyicl uby kiqym nnycktá ynnk k mb
únqaxl qétxail uby qú gkackm w hym yi nk gbyiqk hy uby ytym fymqak.

xatkfk mkigrl k hli ubaolqy hy yi raql yi raql, yi qkiql uby nlm qknym
vaqbdytalm ny hygík, w glxdbicaómy hy xkiytk uby ny vaiaytli nkm náctaxkm k
nlm lolm, w gli vle hlnltahk w yipytxk ny haol:

-myñlt xíl, wl glipayml uby dktk myt hyn qlhl kmil il xy pknqk xám hy nk
glnk; ma vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty dliétxynk, wl nk hkté dlt fayi dbymqk, w ny
mytvaté glxl obxyiql qlhlm nlm híkm uby xy ubyhki hy xa vahk. vbymqtk
xytgyh xy dythliy w my hbynk hy xa xlgyhkh, w khvaytqk uby mé dlgl, w uby
ma rkfnl xbgrl, xám dtlgyhy hy yipytxyhkh uby hy xknagak; xkm, ubayi wyttk
w my yixayihk, k halm my yiglxayihk.

-xktkvannátkxy wl, mkigrl, ma il xyegnktkm kncúi typtkigagl yi qb glnlubal.
krltk fayi, wl qy dythlil, gli uby qy yxayihym, w gli uby il qy xbymqtym hy
kubí khynkiqy qki kxacl hy qb aiqytém, mail uby dtlgbtym yimkigrkt yn
gltkeói, w qy knayiqym w kiaxym k ymdytkt yn gbxdnaxayiql hy xam dtlxymkm,
uby, kbiuby my qkthk, il my axdlmafanaqk.

mkigrl tymdlihaó uby mí rktík, kbiuby mkgkmy pbytekm hy pnkubyek.

gli ymql, my xyqaytli yi nk knkxyhk, w hli ubaolqy my kglxlhó kn day hy bi
lnxl, w mkigrl kn hy bik rkwk; uby ymqlm qknym átflnym w lqtlm mbm
myxyokiqym mayxdty qayiyi daym, w il xkilm. mkigrl dkmó nk ilgry
dyilmkxyiqy, dltuby yn vktkdknl my rkgík xám myiqat gli yn mytyil. hli
ubaolqy nk dkmó yi mbm gliqaibkm xyxltakm; dytl, gli qlhl yml, haytli nlm
lolm kn mbyñl, w kn mknat hyn knfk macbaytli mb gkxail fbmgkihl nkm tafytkm
hyn pkxlml yftl, hlihy nym mbgyhaó nl uby my gliqktá yi yn gkdíqbnl
vyiahytl.





gkdíqbnl zzaz. hy nk pkxlmk kvyiqbtk hyn fktgl yigkiqkhl


dlt mbm dkmlm gliqkhlm w dlt gliqkt, hlm híkm hymdbém uby mknaytli hy nk
knkxyhk, nnycktli hli ubaolqy w mkigrl kn tíl yftl, w yn vytny pby hy ctki
cbmql k hli ubaolqy, dltuby gliqyxdnó w xató yi én nk kxyiahkh hy mbm
tafytkm, nk gnktahkh hy mbm kcbkm, yn mlmaycl hy mb gbtml w nk kfbihkigak
hy mbm níubahlm gtamqknym, gbwk knycty vamqk tyilvó yi mb xyxltak xan
kxltlmlm dyimkxayiqlm. ymdygaknxyiqy pby w vail yi nl uby rkfík vamql yi nk
gbyvk hy xliqymailm; uby, dbymql uby yn xlil hy xkymy dyhtl ny rkfík hagrl
uby dktqy hy kubynnkm glmkm ytki vythkh w dktqy xyiqatk, én my kqyiík xám k
nkm vythkhytkm uby k nkm xyiqatlmkm, fayi kn tyvém hy mkigrl, uby qlhkm nkm
qyiík dlt nk xymxk xyiqatk.

wyihl, dbym, hymqk xkiytk, my ny lptygaó k nk vamqk bi dyubyñl fktgl mai
tyxlm ia lqtkm oktgakm kncbikm, uby ymqkfk kqkhl yi nk ltannk k bi qtligl
hy bi átfln uby yi nk tafytk ymqkfk. xató hli ubaolqy k qlhkm dktqym, w il
val dytmlik kncbik; w nbycl, mai xám ia xám, my kdyó hy tlgaikiqy w xkihó k
mkigrl uby nl xymxl ragaymy hyn tbgal, w uby k yiqtkxfkm fymqakm nkm kqkmy
xbw fayi, obiqkm, kn qtligl hy bi ánkxl l mkbgy uby knní ymqkfk. dtycbiqóny
mkigrl nk gkbmk hy kubyn múfaql kdykxayiql w hy kubyn nackxayiql. tymdlihaó
hli ubaolqy:

-rkm hy mkfyt, mkigrl, uby ymqy fktgl uby kubí ymqá, hytygrkxyiqy w mai
dlhyt myt lqtk glmk yi gliqtktal, xy ymqá nnkxkihl w glivahkihl k uby yiqty
yi én, w vkwk yi én k hkt mlglttl k kncúi gkfknnytl, l k lqtk iygymaqkhk w
dtaigadkn dytmlik, uby hyfy hy ymqkt dbymqk yi kncbik ctkihy gbaqk, dltuby
émqy ym ymqanl hy nlm naftlm hy nkm ramqltakm gkfknnytymgkm w hy nlm
yigkiqkhltym uby yi ynnkm my yiqtyxyqyi w dnkqagki: gbkihl kncúi gkfknnytl
ymqá dbymql yi kncúi qtkfkol, uby il dbyhy myt naftkhl hén mail dlt nk xkil
hy lqtl gkfknnytl, dbymql uby ymqéi hamqkiqym yn bil hyn lqtl hlm l qtym
xan nycbkm, w kbi xám, l ny kttyfkqki yi bik ibfy l ny hydktki bi fktgl
hlihy my yiqty, w yi xyilm hy bi kftat w gyttkt hy lolm ny nnyvki, l dlt
nlm katym, l dlt nk xkt, hlihy ubaytyi w khlihy ym xyiymqyt mb kwbhk; kmí
uby, ¡lr mkigrl!, ymqy fktgl ymqá dbymql kubí dktk yn xymxl ypygql; w ymql
ym qki vythkh glxl ym krltk hy hík; w kiqym uby émqy my dkmy, kqk obiqlm kn
tbgal w k tlgaikiqy, w k nk xkil hy halm, uby ilm cbíy, uby il hyokté hy
yxfktgktxy ma xy nl dahaymyi ptkanym hymgknelm.

-dbym kmí ym -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty hkt k gkhk dkml yi
ymqlm uby il mé ma nlm nnkxy hamdktkqym, il rkw mail lfyhygyt w fkokt nk
gkfyek, kqyihayihl kn typtái "rke nl uby qb kxl qy xkihk, w maéiqkqy gli én
k nk xymk"; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, dlt nl uby qlgk kn hymgktcl hy xa
gligayigak, ubaytl khvytqat k vbymqtk xytgyh uby k xí xy dktygy uby ymqy
qkn fktgl il ym hy nlm yigkiqkhlm, mail hy kncbilm dymgkhltym hymqy tíl,
dltuby yi én my dymgki nkm xyoltym mkflckm hyn xbihl.

ymql hygík, xayiqtkm kqkfk nkm fymqakm, mkigrl, hyoáihlnkm k nk dtlqygaói w
kxdktl hy nlm yigkiqkhltym, gli rktql hlnlt hy mb áiaxk. hli ubaolqy ny
haol uby il qbvaymy dyik hyn hymkxdktl hy kubynnlm kiaxknym, uby yn uby nlm
nnyvktík k ynnlm dlt qki nlicaigblm gkxailm w tycaliym qyihtík gbyiqk hy
mbmqyiqktnlm.

-il yiqayihl yml hy nlcagblm -haol mkigrl-, ia ry líhl qkn vlgkfnl yi qlhlm
nlm híkm hy xa vahk.

-nlicaigblm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- ubayty hygat kdktqkhlm; w il ym
xktkvannk uby il nl yiqayihkm, uby il ymqám qú lfnackhl k mkfyt nkqíi, glxl
kncbilm uby dtymbxyi uby nl mkfyi, w nl aciltki.

-wk ymqái kqkhlm -tydnagó mkigrl-. ¿ubé ryxlm hy rkgyt krltk?

-¿ubé? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. mkiqacbktilm w nyvkt pyttl; ubaytl hygat,
yxfktgktilm w gltqkt nk kxkttk gli uby ymqy fktgl ymqá kqkhl.

w, hkihl bi mknql yi én, macbaéihlny mkigrl, gltqó yn glthyn, w yn fktgl my
pby kdktqkihl dlgl k dlgl hy nk tafytk; w gbkihl mkigrl my val lftk hy hlm
vktkm hyiqtl hyn tíl, glxyieó k qyxfnkt, qyxayihl mb dythagaói; dytl
iaicbik glmk ny hal xám dyik uby yn lít tleikt kn tbgal w yn vyt uby
tlgaikiqy dbcikfk dlt hymkqktmy, w híolny k mb myñlt:

-yn tbgal tyfbeik, glihlnahl hy ibymqtk kbmyigak, w tlgaikiqy dtlgbtk
dliytmy yi nafytqkh dktk kttloktmy qtkm ilmlqtlm. ¡lr gktímaxlm kxaclm,
ubyhklm yi dke, w nk nlgbtk uby ilm kdktqk hy vlmlqtlm, glivytqahk yi
hymyickñl, ilm vbynvk k vbymqtk dtymyigak!

w, yi ymql, glxyieó k nnltkt qki kxktckxyiqy uby hli ubaolqy, xlríil w
glnétagl, ny haol:

-¿hy ubé qyxym, glfkthy gtakqbtk? ¿hy ubé nnltkm, gltkeói hy xkiqyubannkm?
¿ubaéi qy dytmacby, l ubaéi qy kglmk, áiaxl hy tkqói gkmytl, l ubé qy
pknqk, xyiymqytlml yi nk xaqkh hy nkm yiqtkñkm hy nk kfbihkigak? ¿dlt hagrk
vkm gkxaikihl k day w hymgknel dlt nkm xliqkñkm tapykm, mail myiqkhl yi bik
qkfnk, glxl bi ktgrahbuby, dlt yn mymcl gbtml hymqy kctkhkfny tíl, hy hlihy
yi ftyvy ymdkgal mknhtyxlm kn xkt hankqkhl? dytl wk rkfyxlm hy rkfyt
mknahl, w gkxaikhl, dlt nl xyilm, myqygayiqkm l lgrlgayiqkm nycbkm; w ma wl
qbvaytk kubí bi kmqtlnkfal gli uby qlxkt nk knqbtk hyn dlnl, wl qy haoytk
nkm uby ryxlm gkxaikhl; kbiuby, l wl mé dlgl, l wk ryxlm dkmkhl, l
dkmktyxlm dtymql, dlt nk níiyk yubailgakn, uby havahy w gltqk nlm hlm
gliqtkdbymqlm dlnlm yi acbkn hamqkigak.

-w gbkihl nnycbyxlm k ymk nyñk uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy -dtycbiqó mkigrl-,
¿gbáiql rkftyxlm gkxaikhl?

-xbgrl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby hy qtygayiqlm w mymyiqk ctkhlm uby
gliqayiy yn cnlfl, hyn kcbk w hy nk qayttk, mycúi yn góxdbql hy dqlnlxyl,
uby pby yn xkwlt glmxóctkpl uby my mkfy, nk xaqkh rkftyxlm gkxaikhl,
nnyckihl k nk níiyk uby ry hagrl.

-dlt halm -haol mkigrl-, uby vbymk xytgyh xy qtky dlt qymqacl hy nl uby
hagy k bik cyiqan dytmlik, dbql w ckpl, gli nk kñkhahbtk hy xyói, l xyl, l
il mé góxl.

taómy hli ubaolqy hy nk aiqytdtyqkgaói uby mkigrl rkfík hkhl kn ilxfty w kn
góxdbql w gbyiqk hyn glmxóctkpl dqlnlxyl, w híolny:

-mkftám, mkigrl, uby nlm ymdkñlnym w nlm uby my yxfktgki yi gáhae dktk at k
nkm aihakm ltayiqknym, bik hy nkm myñknym uby qayiyi dktk yiqyihyt uby rki
dkmkhl nk níiyk yubailgakn uby qy ry hagrl ym uby k qlhlm nlm uby vki yi yn
ikvíl my nym xbytyi nlm dalolm, mai uby nym ubyhy iaicbil, ia yi qlhl yn
fkoyn ny rknnktái, ma ny dymki k ltl; w kmí, dbyhym, mkigrl, dkmykt bik
xkil dlt bi xbmnl, w ma qldktym glmk vavk, mknhtyxlm hymqk hbhk; w ma il,
dkmkhl rkfyxlm.

-wl il gtyl ikhk hyml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl, gli qlhl, rkté nl uby vbymk
xytgyh xy xkihk, kbiuby il mé dktk ubé rkw iygymahkh hy rkgyt ymkm
yzdytayigakm, dbym wl vyl gli xam xamxlm lolm uby il ilm rkfyxlm kdktqkhl
hy nk tafytk gaigl vktkm, ia ryxlm hygkiqkhl hy hlihy ymqái nkm knyxkñkm
hlm vktkm, dltuby knní ymqái tlgaikiqy w yn tbgal yi yn dtldal nbckt hl nlm
hyokxlm; w qlxkhk nk xatk, glxl wl nk qlxl krltk, vlql k qkn uby il ilm
xlvyxlm ia kihkxlm kn dkml hy bik rltxack.

-rke, mkigrl, nk kvytacbkgaói uby qy ry hagrl, w il qy gbtym hy lqtk, uby
qú il mkfym ubé glmk myki glnbtlm, níiykm, dktknynlm, elhíkglm, gníqagkm,
dlnlm, mlnmqagalm, yubailgalm, dnkiyqkm, macilm, dbiqlm, xyhahkm, hy uby my
glxdliy nk ympytk gynymqy w qyttymqty; uby ma qlhkm ymqkm glmkm mbdaytkm, l
dktqy hynnkm, vaytkm gnktkxyiqy ubé hy dktknynlm ryxlm gltqkhl, ubé hy
macilm vamql w ubé hy axácaiym ryxlm hyokhl kqtám w vkxlm hyokihl krltk. w
qótilqy k hygat uby qy qayiqym w dymubym, uby wl dktk xí qyicl uby ymqám
xám naxdal uby bi dnaycl hy dkdyn naml w fnkigl.

qyiqómy mkigrl, w, nnyckihl gli nk xkil fliaqkxyiqy w gli qayiql rkgak nk
gltvk aeubaythk, kneó nk gkfyek w xató k mb kxl, w haol:

-l nk yzdytayigak ym pknmk, l il ryxlm nnyckhl khlihy vbymk xytgyh hagy, ia
gli xbgrkm nycbkm.

-dbym ¿ubé? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy-, ¿rkm qldkhl kncl?

-¡w kbi knclm! -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

w, mkgbhaéihlmy nlm hyhlm, my nkvó qlhk nk xkil yi yn tíl, dlt yn gbkn
mlmyckhkxyiqy my hymnaekfk yn fktgl dlt xaqkh hy nk glttayiqy, mai uby ny
xlvaymy kncbik aiqynacyigak mygtyqk, ia kncúi yigkiqkhlt ymglihahl, mail yn
xamxl gbtml hyn kcbk, fnkihl yiqligym w mbkvy.

yi ymql, hymgbftaytli bikm ctkihym kgyñkm uby yi nk xaqkh hyn tíl ymqkfki;
w kdyikm nkm rbfl vamql hli ubaolqy, gbkihl gli vle knqk haol k mkigrl:

-¿vyym? knní, ¡lr kxacl!, my hymgbfty nk gabhkh, gkmqannl l pltqknyek hlihy
hyfy hy ymqkt kncúi gkfknnytl ldtaxahl, l kncbik tyaik, aipkiqk l dtaigymk
xkndktkhk, dktk gbwl mlglttl mlw kubí qtkíhl.

-¿ubé hakfnlm hy gabhkh, pltqknyek l gkmqannl hagy vbymk xytgyh, myñlt?
-haol mkigrl-. ¿il ygrk hy vyt uby kubénnkm mli kgyñkm uby ymqái yi yn tíl,
hlihy my xbyny yn qtacl?

-gknnk, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby, kbiuby dktygyi kgyñkm, il nl mli; w
wk qy ry hagrl uby qlhkm nkm glmkm qtkmqtbygki w xbhki hy mb myt ikqbtkn
nlm yigkiqlm. il ubaytl hygat uby nkm xbhki hy yi bil yi lqtl myt
tyknxyiqy, mail uby nl dktygy, glxl nl xlmqtó nk yzdytayigak yi nk
qtkimpltxkgaói hy hbngaiyk, úiagl typbcal hy xam ymdytkiekm.

yi ymql, yn fktgl, yiqtkhl yi nk xaqkh hy nk glttayiqy hyn tíl, glxyieó k
gkxaikt il qki nyiqkxyiqy glxl rkmqk knní. nlm xlnaiytlm hy nkm kgyñkm, uby
vaytli vyiat kubyn fktgl dlt yn tíl, w uby my afk k yxflgkt dlt yn tkbhkn
hy nkm tbyhkm, mknaytli gli dtymqyek xbgrlm hynnlm gli vktkm nktckm k
hyqyiytny, w, glxl mkníki yirktaikhlm, w gbfaytqlm nlm tlmqtlm w nlm
vymqahlm hyn dlnvl hy nk rktaik, tydtymyiqkfki bik xknk vamqk. hkfki vlgym
ctkihym, hagayihl:

-¡hyxlialm hy rlxftym! ¿hóihy vkam? ¿vyiím hymymdytkhlm? ¿ubé ubytéam,
krlcktlm w rkgytlm dyhkelm yi ymqkm tbyhkm?

-¿il qy haoy wl, mkigrl -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-, uby rkfíkxlm
nnyckhl hlihy ry hy xlmqtkt k hó nnyck yn vknlt hy xa ftkel? xatk ubé hy
xknkihtaiym w plnnliym xy mknyi kn yigbyiqtl, xatk gbáiqlm vymqacnlm my xy
ldliyi, xatk gbáiqkm pykm gkqkhbtkm ilm rkgyi glglm... dbym ¡krltk nl
vytéam, fynnkglm!

w, dbymql yi day yi yn fktgl, gli ctkihym vlgym glxyieó k kxyikekt k nlm
xlnaiytlm, hagaéihlnym:

-gkiknnk xknvkhk w dylt kglimyokhk, hyokh yi mb nafytqkh w nafty knfyhtíl k
nk dytmlik uby yi ymk vbymqtk pltqknyek l dtamaói qyiéam ldtaxahk, knqk l
fkok, hy gbknubaytk mbytqy l gknahkh uby myk, uby wl mlw hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, nnkxkhl yn gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym dlt lqtl ilxfty, k ubayi ymqá
tymytvkhk dlt lthyi hy nlm knqlm gaynlm yn hkt pai pynagy k ymqk kvyiqbtk.

w, hagayihl ymql, ygró xkil k mb ymdkhk w glxyieó k ymctaxatnk yi yn katy
gliqtk nlm xlnaiytlm; nlm gbknym, lwyihl w il yiqyihayihl kubynnkm
mkihygym, my dbmaytli gli mbm vktkm k hyqyiyt yn fktgl, uby wk afk yiqtkihl
yi yn tkbhkn w gkikn hy nkm tbyhkm.

dúmlmy mkigrl hy tlhannkm, dahayihl hyvlqkxyiqy kn gaynl ny naftkmy hy qki
xkiapaymql dynactl, glxl nl rael, dlt nk aihbmqtak w dtymqyek hy nlm
xlnaiytlm, uby, ldliaéihlmy gli mbm dknlm kn fktgl, ny hyqbvaytli, dytl il
hy xkiytk uby hyokmyi hy qtkmqltikt yn fktgl w hkt gli hli ubaolqy w gli
mkigrl kn qtkvém yi yn kcbk; dytl víilny fayi k hli ubaolqy, uby mkfík
ikhkt glxl bi ckiml, kbiuby yn dyml hy nkm ktxkm ny nnyvó kn plihl hlm
vygym; w ma il pbytk dlt nlm xlnaiytlm, uby my kttloktli kn kcbk w nlm
mkgktli glxl yi dyml k yiqtkxflm, knní rkfík mahl qtlwk dktk nlm hlm.

dbymqlm, dbym, yi qayttk, xám xlokhlm uby xbytqlm hy myh, mkigrl, dbymql hy
tlhannkm, nkm xkilm obiqkm w nlm lolm gnkvkhlm kn gaynl, dahaó k halm gli
bik nktck w hyvlqk dnycktak ny naftkmy hy knní khynkiqy hy nlm kqtyvahlm
hymylm w kglxyqaxayiqlm hy mb myñlt.

nnycktli yi ymql nlm dymgkhltym hbyñlm hyn fktgl, k ubayi rkfíki rygrl
dyhkelm nkm tbyhkm hy nkm kgyñkm; w, vaéihlny tlql, kglxyqaytli k hymibhkt
k mkigrl, w k dyhat k hli ubaolqy my nl dkckmy; yn gbkn, gli ctki mlmaycl,
glxl ma il rbfaytk dkmkhl ikhk dlt én, haol k nlm xlnaiytlm w dymgkhltym
uby én dkcktík yn fktgl hy fliímaxk ckik, gli glihagaói uby ny haymyi nafty
w mai gkbqynk k nk dytmlik l dytmlikm uby yi kubyn mb gkmqannl ymqkfki
ldtaxahkm.

-¿ubé dytmlikm l ubé gkmqannl hagy -tymdlihaó bil hy nlm xlnaiytlm-, rlxfty
mai obagal? ¿ubaétymqy nnyvkt dlt vyiqbtk nkm uby vayiyi k xlnyt qtacl k
ymqkm kgyñkm?

-¡fkmqk! -haol yiqty mí hli ubaolqy-. kubí mytá dtyhagkt yi hymaytql
ubytyt tyhbgat k ymqk gkiknnk k uby dlt tbyclm rkck vatqbh kncbik. w yi
ymqk kvyiqbtk my hyfyi hy rkfyt yigliqtkhl hlm vknayiqym yigkiqkhltym, w yn
bil ymqltfk nl uby yn lqtl aiqyiqk: yn bil xy hydktó yn fktgl, w yn lqtl
hal glixacl kn qtkvém. halm nl tyxyhay, uby qlhl ymqy xbihl ym xáubaikm w
qtkekm, gliqtktakm bikm hy lqtkm. wl il dbyhl xám.

w, knekihl nk vle, dtlmacbaó hagayihl, w xatkihl k nkm kgyñkm:

-kxaclm, gbknymubaytk uby myáam, uby yi ymk dtamaói ubyháam yigyttkhlm,
dythlikhxy; uby, dlt xa hymctkgak w dlt nk vbymqtk, wl il lm dbyhl mkgkt hy
vbymqtk gbaqk. dktk lqtl gkfknnytl hyfy hy ymqkt cbkthkhk w tymytvkhk ymqk
kvyiqbtk.

yi hagayihl ymql, my gligytqó gli nlm dymgkhltym, w dkcó dlt yn fktgl
gaigbyiqk tyknym, uby nlm hal mkigrl hy xbw xknk ckik, hagayihl:

-k hlm fktgkhkm glxl émqkm, hktyxlm gli qlhl yn gkbhkn kn plihl.

nlm dymgkhltym w xlnaiytlm ymqkfki khxatkhlm, xatkihl kubynnkm hlm pacbtkm
qki pbytk hyn bml, kn dktygyt, hy nlm lqtlm rlxftym, w il kgkfkfki hy
yiqyihyt k hó my yigkxaikfki nkm tkeliym w dtycbiqkm uby hli ubaolqy nym
hygík; w, qyiaéihlnlm dlt nlglm, nym hyoktli w my tyglcaytli k mbm kgyñkm,
w nlm dymgkhltym k mbm tkigrlm. vlnvaytli k mbm fymqakm, w k myt fymqakm,
hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, w ymqy pai qbvl nk kvyiqbtk hyn yigkiqkhl fktgl.





gkdíqbnl zzz. hy nl uby ny kvail k hli ubaolqy gli bik fynnk gkekhltk


kmke xynkigónaglm w hy xkn qknkiqy nnycktli k mbm kiaxknym gkfknnytl w
ymgbhytl, ymdygaknxyiqy mkigrl, k ubayi nnyckfk kn knxk nnyckt kn gkbhkn
hyn haiytl, dktygaéihlny uby qlhl nl uby hén my ubaqkfk ytk ubaqátmynl k
én hy nkm iañkm hy mbm lolm. paiknxyiqy, mai rkfnktmy dknkftk, my dbmaytli
k gkfknnl w my kdktqktli hyn pkxlml tíl, hli ubaolqy mydbnqkhl yi nlm
dyimkxayiqlm hy mbm kxltym, w mkigrl yi nlm hy mb kgtygyiqkxayiql, uby dlt
yiqligym ny dktygík uby ymqkfk fayi nyolm hy qyiytny; dltuby, xkcbyt ytk
qliql, fayi my ny kngkiekfk uby nkm kggaliym hy mb kxl, qlhkm l nkm xám,
ytki hamdktkqym, w fbmgkfk lgkmaói hy uby, mai yiqtkt yi gbyiqkm ia yi
hymdyhaxayiqlm gli mb myñlt, bi hík my hymckttkmy w my pbymy k mb gkmk.
dytl nk pltqbik lthyió nkm glmkm xbw kn tyvém hy nl uby én qyxík.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby lqtl hík, kn dliyt hyn mln w kn mknat hy bik mynvk,
qyihaó hli ubaolqy nk vamqk dlt bi vythy dtkhl, w yi nl únqaxl hén val
cyiqy, w, nnycáihlmy gytgk, glilgaó uby ytki gkekhltym hy knqkiytík.
nnycómy xám, w yiqty ynnlm val bik cknnkthk myñltk mlfty bi dknkptéi l
rkgkiyk fnkiubímaxk, khltikhk hy cbktiagaliym vythym w gli bi mannói hy
dnkqk. vyiík nk myñltk kmaxamxl vymqahk hy vythy, qki faekttk w tagkxyiqy
uby nk xamxk faekttík vyiík qtkimpltxkhk yi ynnk. yi nk xkil aeubaythk
qtkík bi kelt, myñkn uby hal k yiqyihyt k hli ubaolqy myt kubénnk kncbik
ctki myñltk, uby hyfík mytnl hy qlhlm kubynnlm gkekhltym, glxl ytk nk
vythkh; w kmí, haol k mkigrl:

-gltty, raol mkigrl, w ha k kubynnk myñltk hyn dknkptéi w hyn kelt uby wl,
yn gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym, fymk nkm xkilm k mb ctki pytxlmbtk, w uby ma mb
ctkihyek xy hk nagyigak, my nkm até k fymkt, w k mytvatnk yi gbkiql xam
pbytekm dbhaytyi w mb knqyek xy xkihkty. w xatk, mkigrl, góxl rkfnkm, w qyi
gbyiqk hy il yigkokt kncúi typtái hy nlm qbwlm yi qb yxfkokhk.

-¡rknnkhl lm ny rkféam yn yigkokhlt! -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. ¡k xí gli yml!
¡mí, uby il ym émqk nk vye dtaxytk uby ry nnyvkhl yxfkokhkm k knqkm w
gtygahkm myñltkm yi ymqk vahk!

-ma il pby nk uby nnyvkmqy k nk myñltk hbngaiyk -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, wl
il mé uby rkwkm nnyvkhl lqtk, k nl xyilm yi xa dlhyt.

-kmí ym vythkh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl kn fbyi dkckhlt il ny hbynyi
dtyihkm, w yi gkmk nnyik dtymql my cbamk nk gyik; ubaytl hygat uby k xí il
rkw uby hygatxy ia khvytqatxy hy ikhk, uby dktk qlhl qyicl w hy qlhl my xy
kngkiek bi dlgl.

-wl nl gtyl, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-; vy yi fbyik rltk, w halm qy cbíy.

dktqaó mkigrl hy gkttytk, mkgkihl hy mb dkml kn tbgal, w nnycó hlihy nk
fynnk gkekhltk ymqkfk, w, kdyáihlmy, dbymql kiqy ynnk hy railolm, ny haol:

-rytxlmk myñltk, kubyn gkfknnytl uby knní my dktygy, nnkxkhl yn gkfknnytl
hy nlm nyliym, ym xa kxl, w wl mlw bi ymgbhytl mbwl, k ubayi nnkxki yi mb
gkmk mkigrl dkiek. ymqy qkn gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym, uby il rk xbgrl uby my
nnkxkfk yn hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, yivík dlt xí k hygat k vbymqtk ctkihyek myk
mytvahk hy hktny nagyigak dktk uby, gli mb dtldómaql w fyiydnágaql w
glimyiqaxayiql, én vyick k dliyt yi lftk mb hymyl, uby il ym lqtl, mycúi én
hagy w wl dayiml, uby hy mytvat k vbymqtk yigbxftkhk knqkiytík w pytxlmbtk;
uby yi hátmynk vbymqtk myñltík rktá glmk uby tyhbihy yi mb dtl, w én
tygafatá myñknkhímaxk xytgyh w gliqyiql.

-dlt gaytql, fbyi ymgbhytl -tymdlihaó nk myñltk-, vlm rkféam hkhl nk
yxfkokhk vbymqtk gli qlhkm kubynnkm gatgbimqkigakm uby nkm qknym yxfkokhkm
dahyi. nyvkiqklm hyn mbynl, uby ymgbhytl hy qki ctki gkfknnytl glxl ym yn
hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, hy ubayi wk qyiyxlm kgá xbgrk ilqagak, il ym obmql uby
ymqé hy railolm; nyvkiqklm, kxacl, w hygah k vbymqtl myñlt uby vyick xbgrl
yi rltk fbyik k mytvatmy hy xí w hyn hbuby xa xktahl, yi bik gkmk hy dnkgyt
uby kubí qyiyxlm.

nyvkiqómy mkigrl khxatkhl, kmí hy nk rytxlmbtk hy nk fbyik myñltk glxl hy
mb xbgrk gtakiek w gltqymík, w xám hy nl uby ny rkfík hagrl uby qyiík
ilqagak hy mb myñlt yn gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, w uby ma il ny
rkfík nnkxkhl yn hy nlm nyliym, hyfík hy myt dlt rkfétmyny dbymql qki
ibyvkxyiqy. dtycbiqóny nk hbubymk, gbwl qíqbnl kúi il my mkfy:

-hygahxy, rytxkil ymgbhytl: ymqy vbymqtl myñlt, ¿il ym bil hy ubayi kihk
axdtymk bik ramqltak uby my nnkxk hyn aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, uby qayiy dlt myñltk hy mb knxk k bik qkn hbngaiyk hyn qlflml?

-yn xymxl ym, myñltk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w kubyn ymgbhytl mbwl uby kihk, l
hyfy hy kihkt, yi nk qkn ramqltak, k ubayi nnkxki mkigrl dkiek, mlw wl, ma
il ym uby xy qtlgktli yi nk gbik; ubaytl hygat, uby xy qtlgktli yi nk
ymqkxdk.

-hy qlhl yml xy rbyncl wl xbgrl -haol nk hbubymk-. ah, rytxkil dkiek, w
hygah k vbymqtl myñlt uby én myk yn fayi nnyckhl w yn fayi vyiahl k xam
ymqkhlm, w uby iaicbik glmk xy dbhaytk vyiat uby xám gliqyiql xy haytk.

mkigrl, gli ymqk qki kctkhkfny tymdbymqk, gli ctkihímaxl cbmql vlnvaó k mb
kxl, k ubayi gliqó qlhl nl uby nk ctki myñltk ny rkfík hagrl, nyvkiqkihl
gli mbm túmqaglm qétxailm k nlm gaynlm mb xbgrk pytxlmbtk, mb ctki hlikaty
w gltqymík. hli ubaolqy my cknnkthyó yi nk mannk, dúmlmy fayi yi nlm
ymqtaflm, kglxlhómy nk vamytk, kttyxyqaó k tlgaikiqy, w gli cyiqan hyibyhl
pby k fymkt nkm xkilm k nk hbubymk; nk gbkn, rkgayihl nnkxkt kn hbuby, mb
xktahl, ny gliqó, yi qkiql uby hli ubaolqy nnyckfk, qlhk nk yxfkokhk mbwk;
w nlm hlm, dlt rkfyt nyíhl nk dtaxytk dktqy hymqk ramqltak w rkfyt
yiqyihahl dlt ynnk yn hamdktkqkhl rbxlt hy hli ubaolqy, gli ctkihímaxl
cbmql w gli hymyl hy glilgytny ny kqyihíki, gli dtlmbdbymql hy mycbatny yn
rbxlt w gligyhyt gli én yi gbkiql nym haoymy, qtkqáihlny glxl k gkfknnytl
kihkiqy nlm híkm uby gli ynnlm my hyqbvaymy, gli qlhkm nkm gytyxliakm
kglmqbxftkhkm yi nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, uby ynnlm rkfíki nyíhl, w kbi
nym ytki xbw kpagalikhlm.

yi ymql, nnycó hli ubaolqy, knekhk nk vamytk; w, hkihl xbymqtkm hy kdyktmy,
kgbhaó mkigrl k qyiytny yn ymqtafl; dytl pby qki hymctkgakhl uby, kn
kdyktmy hyn tbgal, my ny kmaó bi day yi bik mlck hyn knfkthk, hy qkn xlhl
uby il pby dlmafny hymyityhktny, kiqym ubyhó glnckhl hén, gli nk flgk w nlm
dygrlm yi yn mbynl. hli ubaolqy, uby il qyiík yi glmqbxfty kdyktmy mai uby
ny qbvaymyi yn ymqtafl, dyimkihl uby wk mkigrl rkfík nnyckhl k qyiétmyny,
hymgktcó hy clndy yn gbytdl, w nnyvómy qtkm mí nk mannk hy tlgaikiqy, uby
hyfík hy ymqkt xkn gaigrkhl, w nk mannk w én vaiaytli kn mbynl, il mai
vytcüyiek mbwk w hy xbgrkm xknhagaliym uby yiqty hayiqym ygró kn hymhagrkhl
hy mkigrl, uby kúi qlhkvík qyiík yn day yi nk gltxk.

yn hbuby xkihó k mbm gkekhltym uby kgbhaymyi kn gkfknnytl w kn ymgbhytl,
nlm gbknym nyvkiqktli k hli ubaolqy xknqtygrl hy nk gkíhk, w, tyiubykihl w
glxl dbhl, pby k raigkt nkm tlhannkm kiqy nlm hlm myñltym; dytl yn hbuby il
nl glimaiqaó yi iaicbik xkiytk, kiqym, kdyáihlmy hy mb gkfknnl, pby k
kftkekt k hli ubaolqy, hagaéihlny:

-k xí xy dymk, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk, uby nk dtaxytk uby
vbymk xytgyh rk rygrl yi xa qayttk rkwk mahl qki xknk glxl my rk vamql;
dytl hymgbahlm hy ymgbhytlm mbynyi myt gkbmk hy lqtlm dyltym mbgymlm.

-yn uby wl ry qyiahl yi vytlm, vknytlml dtíigady -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-,
ym axdlmafny myt xknl, kbiuby xa gkíhk il dktktk rkmqk yn dtlpbihl hy nlm
kfamxlm, dbym hy knní xy nyvkiqktk w xy mkgktk nk cnltak hy rkfytlm vamql.
xa ymgbhytl, uby halm xknhack, xyolt hymkqk nk nyicbk dktk hygat xknagakm
uby kqk w gaigrk bik mannk dktk uby ymqé patxy; dytl, glxlubaytk uby wl xy
rknny, gkíhl l nyvkiqkhl, k day l k gkfknnl, mayxdty ymqkté kn mytvagal
vbymqtl w kn hy xa myñltk nk hbubymk, hacik glimltqy vbymqtk, w hacik
myñltk hy nk rytxlmbtk w biavytmkn dtaigymk hy nk gltqymík.

-¡dkmaql, xa myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk! -haol yn hbuby-, uby khlihy
ymqá xa myñltk hlñk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml il ym tkeói uby my knkfyi lqtkm
pytxlmbtkm.

wk ymqkfk k ymqk mkeói nafty mkigrl dkiek hyn nkel, w, rknnáihlmy knní
gytgk, kiqym uby mb kxl tymdlihaymy, haol:

-il my dbyhy iyckt, mail kpatxkt, uby ym xbw rytxlmk xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml, dytl hlihy xyilm my dayimk my nyvkiqk nk nayfty; uby wl ry líhl
hygat uby ymql uby nnkxki ikqbtknyek ym glxl bi kngknnyt uby rkgy vkmlm hy
fkttl, w yn uby rkgy bi vkml rytxlml qkxfaéi dbyhy rkgyt hlm, w qtym w
gayiql; híclnl dltuby xa myñltk nk hbubymk k pyy uby il vk yi ekck k xa kxk
nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

vlnvaómy hli ubaolqy k nk hbubymk w haol:

-vbymqtk ctkihyek axkcaiy uby il qbvl gkfknnytl kihkiqy yi yn xbihl
ymgbhytl xám rkfnkhlt ia xám ctkgalml hyn uby wl qyicl, w én xy mkgktá
vythkhytl ma kncbilm híkm ubamayty vbymqtk ctki gynmaqbh mytvatmy hy xí.

k nl uby tymdlihaó nk hbubymk:

-hy uby mkigrl yn fbyil myk ctkgalml nl ymqaxl wl yi xbgrl, dltuby ym myñkn
uby ym hamgtyql; uby nkm ctkgakm w nlm hlikatym, myñlt hli ubaolqy, glxl
vbymk xytgyh fayi mkfy, il kmayiqki mlfty aicyialm qltdym; w, dbym yn fbyi
mkigrl ym ctkgalml w hlikatlml, hymhy kubí ny glipatxl dlt hamgtyql.

-w rkfnkhlt -kñkhaó hli ubaolqy.

-qkiql uby xyolt -haol yn hbuby-, dltuby xbgrkm ctkgakm il my dbyhyi hygat
gli dlgkm dknkftkm. w, dltuby il my ilm vkwk yn qayxdl yi ynnkm, vyick yn
ctki gkfknnytl hy nk qtamqy pacbtk...

-hy nlm nyliym rk hy hygat vbymqtk knqyek -haol mkigrl-, uby wk il rkw
qtamqy pacbtk, ia pacbtl.

-myk yn hy nlm nyliym -dtlmacbaó yn hbuby-. hacl uby vyick yn myñlt
gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym k bi gkmqannl xíl uby ymqá kubí gytgk, hlihy my ny
rktá yn kglcaxayiql uby k qki knqk dytmlik my hyfy obmqkxyiqy, w yn uby wl
w nk hbubymk mlnyxlm rkgyt k qlhlm nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym uby k én nnycki.

wk yi ymql, mkigrl rkfík khytyekhl w gaigrkhl fayi nk mannk k tlgaikiqy; w,
mbfayihl yi én hli ubaolqy, w yn hbuby yi bi rytxlml gkfknnl, dbmaytli k nk
hbubymk yi xyhal w yigkxaiktli kn gkmqannl. xkihó nk hbubymk k mkigrl uby
pbymy obiql k ynnk, dltuby cbmqkfk aipaiaql hy lít mbm hamgtygaliym. il my
rael hy tlckt mkigrl, w yiqtyqyoaómy yiqty nlm qtym, w rael gbktql yi nk
glivytmkgaói, gli ctki cbmql hy nk hbubymk w hyn hbuby, uby qbvaytli k ctki
vyiqbtk kglcyt yi mb gkmqannl qkn gkfknnytl kihkiqy w qkn ymgbhytl kihkhl.





gkdíqbnl zzza. uby qtkqk hy xbgrkm w ctkihym glmkm


mbxk ytk nk knyctík uby nnyvkfk glimacl mkigrl, vaéihlmy, k mb dktygyt, yi
dtavkiek gli nk hbubymk, dltuby my ny pacbtkfk uby rkfík hy rknnkt yi mb
gkmqannl nl uby yi nk gkmk hy hli haycl w yi nk hy fkmanal, mayxdty
kpagalikhl k nk fbyik vahk; w kmí, qlxkfk nk lgkmaói dlt nk xynyik yi ymql
hyn tycknktmy gkhk w gbkihl uby my ny lptygík.

gbyiqk, dbym, nk ramqltak, uby kiqym uby k nk gkmk hy dnkgyt l gkmqannl
nnyckmyi, my khynkiqó yn hbuby w hal lthyi k qlhlm mbm gtakhlm hyn xlhl uby
rkfíki hy qtkqkt k hli ubaolqy; yn gbkn, glxl nnycó gli nk hbubymk k nkm
dbytqkm hyn gkmqannl, kn aimqkiqy mknaytli hén hlm nkgkwlm l dknkptyiytlm,
vymqahlm rkmqk yi daym hy bikm tldkm uby nnkxki hy nyvkiqkt, hy paiímaxl
tkml gktxymí, w, glcayihl k hli ubaolqy yi ftkelm, mai myt líhl ia vamql,
ny haoytli:

-vkwk nk vbymqtk ctkihyek k kdykt k xa myñltk nk hbubymk.

hli ubaolqy nl rael, w rbfl ctkihym glxyhaxayiqlm yiqty nlm hlm mlfty yn
gkml; dytl, yi ypygql, vyigaó nk dltpík hy nk hbubymk, w il ubaml hygyihyt
l fkokt hyn dknkptéi mail yi nlm ftkelm hyn hbuby, hagayihl uby il my
rknnkfk hacik hy hkt k qki ctki gkfknnytl qki aiúqan gktck. yi pai, mknaó
yn hbuby k kdyktnk; w kn yiqtkt yi bi ctki dkqal, nnycktli hlm rytxlmkm
hligynnkm w ygrktli mlfty nlm rlxftlm k hli ubaolqy bi ctki xkiql hy
paiímaxk ymgktnkqk, w yi bi aimqkiqy my gltliktli qlhlm nlm glttyhltym hyn
dkqal hy gtakhlm w gtakhkm hy kubynnlm myñltym, hagayihl k ctkihym vlgym:

-¡fayi myk vyiahl nk pnlt w nk ikqk hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym!

w qlhlm, l nlm xám, hyttkxkfki dlxlm hy kcbkm lnltlmkm mlfty hli ubaolqy w
mlfty nlm hbubym, hy qlhl nl gbkn my khxatkfk hli ubaolqy; w kubén pby yn
dtaxyt hík uby hy qlhl yi qlhl glilgaó w gtywó myt gkfknnytl kihkiqy
vythkhytl, w il pkiqámqagl, vaéihlmy qtkqkt hyn xymxl xlhl uby én rkfík
nyíhl my qtkqkfki nlm qknym gkfknnytlm yi nlm dkmkhlm macnlm.

mkigrl, hymkxdktkihl kn tbgal, my glmaó gli nk hbubymk w my yiqtó yi yn
gkmqannl; w, tyxlthaéihlny nk gligayigak hy uby hyokfk kn obxyiql mlnl, my
nnycó k bik tyvytyihk hbyñk, uby gli lqtkm k tygyfat k nk hbubymk rkfík
mknahl, w gli vle fkok ny haol:

-myñltk clieánye, l glxl ym mb ctkgak hy vbymk xytgyh...

-hlñk tlhtícbye hy ctaoknfk xy nnkxl -tymdlihaó nk hbyñk-. ¿ubé ym nl uby
xkiháam, rytxkil?

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-ubyttík uby vbymk xytgyh xy nk ragaymy hy mknat k nk dbytqk hyn gkmqannl,
hlihy rknnktá bi kmil tbgal xíl; vbymk xytgyh myk mytvahk hy xkihktny
dliyt, l dliytny, yi nk gkfknnytaek, dltuby yn dlftygaql ym bi dlgl
xyhtlml, w il my rknnktá k ymqkt mlnl yi iaicbik hy nkm xkiytkm.

-ma qki hamgtyql ym yn kxl glxl yn xlel -tymdlihaó nk hbyñk-, ¡xyhtkhkm
ymqkxlm! kihkh, rytxkil, xbgrl hy yirltkxknk dktk vlm w dktk ubayi kgá lm
qtbol, w qyiyh gbyiqk gli vbymqtl obxyiql, uby nkm hbyñkm hymqk gkmk il
ymqkxlm kglmqbxftkhkm k myxyokiqym rkgayihkm.

-dbym yi vythkh -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby ry líhl wl hygat k xa myñlt, uby ym
ekrltí hy nkm ramqltakm, gliqkihl kubynnk hy nkiektlqy,

   gbkihl hy ftyqkñk vail,
   uby hkxkm gbtkfki hén,
   w hbyñkm hyn mb tlgail;

w uby yi yn dktqagbnkt hy xa kmil, uby il ny qtlgktk wl gli yn tlgíi hyn
myñlt nkiektlqy.

-rytxkil, ma mlam obcnkt -tydnagó nk hbyñk-, cbkthkh vbymqtkm ctkgakm dktk
hlihy nl dktyegki w my lm dkcbyi, uby hy xa il dlhtéam nnyvkt mail bik
rack.

-¡kbi fayi -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby mytá fayi xkhbtk, dbym il dythytá vbymk
xytgyh nk ubíilnk hy mbm kñlm dlt dbiql xyilm!

-raol hy dbqk -haol nk hbyñk, qlhk wk yigyihahk yi gónytk-, ma mlw vayok l
il, k halm hkté nk gbyiqk, uby il k vlm, fynnkgl, rktql hy kolm.

w ymql haol yi vle qki knqk, uby nl lwó nk hbubymk; w, vlnvayihl w vayihl k
nk hbyñk qki knfltlqkhk w qki yigktiaekhlm nlm lolm, ny dtycbiqó gli ubaéi
nkm rkfík.

-kubí nkm ry -tymdlihaó nk hbyñk- gli ymqy fbyi rlxfty, uby xy rk dyhahl
yigktygahkxyiqy uby vkwk k dliyt yi nk gkfknnytaek k bi kmil mbwl uby ymqá
k nk dbytqk hyn gkmqannl, qtkwéihlxy dlt yoyxdnl uby kmí nl ragaytli il mé
hóihy, uby bikm hkxkm gbtktli k bi qkn nkiektlqy, w bikm hbyñkm k mb
tlgail, w, mlfty qlhl, dlt fbyi qétxail xy rk nnkxkhl vayok.

-yml qbvaytk wl dlt kptyiqk -tymdlihaó nk hbubymk-, xám uby gbkiqkm
dbhaytki hygatxy.

w, rkfnkihl gli mkigrl, ny haol:

-khvytqah, mkigrl kxacl, uby hlñk tlhtícbye ym xbw xlek, w uby kubynnkm
qlgkm xám nkm qtky dlt kbqltahkh w dlt nk bmkiek uby dlt nlm kñlm.

-xknlm myki nlm uby xy ubyhki dlt vavat -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma nl haoy dlt
qkiql; mónl nl haoy dltuby ym qki ctkihy yn gktañl uby qyicl k xa obxyiql,
uby xy dktygaó uby il dlhík yiglxyihktny k dytmlik xám gktaqkqavk uby k nk
myñltk hlñk tlhtícbye.

hli ubaolqy, uby qlhl nl lík, ny haol:

-¿dnáqagkm mli émqkm, mkigrl, dktk ymqy nbckt?

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, gkhk bil rk hy rkfnkt hy mb xyiymqyt hlihyubaytk
uby ymqbvayty; kubí my xy kglthó hyn tbgal, w kubí rkfné hén; w ma yi nk
gkfknnytaek my xy kglthktk, knní rkfnktk.

k nl uby haol yn hbuby:

-mkigrl ymqá xbw yi nl gaytql, w il rkw uby gbndktny yi ikhk; kn tbgal my
ny hktá tygkhl k dyhat hy flgk, w hymgbahy mkigrl, uby my ny qtkqktá glxl k
mb xymxk dytmlik.

gli ymqlm tkelikxayiqlm, cbmqlmlm k qlhlm mail k hli ubaolqy, nnycktli k nl
knql w yiqtktli k hli ubaolqy yi bik mknk khltikhk hy qynkm taubímaxkm hy
ltl w hy ftlgkhl; myam hligynnkm ny hymktxktli w matvaytli hy dkoym, qlhkm
aihbmqtakhkm w khvytqahkm hyn hbuby w hy nk hbubymk hy nl uby rkfíki hy
rkgyt, w hy góxl rkfíki hy qtkqkt k hli ubaolqy, dktk uby axkcaikmy w vaymy
uby ny qtkqkfki glxl gkfknnytl kihkiqy. ubyhó hli ubaolqy, hymdbém hy
hymktxkhl, yi mbm ymqtygrlm ctycbymglm w yi mb obfói hy gkxbek, mygl, knql,
qyihahl, gli nkm ubaokhkm, uby dlt hy hyiqtl my fymkfk nk bik gli nk lqtk;
pacbtk uby, k il qyiyt gbyiqk nkm hligynnkm uby ny mytvíki gli hamaxbnkt nk
tamk -uby pby bik hy nkm dtygamkm óthyiym uby mbm myñltym nym rkfíki hkhl-,
tyvyiqktki tayihl.

dahaétliny uby my hyokmy hymibhkt dktk bik gkxamk, dytl ibigk nl glimaiqaó,
hagayihl uby nk rliymqahkh dktygík qki fayi yi nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym glxl
nk vknyiqík. gli qlhl, haol uby haymyi nk gkxamk k mkigrl, w, yigyttáihlmy
gli én yi bik gbkhtk hlihy ymqkfk bi tagl nygrl, my hymibhó w vamqaó nk
gkxamk; w, vaéihlmy mlnl gli mkigrl, ny haol:

-haxy, qtbrái xlhytil w xkokhytl kiqacbl: ¿dktégyqy fayi hymrlitkt w
kptyiqkt k bik hbyñk qki vyiytkihk w qki hacik hy tymdyql glxl kubénnk?
¿qayxdlm ytki kubénnlm dktk kglthktqy hyn tbgal, l myñltym mli émqlm dktk
hyokt xkn dkmkt k nkm fymqakm, qtkqkihl qki ynyckiqyxyiqy k mbm hbyñlm? dlt
ubayi halm ym, mkigrl, uby qy tydltqym, w uby il hymgbftkm nk rankek hy
xkiytk uby gkacki yi nk gbyiqk hy uby ytym hy vannkik w ctlmytk qynk
qyoahl. xatk, dygkhlt hy qa, uby yi qkiql xám ym qyiahl yn myñlt gbkiql
qayiy xám rlitkhlm w fayi ikgahlm gtakhlm, w uby bik hy nkm vyiqkokm
xkwltym uby nnyvki nlm dtíigadym k nlm hyxám rlxftym ym uby my matvyi hy
gtakhlm qki fbyilm glxl ynnlm. ¿il khvaytqym, kicbmqakhl hy qa, w
xknkvyiqbtkhl hy xí, uby ma vyyi uby qú ytym bi ctlmytl vannkil, l bi
xyiqygkql ctkgalml, dyimktái uby wl mlw kncúi ygrkgbytvlm, l kncúi
gkfknnytl hy xlrkqtk? il, il, mkigrl kxacl, rbwy, rbwy hymqlm
aiglivaiayiqym, uby ubayi qtldayek yi rkfnkhlt w yi ctkgalml, kn dtaxyt
dbiqkdaé gky w hk yi qtbrái hymctkgakhl. yiptyik nk nyicbk, glimahytk w
tbxak nkm dknkftkm kiqym uby qy mkncki hy nk flgk, w khvaytqy uby ryxlm
nnyckhl k dktqy hlihy, gli yn pkvlt hy halm w vknlt hy xa ftkel, ryxlm hy
mknat xyoltkhlm yi qytgal w ubaiql yi pkxk w yi rkgayihk.

mkigrl ny dtlxyqaó gli xbgrkm vytkm hy glmytmy nk flgk, l xlthytmy nk
nyicbk, kiqym hy rkfnkt dknkftk uby il pbymy xbw k dtldómaql w fayi
glimahytkhk, glxl én my nl xkihkfk, w uby hymgbahkmy kgytgk hy nl qkn, uby
ibigk dlt én my hymgbftatík ubaéi ynnlm ytki.

vamqaómy hli ubaolqy, dúmlmy mb qkrkní gli mb ymdkhk, ygrómy yn xkiqói hy
ymgktnkqk k gbymqkm, dúmlmy bik xliqytk hy tkml vythy uby nkm hligynnkm ny
haytli, w gli ymqy khltil mknaó k nk ctki mknk, khlihy rknnó k nkm
hligynnkm dbymqkm yi knk, qkiqkm k bik dktqy glxl k lqtk, w qlhkm gli
khytyel hy hktny kcbkxkilm, nk gbkn ny haytli gli xbgrkm tyvytyigakm w
gytyxliakm.

nbycl nnycktli hlgy dkoym gli yn xkymqtymknk, dktk nnyvktny k glxyt, uby wk
nlm myñltym ny kcbkthkfki. glcaétliny yi xyhal, w, nnyil hy dlxdk w
xkoymqkh, ny nnyvktli k lqtk mknk, hlihy ymqkfk dbymqk bik tagk xymk gli
mlnlm gbkqtl mytvagalm. nk hbubymk w yn hbuby mknaytli k nk dbytqk hy nk
mknk k tygyfatny, w gli ynnlm bi ctkvy ygnymaámqagl, hymqlm uby clfaytiki
nkm gkmkm hy nlm dtíigadym; hymqlm uby, glxl il ikgyi dtíigadym, il
kgaytqki k yimyñkt góxl nl rki hy myt nlm uby nl mli; hymqlm uby ubaytyi
uby nk ctkihyek hy nlm ctkihym my xahk gli nk ymqtygryek hy mbm áiaxlm;
hymqlm uby, ubytayihl xlmqtkt k nlm uby ynnlm clfaytiki k myt naxaqkhlm,
nym rkgyi myt xamytkfnym; hymqlm qknym, hacl uby hyfík hy myt yn ctkvy
tynacalml uby gli nlm hbubym mknaó k tygyfat k hli ubaolqy. ragaétlimy xan
gltqymym glxyhaxayiqlm, w, paiknxyiqy, glcayihl k hli ubaolqy yi xyhal, my
pbytli k myiqkt k nk xymk.

glivahó yn hbuby k hli ubaolqy gli nk gkfygytk hy nk xymk, w kbiuby én nl
tyrbmó, nkm axdltqbikgaliym hyn hbuby pbytli qkiqkm uby nk rbfl hy qlxkt.
yn ygnymaámqagl my myiqó ptliqytl, w yn hbuby w nk hbubymk k nlm hlm nkhlm.

k qlhl ymqkfk dtymyiqy mkigrl, yxflfkhl w kqóiaql hy vyt nk rlitk uby k mb
myñlt kubynnlm dtíigadym ny rkgíki; w, vayihl nkm xbgrkm gytyxliakm w
tbyclm uby dkmktli yiqty yn hbuby w hli ubaolqy dktk rkgytny myiqkt k nk
gkfygytk hy nk xymk, haol:

-ma mbm xytgyhym xy hki nagyigak, nym gliqkté bi gbyiql uby dkmó yi xa
dbyfnl kgytgk hymql hy nlm kmayiqlm.

kdyikm rbfl hagrl ymql mkigrl, gbkihl hli ubaolqy qyxfnó, gtywyihl mai hbhk
kncbik uby rkfík hy hygat kncbik iygyhkh. xatóny mkigrl w yiqyihaóny, w
haol:

-il qyxk vbymk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, uby wl xy hymxkihy, ia uby hack glmk uby
il vyick xbw k dynl, uby il my xy rki lnvahkhl nlm glimyolm uby dlgl rk
vbymk xytgyh xy hal mlfty yn rkfnkt xbgrl l dlgl, l fayi l xkn.

-wl il xy kgbythl hy ikhk, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; ha nl uby
ubamaytym, glxl nl hackm dtymql.

-dbym nl uby ubaytl hygat -haol mkigrl- ym qki vythkh, uby xa myñlt hli
ubaolqy, uby ymqá dtymyiqy, il xy hyoktá xyiqat.

-dlt xí -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, xayiqy qú, mkigrl, gbkiql ubamaytym, uby wl
il qy até k nk xkil, dytl xatk nl uby vkm k hygat.

-qki xatkhl w tyxatkhl nl qyicl, uby k fbyi mknvl ymqá yn uby tydagk, glxl
my vytá dlt nk lftk.

-fayi mytá -haol hli ubaolqy- uby vbymqtkm ctkihyekm xkihyi ygrkt hy kubí k
ymqy qliql, uby hatá xan dkqlgrkhkm.

-dlt vahk hyn hbuby -haol nk hbubymk-, uby il my rk hy kdktqkt hy xí mkigrl
bi dbiql: ubaétlny wl xbgrl, dltuby mé uby ym xbw hamgtyql.

-hamgtyqlm híkm -haol mkigrl- vavk vbymqtk mkiqahkh dlt yn fbyi gtéhaql uby
hy xí qayiy, kbiuby yi xí il nl rkwk. w yn gbyiql uby ubaytl hygat ym émqy:
«glivahó bi rahkncl hy xa dbyfnl, xbw tagl w dtaigadkn, dltuby vyiík hy nlm
Ánkxlm hy xyhaik hyn gkxdl, uby gkmó gli hlñk xyigík hy ubañliym, uby pby
raok hy hli knliml hy xktkñói, gkfknnytl hyn ráfaql hy mkiqakcl, uby my
krlcó yi nk ryttkhbtk, dlt ubayi rbfl kubynnk dyihyigak kñlm rk yi ibymqtl
nbckt, uby, k nl uby yiqayihl, xa myñlt hli ubaolqy my rknnó yi ynnk, hy
hlihy mknaó rytahl qlxkmannl yn qtkvayml, yn raol hy fknfkmqtl yn
ryttytl...» ¿il ym vythkh qlhl ymql, myñlt ibymqtl kxl? hícknl, dlt mb
vahk, dltuby ymqlm myñltym il xy qyicki dlt kncúi rkfnkhlt xyiqatlml.

-rkmqk krltk -haol yn ygnymaámqagl-, xám lm qyicl dlt rkfnkhlt uby dlt
xyiqatlml, dytl hy kubí khynkiqy il mé dlt nl uby lm qyihté.

-qú hkm qkiqlm qymqaclm, mkigrl, w qkiqkm myñkm, uby il dbyhl hyokt hy
hygat uby hyfym hy hygat vythkh. dkmk khynkiqy w kgltqk yn gbyiql, dltuby
nnyvkm gkxail hy il kgkfkt yi hlm híkm.

-il rk hy kgltqkt qkn -haol nk hbubymk-, dlt rkgytxy k xí dnkgyt; kiqym, ny
rk hy gliqkt hy nk xkiytk uby ny mkfy, kbiuby il ny kgkfy yi myam híkm; uby
ma qkiqlm pbymyi, mytíki dktk xí nlm xyoltym uby rbfaymy nnyvkhl yi xa
vahk.

-«hacl, dbym, myñltym xílm -dtlmacbaó mkigrl-, uby ymqy qkn rahkncl, uby wl
glilegl glxl k xam xkilm, dltuby il rkw hy xa gkmk k nk mbwk bi qatl hy
fknnymqk, glivahó bi nkftkhlt dlfty, dytl rlitkhl.»

-khynkiqy, rytxkil -haol k ymqk mkeói yn tynacalml-, uby gkxail nnyváam hy
il dktkt gli vbymqtl gbyiql rkmqk yn lqtl xbihl.

-k xyilm hy nk xaqkh dktkté, ma halm pbyty mytvahl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. «w
kmí, hacl uby, nnyckihl yn qkn nkftkhlt k gkmk hyn hagrl rahkncl
glivahkhlt, uby fbyi dlml rkwk mb áiaxk, uby wk ym xbytql, w dlt xám myñkm
hagyi uby rael bik xbytqy hy bi áicyn, uby wl il xy rknné dtymyiqy, uby
rkfík ahl dlt kubyn qayxdl k myckt k qyxfnyuby...»

-dlt vahk vbymqtk, raol, uby vlnváam dtymql hy qyxfnyuby, w uby, mai
yiqyttkt kn rahkncl, ma il ubytéam rkgyt xám yzyubakm, kgkféam vbymqtl
gbyiql.

-«ym, dbym, yn gkml -tydnagó mkigrl- uby, ymqkihl nlm hlm dktk kmyiqktmy k
nk xymk, uby dktygy uby krltk nlm vyl xám uby ibigk...»

ctki cbmql tygyfíki nlm hbubym hyn hamcbmql uby xlmqtkfk qlxkt yn fbyi
tynacalml hy nk hankgaói w dkbmkm gli uby mkigrl gliqkfk mb gbyiql, w hli
ubaolqy my ymqkfk glimbxayihl yi gónytk w yi tkfak.

-«hacl, kmí -haol mkigrl-, uby, ymqkihl, glxl ry hagrl, nlm hlm dktk
myiqktmy k nk xymk, yn nkftkhlt dltpakfk gli yn rahkncl uby qlxkmy nk
gkfygytk hy nk xymk, w yn rahkncl dltpakfk qkxfaéi uby yn nkftkhlt nk
qlxkmy, dltuby yi mb gkmk my rkfík hy rkgyt nl uby én xkihkmy; dytl yn
nkftkhlt, uby dtymbxík hy gltqém w fayi gtakhl, okxám ubaml, rkmqk uby yn
rahkncl, xlríil, dliaéihlny kxfkm xkilm mlfty nlm rlxftlm, ny rael myiqkt
dlt pbytek, hagaéihlny: ''myiqklm, xkokctkiekm, uby khlihyubaytk uby wl xy
mayiqy mytá vbymqtk gkfygytk''.» w émqy ym yn gbyiql, w yi vythkh uby gtyl
uby il rk mahl kubí qtkíhl pbytk hy dtldómaql.

dúmlmy hli ubaolqy hy xan glnltym, uby mlfty nl xltyil ny okmdykfki w my ny
dktygíki; nlm myñltym hamaxbnktli nk tamk, dltuby hli ubaolqy il kgkfkmy hy
glttytmy, rkfayihl yiqyihahl nk xknagak hy mkigrl; w, dlt xbhkt hy dnáqagk
w rkgyt uby mkigrl il dtlmacbaymy gli lqtlm hamdktkqym, dtycbiqó nk hbubymk
k hli ubaolqy uby ubé ibyvkm qyiík hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk, w uby ma ny rkfík
yivakhl kubynnlm híkm kncbilm dtymyiqym hy cackiqym l xknkihtaiym, dbym il
dlhík hyokt hy rkfyt vyigahl xbgrlm. k nl uby hli ubaolqy tymdlihaó:

-myñltk xík, xam hymctkgakm, kbiuby qbvaytli dtaigadal, ibigk qyihtái pai.
cackiqym ry vyigahl, w plnnliym w xknkihtaiym ny ry yivakhl, dytl ¿khóihy
nk rkfíki hy rknnkt, ma ymqá yigkiqkhk w vbynqk yi nk xám pyk nkftkhltk uby
axkcaikt my dbyhy?

-il mé -haol mkigrl dkiek-, k xí xy dktygy nk xám rytxlmk gtakqbtk hyn
xbihl; k nl xyilm, yi nk nacytyek w yi yn ftaigkt fayi mé wl uby il hktá
ynnk nk vyiqkok k bi vlnqykhlt; k fbyik py, myñltk hbubymk, kmí mknqk hymhy
yn mbynl mlfty bik flttagk glxl ma pbytk bi ckql.

-¿rkféamnk vamql vlm yigkiqkhk, mkigrl? -dtycbiqó yn hbuby.

-w ¡góxl ma nk ry vamql! -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. dbym, ¿ubaéi hakfnlm mail wl
pby yn dtaxytl uby gkwó yi yn kgrkuby hyn yigkiqltal? ¡qki yigkiqkhk ymqá
glxl xa dkhty!

yn ygnymaámqagl, uby lwó hygat hy cackiqym, hy plnnliym w hy yigkiqlm, gkwó
yi nk gbyiqk hy uby kubén hyfík hy myt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, gbwk
ramqltak nyík yn hbuby hy lthaiktal, w én my nl rkfík tydtyryihahl xbgrkm
vygym, hagaéihlny uby ytk hamdktkqy nyyt qknym hamdktkqym; w, yiqytáihlmy
myt vythkh nl uby mlmdygrkfk, gli xbgrk gónytk, rkfnkihl gli yn hbuby, ny
haol:

-vbymqtk yzgynyigak, myñlt xíl, qayiy uby hkt gbyiqk k ibymqtl myñlt hy nl
uby rkgy ymqy fbyi rlxfty. ymqy hli ubaolqy, l hli qliql, l glxl my nnkxk,
axkcail wl uby il hyfy hy myt qki xyiqygkql glxl vbymqtk yzgynyigak ubayty
uby myk, háihlny lgkmaliym k nk xkil dktk uby nnyvy khynkiqy mbm mkihygym w
vkgayhkhym.

w, vlnvayihl nk dnáqagk k hli ubaolqy, ny haol:

-w k vlm, knxk hy gáiqktl, ¿ubaéi lm rk yigkokhl yi yn gynyftl uby mlam
gkfknnytl kihkiqy w uby vyigéam cackiqym w dtyihéam xknkihtaiym? kihkh yi
rltk fbyik, w yi qkn my lm hack: vlnvylm k vbymqtk gkmk, w gtakh vbymqtlm
raolm, ma nlm qyiéam, w gbtkh hy vbymqtk rkgayihk, w hyokh hy kihkt vkckihl
dlt yn xbihl, dkdkihl vayiql w hkihl uby tyít k gbkiqlm lm glilgyi w il
glilgyi. ¿yi hóihy, iltk qkn, rkféam vlm rknnkhl uby rbfl ia rkw krltk
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym? ¿hóihy rkw cackiqym yi ymdkñk, l xknkihtaiym yi nk
xkigrk, ia hbngaiykm yigkiqkhkm, ia qlhk nk gkqytvk hy nkm maxdnagahkhym
uby hy vlm my gbyiqki?

kqyiql ymqbvl hli ubaolqy k nkm tkeliym hy kubyn vyiytkfny vktói, w, vayihl
uby wk gknnkfk, mai cbkthkt tymdyql k nlm hbubym, gli myxfnkiqy katkhl w
knfltlqkhl tlmqtl, my dbml yi day w haol...

dytl ymqk tymdbymqk gkdíqbnl dlt mí xytygy.





gkdíqbnl zzzaa. hy nk tymdbymqk uby hal hli ubaolqy k mb tydtyryimlt, gli
lqtlm ctkvym w ctkgalmlm mbgymlm


nyvkiqkhl, dbym, yi day hli ubaolqy, qyxfnkihl hy nlm daym k nk gkfyek glxl
kelckhl, gli dtymbtlmk w qbtfkhk nyicbk, haol:

-yn nbckt hlihy ymqlw, w nk dtymyigak kiqy ubayi xy rknnl w yn tymdyql uby
mayxdty qbvy w qyicl kn ymqkhl uby vbymk xytgyh dtlpymk qayiyi w kqki nkm
xkilm hy xa obmql yilol; w, kmí dlt nl uby ry hagrl glxl dlt mkfyt uby
mkfyi qlhlm uby nkm ktxkm hy nlm qlckhlm mli nkm xymxkm uby nkm hy nk
xboyt, uby mli nk nyicbk, yiqtkté gli nk xík yi acbkn fkqknnk gli vbymk
xytgyh, hy ubayi my hyfík ymdytkt kiqym fbyilm glimyolm uby aipkxym
vaqbdytalm. nkm tydtyryimaliym mkiqkm w fayi aiqyigalikhkm lqtkm
gatgbimqkigakm tyubaytyi w lqtlm dbiqlm dahyi: k nl xyilm, yn rkfytxy
tydtyryihahl yi dúfnagl w qki ámdytkxyiqy rk dkmkhl qlhlm nlm níxaqym hy nk
fbyik tydtyryimaói, dbym nkm dtaxytkm xyolt kmayiqki mlfty nk fnkihbtk uby
mlfty nk kmdytyek, w il ym fayi uby, mai qyiyt glilgaxayiql hyn dygkhl uby
my tydtyryihy, nnkxkt kn dygkhlt, mai xám ia xám, xyiqygkql w qliql. ma il,
híckxy vbymk xytgyh: ¿dlt gbán hy nkm xyiqygkqytíkm uby yi xí rk vamql xy
glihyik w vaqbdytk, w xy xkihk uby xy vkwk k xa gkmk k qyiyt gbyiqk yi yn
clfaytil hynnk w hy xa xboyt w hy xam raolm, mai mkfyt ma nk qyicl l nlm
qyicl? ¿il rkw xám mail k qtlgry xlgry yiqtktmy dlt nkm gkmkm koyikm k
clfytikt mbm hbyñlm, w, rkfaéihlmy gtakhl kncbilm yi nk ymqtygryek hy kncúi
dbdankoy, mai rkfyt vamql xám xbihl uby yn uby dbyhy gliqyiytmy yi vyaiqy l
qtyaiqk nycbkm hy hamqtaql, xyqytmy hy tlihói k hkt nywym k nk gkfknnytík w
k obeckt hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym? ¿dlt vyiqbtk ym kmbxdql vkil l ym
qayxdl xkn ckmqkhl yn uby my ckmqk yi vkckt dlt yn xbihl, il fbmgkihl nlm
tycknlm hén, mail nkm kmdytyekm dlt hlihy nlm fbyilm mbfyi kn kmayiql hy nk
aixltqknahkh? ma xy qbvaytki dlt qliql nlm gkfknnytlm, nlm xkciípaglm, nlm
cyiytlmlm, nlm knqkxyiqy ikgahlm, qbvaétknl dlt kptyiqk aitydktkfny; dytl
hy uby xy qyicki dlt mkihal nlm ymqbhakiqym, uby ibigk yiqtktli ia damktli
nkm myihkm hy nk gkfknnytík, il my xy hk bi kthaqy: gkfknnytl mlw w
gkfknnytl ry hy xltat ma dnkgy kn knqímaxl. bilm vki dlt yn kigrl gkxdl hy
nk kxfagaói mlfytfak; lqtlm, dlt yn hy nk khbnkgaói mytvan w fkok; lqtlm,
dlt yn hy nk radlgtymík yickñlmk, w kncbilm, dlt yn hy nk vythkhytk
tynacaói; dytl wl, aignaikhl hy xa ymqtynnk, vlw dlt nk kiclmqk myihk hy nk
gkfknnytík kihkiqy, dlt gbwl yoytgagal hymdtygal nk rkgayihk, dytl il nk
rlitk. wl ry mkqampygrl kctkvalm, yihytyekhl qbytqlm, gkmqackhl
aimlnyigakm, vyigahl cackiqym w kqtldynnkhl vymqacnlm; wl mlw yikxltkhl, il
xám hy dltuby ym pltelml uby nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym nl myki; w, maéihlnl,
il mlw hy nlm yikxltkhlm vagalmlm, mail hy nlm dnkqóiaglm gliqaiyiqym. xam
aiqyigaliym mayxdty nkm yihytyel k fbyilm paiym, uby mli hy rkgyt fayi k
qlhlm w xkn k iaicbil; ma yn uby ymql yiqayihy, ma yn uby ymql lftk, ma yn
uby hymql qtkqk xytygy myt nnkxkhl flfl, híckinl vbymqtkm ctkihyekm, hbuby
w hbubymk yzgynyiqym.

-¡fayi, dlt halm! -haol mkigrl-. il hack xám vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt w kxl
xíl, yi mb kflil, dltuby il rkw xám uby hygat, ia xám uby dyimkt, ia xám
uby dytmyvytkt yi yn xbihl. w xám, uby, iyckihl ymqy myñlt, glxl rk iyckhl,
uby il rk rkfahl yi yn xbihl, ia nlm rkw, gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, ¿ubé xbgrl
uby il mydk iaicbik hy nkm glmkm uby rk hagrl?

-¿dlt vyiqbtk -haol yn ygnymaámqagl- mlam vlm, rytxkil, kubyn mkigrl dkiek
uby hagyi, k ubayi vbymqtl kxl qayiy dtlxyqahk bik íimbnk?

-mí mlw -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w mlw ubayi nk xytygy qki fayi glxl lqtl
gbknubaytk; mlw ubayi "oúiqkqy k nlm fbyilm w mytám bil hynnlm", w mlw wl
hy kubynnlm "il gli ubayi ikgym, mail gli ubayi dkgym", w hy nlm "ubayi k
fbyi átfln my kttaxk, fbyik mlxftk ny glfaok". wl xy ry kttaxkhl k fbyi
myñlt, w rk xbgrlm xymym uby kihl yi mb glxdkñík, w ry hy myt lqtl glxl én,
halm ubytayihl; w vavk én w vavk wl: uby ia k én ny pknqktái axdytalm uby
xkihkt ia k xí íimbnkm uby clfytikt.

-il, dlt gaytql, mkigrl kxacl -haol k ymqk mkeói yn hbuby-, uby wl, yi
ilxfty hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy, lm xkihl yn clfaytil hy bik uby qyicl hy
iliym, hy il dyubyñk gknahkh.

-ríigkqy hy tlhannkm, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w fymk nlm daym k mb
yzgynyigak dlt nk xytgyh uby qy rk rygrl.

ríelnl kmí mkigrl; nl gbkn vamql dlt yn ygnymaámqagl, my nyvkiqó hy nk
xymk, xlríil khyxám, hagayihl:

-dlt yn ráfaql uby qyicl, uby ymqlw dlt hygat uby ym qki mkihal vbymqtk
yzgynyigak glxl ymqlm dygkhltym. ¡xatkh ma il rki hy myt ynnlm nlglm, dbym
nlm gbythlm gkiliaeki mbm nlgbtkm! ubéhymy vbymqtk yzgynyigak gli ynnlm;
uby, yi qkiql uby ymqbvaytyi yi gkmk, xy ymqkté wl yi nk xík, w xy ymgbmkté
hy tydtyryihyt nl uby il dbyhl tyxyhakt.

w, mai hygat xám ia glxyt xám, my pby, mai uby pbymyi dktqy k hyqyiytny nlm
tbyclm hy nlm hbubym; kbiuby yn hbuby il ny haol xbgrl, axdyhahl hy nk tamk
uby mb axdytqaiyiqy gónytk ny rkfík gkbmkhl. kgkfó hy tyít w haol k hli
ubaolqy:

-vbymk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym, rk tymdlihahl dlt mí qki
knqkxyiqy uby il ny ubyhk glmk dlt mkqampkgyt hymqy uby, kbiuby dktygy
kctkval, il nl ym yi iaicbik xkiytk; dltuby, kmí glxl il kctkvaki nkm
xboytym, il kctkvaki nlm ygnymaámqaglm, glxl vbymk xytgyh xyolt mkfy.

-kmí ym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w nk gkbmk ym uby yn uby il dbyhy myt
kctkvakhl il dbyhy kctkvakt k ikhay. nkm xboytym, nlm iañlm w nlm
ygnymaámqaglm, glxl il dbyhyi hypyihytmy, kbiuby myki lpyihahlm, il dbyhyi
myt kptyiqkhlm; dltuby yiqty yn kctkval w nk kptyiqk rkw ymqk hapytyigak,
glxl xyolt vbymqtk yzgynyigak mkfy: nk kptyiqk vayiy hy dktqy hy ubayi nk
dbyhy rkgyt, w nk rkgy w nk mbmqyiqk; yn kctkval dbyhy vyiat hy gbknubayt
dktqy, mai uby kptyiqy. myk yoyxdnl: ymqá bil yi nk gknny hymgbahkhl,
nnycki haye gli xkil ktxkhk, w, háihlny hy dknlm, dliy xkil k nk ymdkhk w
rkgy mb hyfyt, dytl nk xbgryhbxfty hy nlm gliqtktalm my ny ldliy, w il ny
hyok mknat gli mb aiqyigaói, uby ym hy vyicktmy; ymqy qkn ubyhk kctkvakhl,
dytl il kptyiqkhl. w nl xymxl glipatxktá lqtl yoyxdnl: ymqá bil vbynql hy
ymdknhkm, nnyck lqtl w hkny hy dknlm, w yi háihlmynlm rbwy w il ymdytk, w
yn lqtl ny macby w il kngkiek; ymqy uby tygafaó nlm dknlm, tygafaó kctkval,
xkm il kptyiqk, dltuby nk kptyiqk rk hy myt mbmqyiqkhk. ma yn uby ny hal
nlm dknlm, kbiuby my nlm hal k rbtqkglthyn, dbmaytk xkil k mb ymdkhk w my
ymqbvaytk ubyhl, rkgayihl tlmqtl k mb yiyxacl, ubyhktk yn kdknykhl
kctkvakhl w kptyiqkhl obiqkxyiqy: kctkvakhl, dltuby ny haytli k qtkagaói;
kptyiqkhl, dltuby yn uby ny hal mbmqyiqó nl uby rkfík rygrl, mai vlnvyt nkm
ymdknhkm w k day ubyhl. w kmí, mycúi nkm nywym hyn xknhaql hbynl, wl dbyhl
ymqkt kctkvakhl, xkm il kptyiqkhl; dltuby nlm iañlm il mayiqyi, ia nkm
xboytym, ia dbyhyi rbat, ia qayiyi dktk ubé ymdytkt, w nl xymxl nlm
glimqaqbahlm yi nk mkgtk tynacaói, dltuby ymqlm qtym céiytlm hy cyiqy
gktygyi hy ktxkm lpyimavkm w hypyimavkm; w kmí, kbiuby ikqbtknxyiqy ymqéi
lfnackhlm k hypyihytmy, il nl ymqái dktk lpyihyt k ikhay. w, kbiuby dlgl rk
haoy uby wl dlhík ymqkt kctkvakhl, kcltk hacl uby il, yi iaicbik xkiytk,
dltuby ubayi il dbyhy tygyfat kptyiqk, xyilm nk dbyhy hkt; dlt nkm gbknym
tkeliym wl il hyfl myiqat, ia mayiql, nkm uby kubyn fbyi rlxfty xy rk
hagrl; mónl ubamaytk uby ymdytktk kncúi dlgl, dktk hktny k yiqyihyt yi yn
yttlt yi uby ymqá yi dyimkt w hygat uby il rk rkfahl, ia nlm rkw,
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yi yn xbihl; uby ma nl qkn lwytk kxkhím, l bil hy nlm
aipaiaqlm hy mb naikoy, wl mé uby il ny pbytk fayi k mb xytgyh.

-yml obtl wl fayi -haol mkigrl-: gbgrannkhk ny rbfaytki hkhl uby ny
kftaytki hy kttafk kfkol glxl bik ctkikhk, l glxl k bi xynói xbw xkhbtl.
¡fliaqlm ytki ynnlm dktk mbptat myxyokiqym glmubannkm! dktk xa mkiqacbkhk,
uby qyicl dlt gaytql uby ma tyaiknhlm hy xliqknfái rbfaytk líhl ymqkm
tkeliym kn rlxftygaql, qkdkflgk ny rbfaytk hkhl uby il rkfnktk xám yi qtym
kñlm. ¡il, mail qlxátkmy gli ynnlm w vaytk góxl ymgkdkfk hy mbm xkilm!

dytygík hy tamk nk hbubymk yi lwyihl rkfnkt k mkigrl, w yi mb ldaiaói ny
qyiík dlt xám ctkgalml w dlt xám nlgl uby k mb kxl; w xbgrlm rbfl yi kubyn
qayxdl uby pbytli hymqy xamxl dktygyt. paiknxyiqy, hli ubaolqy my mlmycó, w
nk glxahk my kgkfó, w, yi nyvkiqkihl nlm xkiqynym, nnycktli gbkqtl
hligynnkm, nk bik gli bik pbyiqy hy dnkqk, w nk lqtk gli bi kcbkxkian,
kmaxamxl hy dnkqk, w nk lqtk gli hlm fnkiubímaxkm w taubímaxkm qlknnkm kn
rlxftl, w nk gbktqk hymgbfaytqlm nlm ftkelm rkmqk nk xaqkh, w yi mbm
fnkigkm xkilm -uby mai hbhk ytki fnkigkm- bik tyhlihk dynnk hy okfói
ikdlnaqkil. nnycó nk hy nk pbyiqy, w gli cyiqan hlikaty w hymyivlnqbtk
yigkoó nk pbyiqy hyfkol hy nk fktfk hy hli ubaolqy; yn gbkn, mai rkfnkt
dknkftk, khxatkhl hy myxyokiqy gytyxliak, gtywyihl uby hyfík myt bmkiek hy
kubynnk qayttk yi nbckt hy nkm xkilm nkvkt nkm fktfkm, w kmí qyihaó nk mbwk
qlhl gbkiql dbhl, w kn xamxl dbiql glxyieó k nnlvyt yn kcbkxkian, w nk
hligynnk hyn okfói ny xkilmyó nkm fktfkm gli xbgrk dtaymk, nyvkiqkihl gldlm
hy iayvy, uby il ytki xyilm fnkigkm nkm okflikhbtkm, il mónl dlt nkm
fktfkm, xkm dlt qlhl yn tlmqtl w dlt nlm lolm hyn lfyhayiqy gkfknnytl,
qkiql, uby my nlm ragaytli gyttkt dlt pbytek.

yn hbuby w nk hbubymk, uby hy ikhk hymql ytki mkfahltym, ymqkfki ymdytkihl
yi ubé rkfík hy dktkt qki yzqtklthaiktal nkvkqltal. nk hligynnk fktfytk,
gbkihl ny qbvl gli bi dknxl hy okflikhbtk, paicaó uby my ny rkfík kgkfkhl
yn kcbk, w xkihó k nk hyn kcbkxkian pbymy dlt ynnk, uby yn myñlt hli
ubaolqy ymdytktík. ríelnl kmí, w ubyhó hli ubaolqy gli nk xám ymqtkñk
pacbtk w xám dktk rkgyt tyít uby my dbhaytk axkcaikt.

xatáfkiny qlhlm nlm uby dtymyiqym ymqkfki, uby ytki xbgrlm, w glxl ny vyíki
gli xyhak vktk hy gbynnl, xám uby xyhakikxyiqy xltyil, nlm lolm gyttkhlm w
nkm fktfkm nnyikm hy okfói, pby ctki xktkvannk w xbgrk hamgtygaói dlhyt
hamaxbnkt nk tamk; nkm hligynnkm hy nk fbtnk qyiíki nlm lolm fkolm, mai
lmkt xatkt k mbm myñltym; k ynnlm nym tyqlekfk nk gónytk w nk tamk yi yn
gbytdl, w il mkfíki k ubé kgbhat: l k gkmqackt yn kqtyvaxayiql hy nkm
xbgrkgrkm, l hktnym dtyxal dlt yn cbmql uby tygafíki hy vyt k hli ubaolqy
hy kubynnk mbytqy.

paiknxyiqy, nk hligynnk hyn kcbkxkian vail, w kgkfktli hy nkvkt k hli
ubaolqy, w nbycl nk uby qtkík nkm qlknnkm ny naxdaó w ny yiobcó xbw
tydlmkhkxyiqy; w, rkgaéihlny qlhkm gbkqtl k nk dkt bik ctkihy w dtlpbihk
aignaikgaói w tyvytyigak, my ubytíki at; dytl yn hbuby, dltuby hli ubaolqy
il gkwymy yi nk fbtnk, nnkxó k nk hligynnk hy nk pbyiqy, hagaéihlny:

-vyiah w nkvkhxy k xí, w xatkh uby il my lm kgkfy yn kcbk.

nk xbgrkgrk, kcbhk w hanacyiqy, nnycó w dbml nk pbyiqy kn hbuby glxl k hli
ubaolqy, w, háihlmy dtamk, ny nkvktli w okfliktli xbw fayi, w, hyoáihlny
yiobql w naxdal, rkgayihl tyvytyigakm my pbytli. hymdbém my mbdl uby rkfík
obtkhl yn hbuby uby ma k én il ny nkvktki glxl k hli ubaolqy, rkfík hy
gkmqackt mb hymyivlnqbtk, nl gbkn rkfíki yixyihkhl hamgtyqkxyiqy gli
rkfytny k én okflikhl.

ymqkfk kqyiql mkigrl k nkm gytyxliakm hy kubyn nkvkqltal, w haol yiqty mí:

-¡vánkxy halm! ¿ma mytá qkxfaéi bmkiek yi ymqk qayttk nkvkt nkm fktfkm k
nlm ymgbhytlm glxl k nlm gkfknnytlm? dltuby, yi halm w yi xa áiaxk uby nl
ry fayi xyiymqyt, w kbi uby ma xy nkm tkdkmyi k ikvkok, nl qyihtík k xám
fyiypagal.

-¿ubé hygím yiqty vlm, mkigrl? -dtycbiqó nk hbubymk.

-hacl, myñltk -tymdlihaó én-, uby yi nkm gltqym hy nlm lqtlm dtíigadym
mayxdty ry líhl hygat uby yi nyvkiqkihl nlm xkiqynym hki kcbk k nkm xkilm,
dytl il nyoík k nkm fktfkm; w uby dlt yml ym fbyil vavat xbgrl, dlt vyt
xbgrl; kbiuby qkxfaéi hagyi uby yn uby nktck vahk vavy xbgrl xkn rk hy
dkmkt, dbymql uby dkmkt dlt bi nkvkqltal hy émqlm kiqym ym cbmql uby
qtkfkol.

-il qyicáam dyik, kxacl mkigrl -haol nk hbubymk-, uby wl rkté uby xam
hligynnkm lm nkvyi, w kbi lm xyqki yi glnkhk, ma pbyty xyiymqyt.

-gli nkm fktfkm xy gliqyiql -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dlt krltk k nl xyilm, uby
kihkihl yn qayxdl, halm haol nl uby mytá.

-xatkh, xkymqtymknk -haol nk hbubymk-, nl uby yn fbyi mkigrl dahy, w
gbxdnahny mb vlnbiqkh kn day hy nk nyqtk.

yn xkymqtymknk tymdlihaó uby yi qlhl mytík mytvahl yn myñlt mkigrl, w gli
ymql my pby k glxyt, w nnyvó glimacl k mkigrl, ubyháihlmy k nk xymk nlm
hbubym w hli ubaolqy, rkfnkihl yi xbgrkm w havytmkm glmkm; dytl qlhkm
qlgkiqym kn yoytgagal hy nkm ktxkm w hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík.

nk hbubymk tlcó k hli ubaolqy uby ny hynaiykmy w hymgtafaymy, dbym dktygík
qyiyt pynagy xyxltak, nk rytxlmbtk w pkggaliym hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml; uby, mycúi nl uby nk pkxk dtyclikfk hy mb fynnyek, qyiík dlt
yiqyihahl uby hyfík hy myt nk xám fynnk gtakqbtk hyn ltfy, w kbi hy qlhk nk
xkigrk. mlmdató hli ubaolqy, lwyihl nl uby nk hbubymk ny xkihkfk, w haol:

-ma wl dbhaytk mkgkt xa gltkeói w dliytny kiqy nlm lolm hy vbymqtk
ctkihyek, kubí, mlfty ymqk xymk w yi bi dnkql, ubaqktk yn qtkfkol k xa
nyicbk hy hygat nl uby kdyikm my dbyhy dyimkt, dltuby vbymqtk yzgynyigak nk
vaytk yi én qlhk tyqtkqkhk; dytl, ¿dktk ubé ym dliytxy wl krltk k hynaiykt
w hymgtafat dbiql dlt dbiql w dktqy dlt dktqy nk rytxlmbtk hy nk mai dkt
hbngaiyk, mayihl gktck hacik hy lqtlm rlxftlm uby hy nlm xílm, yxdtymk yi
ubayi my hyfíki lgbdkt nlm daigynym hy dkttkmal, hy qaxkiqym w hy kdynym, w
nlm fbtanym hy namadl, dktk daiqktnk w ctkfktnk yi qkfnkm, yi xátxlnym w yi
ftligym, w nk tyqótagk gagytliakik w hyxlmqaik dktk knkfktnk?

-¿ubé ubayty hygat hyxlmqaik, myñlt hli ubaolqy -dtycbiqó nk hbubymk-, uby
ym vlgkfnl uby il ny ry líhl yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk?

-tyqótagk hyxlmqaik -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- ym nl xamxl uby hygat tyqótagk
hy hyxómqyiym, glxl gagytliakik, hy gagytói, uby pbytli nlm hlm xkwltym
tyqótaglm hyn xbihl.

-kmí ym -haol yn hbuby-, w rkféam kihkhl hymnbxftkhk yi nk qkn dtycbiqk.
dytl, gli qlhl yml, ilm hktík ctki cbmql yn myñlt hli ubaolqy ma ilm nk
daiqkmy; uby k fbyi mycbtl uby, kbiuby myk yi tkmcbñl w flmubyol, uby ynnk
mknck qkn, uby nk qyicki aivahak nkm xám rytxlmkm.

-mí ragaytk, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ma il xy nk rbfaytk
flttkhl hy nk ahyk nk hymctkgak uby dlgl rk uby ny mbgyhaó, uby ym qkn, uby
xám ymqlw dktk nnltktnk uby dktk hymgtafatnk; dltuby rkftái hy mkfyt
vbymqtkm ctkihyekm uby, wyihl nlm híkm dkmkhlm k fymktny nkm xkilm, w k
tygyfat mb fyihagaói, fyiydnágaql w nagyigak dktk ymqk qytgytk mknahk,
rknné lqtk hy nk uby fbmgkfk: rknnénk yigkiqkhk w glivytqahk hy dtaigymk yi
nkftkhltk, hy rytxlmk yi pyk, hy áicyn yi hakfnl, hy lnltlmk yi dymqípytk,
hy fayi rkfnkhk yi túmqagk, hy tydlmkhk yi ftaigkhltk, hy nbe yi qaiayfnkm,
w, paiknxyiqy, hy hbngaiyk hyn qlflml yi bik vannkik hy mkwkcl.

-¡vánkxy halm! -hkihl bik ctki vle, haol k ymqy aimqkiqy yn hbuby-. ¿ubaéi
rk mahl yn uby qkiql xkn rk rygrl kn xbihl? ¿ubaéi rk ubaqkhl hén nk
fynnyek uby ny knyctkfk, yn hlikaty uby ny yiqtyqyiík w nk rliymqahkh uby
ny kgtyhaqkfk?

-¿ubaéi? -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. ¿ubaéi dbyhy myt mail kncúi xknacil
yigkiqkhlt hy nlm xbgrlm aivahalmlm uby xy dytmacbyi? ymqk tkek xknhaqk,
ikgahk yi yn xbihl dktk ymgbtygyt w kiaubankt nkm rkekñkm hy nlm fbyilm, w
dktk hkt nbe w nyvkiqkt nlm pygrlm hy nlm xknlm. dytmycbahl xy rki
yigkiqkhltym, yigkiqkhltym xy dytmacbyi w yigkiqkhltym xy dytmacbatái rkmqk
hkt glixacl w gli xam knqkm gkfknnytíkm yi yn dtlpbihl kfamxl hyn lnvahl; w
yi kubynnk dktqy xy hkñki w raytyi hlihy vyyi uby xám nl mayiql, dltuby
ubaqktny k bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy mb hkxk ym ubaqktny nlm lolm gli uby xatk,
w yn mln gli uby my knbxftk, w yn mbmqyiql gli uby my xkiqayiy. lqtkm
xbgrkm vygym nl ry hagrl, w krltk nl vbynvl k hygat: uby yn gkfknnytl
kihkiqy mai hkxk ym glxl yn átfln mai rlokm, yn yhapagal mai gaxayiql w nk
mlxftk mai gbytdl hy ubayi my gkbmy.

-il rkw xám uby hygat -haol nk hbubymk-; dytl ma, gli qlhl yml, ryxlm hy
hkt gtéhaql k nk ramqltak uby hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy hy dlglm híkm k ymqk
dktqy rk mknahl k nk nbe hyn xbihl, gli cyiytkn kdnkbml hy nkm cyiqym,
hynnk my glnacy, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, uby ibigk vbymk xytgyh rk vamql k nk
myñltk hbngaiyk, w uby ymqk qkn myñltk il ym yi yn xbihl, mail uby ym hkxk
pkiqámqagk, uby vbymk xytgyh nk yicyihtó w dktaó yi mb yiqyihaxayiql, w nk
daiqó gli qlhkm kubynnkm ctkgakm w dytpygaliym uby ubaml.

-yi yml rkw xbgrl uby hygat -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. halm mkfy ma rkw
hbngaiyk l il yi yn xbihl, l ma ym pkiqámqagk l il ym pkiqámqagk; w émqkm
il mli hy nkm glmkm gbwk kvytacbkgaói my rk hy nnyvkt rkmqk yn gkfl. ia wl
yicyihté ia dktí k xa myñltk, dbymql uby nk gliqyxdnl glxl glivayiy uby myk
bik hkxk uby gliqyick yi mí nkm dktqym uby dbyhki rkgytnk pkxlmk yi qlhkm
nkm hyn xbihl, glxl mli: rytxlmk, mai qkgrk, ctkvy mai mlfytfak, kxltlmk
gli rliymqahkh, kctkhygahk dlt gltqém, gltqém dlt fayi gtakhk, w,
paiknxyiqy, knqk dlt naikoy, k gkbmk uby mlfty nk fbyik mkicty tymdnkihygy
w gkxdyk nk rytxlmbtk gli xám ctkhlm hy dytpygaói uby yi nkm rytxlmkm
rbxanhyxyiqy ikgahkm.

-kmí ym -haol yn hbuby-; dytl rkxy hy hkt nagyigak yn myñlt hli ubaolqy
dktk uby hack nl uby xy pbytek k hygat nk ramqltak uby hy mbm rkekñkm ry
nyíhl, hy hlihy my aipayty uby, dbymql uby my gligyhk uby rkw hbngaiyk, yi
yn qlflml l pbytk hén, w uby myk rytxlmk yi yn mbxl ctkhl uby vbymk xytgyh
ilm nk daiqk, yi nl hy nk knqyek hyn naikoy il gltty dktyokm gli nkm
ltakikm, gli nkm knkmqtkoktykm, gli nkm xkhámaxkm, ia gli lqtkm hymqy okye,
hy ubayi ymqái nnyikm nkm ramqltakm uby vbymk xytgyh fayi mkfy.

-k yml dbyhl hygat -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby hbngaiyk ym raok hy mbm
lftkm, w uby nkm vatqbhym khlfki nk mkicty, w uby yi xám my rk hy ymqaxkt w
qyiyt bi rbxanhy vatqblml uby bi vagalml nyvkiqkhl; gbkiql xám, uby
hbngaiyk qayiy bi oatói uby nk dbyhy nnyvkt k myt tyaik hy gltlik w gydqtl;
uby yn xytygaxayiql hy bik xboyt rytxlmk w vatqblmk k rkgyt xkwltym
xankctlm my ymqayihy, w, kbiuby il pltxknxyiqy, vatqbknxyiqy qayiy yi mí
yigyttkhkm xkwltym vyiqbtkm.

-hacl, myñlt hli ubaolqy -haol nk hbubymk-, uby yi qlhl gbkiql vbymqtk
xytgyh hagy vk gli day hy dnlxl, w, glxl mbyny hygatmy, gli nk mlihk yi nk
xkil; w uby wl hymhy kubí khynkiqy gtyyté w rkté gtyyt k qlhlm nlm hy xa
gkmk, w kbi kn hbuby xa myñlt, ma pbyty xyiymqyt, uby rkw hbngaiyk yi yn
qlflml, w uby vavy rlw hík, w ym rytxlmk, w dtaigadknxyiqy ikgahk w
xytygyhltk uby bi qkn gkfknnytl glxl ym yn myñlt hli ubaolqy nk matvk; uby
ym nl xám uby dbyhl ia mé yigktygyt. dytl il dbyhl hyokt hy pltxkt bi
ymgtúdbnl, w qyiyt kncúi il mé ubé hy loytaek gliqtk mkigrl dkiek: yn
ymgtúdbnl ym uby hagy nk ramqltak typytahk uby yn qkn mkigrl dkiek rknnó k
nk qkn myñltk hbngaiyk, gbkihl hy dktqy hy vbymqtk xytgyh ny nnyvó bik
ydímqlnk, krygrkihl bi glmqkn hy qtacl, w, dlt xám myñkm, hagy uby ytk
tbfaói: glmk uby xy rkgy hbhkt yi nk knqyek hy mb naikoy.

k nl uby tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-myñltk xík, mkftá nk vbymqtk ctkihyek uby qlhkm l nkm xám glmkm uby k xí
xy mbgyhyi vki pbytk hy nlm qétxailm lthaiktalm hy nkm uby k nlm lqtlm
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym kgliqygyi, l wk myki yigkxaikhkm dlt yn ubytyt
aiymgtbqkfny hy nlm rkhlm, l wk vyicki yigkxaikhkm dlt nk xknagak hy kncúi
yigkiqkhlt aivahalml; w, glxl ym glmk wk kvytacbkhk uby qlhlm l nlm xám
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym w pkxlmlm, bil qyick ctkgak hy il dlhyt myt yigkiqkhl,
lqtl hy myt hy qki axdyiyqtkfnym gktiym uby il dbyhk myt rytahl, glxl nl
pby yn pkxlml tlnhái, bil hy nlm hlgy dktym hy ptkigak, hy ubayi my gbyiqk
uby il dlhík myt pytahl mail dlt nk dnkiqk hyn day aeubaythl, w uby ymql
rkfík hy myt gli nk dbiqk hy bi knpanyt clthl, w il gli lqtk mbytqy hy ktxk
kncbik; w kmí, gbkihl fytikthl hyn gktdal ny xkqó yi tligymvknnym, vayihl
uby il ny dlhík nnkckt gli payttl, ny nyvkiqó hyn mbynl yiqty nlm ftkelm w
ny krlcó, kgltháihlmy yiqligym hy nk xbytqy uby hal rétgbnym k kiqyói,
kubyn pytle cackiqy uby hygíki myt raol hy nk qayttk. ubaytl aipytat hy nl
hagrl, uby dlhtík myt uby wl qbvaymy kncbik ctkgak hémqkm, il hyn il
dlhyt myt pytahl, dltuby xbgrkm vygym nk yzdytayigak xy rk xlmqtkhl uby mlw
hy gktiym fnkihkm w il ikhk axdyiyqtkfnym, ia nk hy il dlhyt myt yigkiqkhl,
uby wk xy ry vamql xyqahl yi bik okbnk, hlihy qlhl yn xbihl il pbytk
dlhytlml k yigyttktxy, ma il pbytk k pbytekm hy yigkiqkxyiqlm; dytl, dbym
hy kubén xy nafté, ubaytl gtyyt uby il rk hy rkfyt lqtl kncbil uby xy
yxdyegk; w kmí, vayihl ymqlm yigkiqkhltym uby gli xa dytmlik il dbyhyi bmkt
hy mbm xknkm xkñkm, véickimy yi nkm glmkm uby xám ubaytl, w ubaytyi
ubaqktxy nk vahk xknqtkqkihl nk hy hbngaiyk, dlt ubayi wl vavl; w kmí, gtyl
uby, gbkihl xa ymgbhytl ny nnyvó xa yxfkokhk, my nk glivatqaytli yi vannkik
w lgbdkhk yi qki fkol yoytgagal glxl ym yn hy krygrkt qtacl; dytl wk qyicl
wl hagrl uby kubyn qtacl ia ytk tbfaói ia qtacl, mail ctkilm hy dytnkm
ltayiqknym; w dktk dtbyfk hymqk vythkh ubaytl hygat k vbymqtkm xkciaqbhym
góxl, vaiayihl dlgl rk dlt yn qlflml, okxám dbhy rknnkt nlm dknkgalm hy
hbngaiyk; w uby lqtl hík, rkfaéihlnk vamql mkigrl, xa ymgbhytl, yi mb xymxk
pacbtk, uby ym nk xám fynnk hyn ltfy, k xí xy dktygaó bik nkftkhltk qlmgk w
pyk, w il ikhk fayi tkelikhk, mayihl nk hamgtygaói hyn xbihl; w, dbym wl il
ymqlw yigkiqkhl, ia nl dbyhl ymqkt, mycúi fbyi hamgbtml, ynnk ym nk
yigkiqkhk, nk lpyihahk w nk xbhkhk, qtlgkhk w qtkmqtlgkhk, w yi ynnk my rki
vyickhl hy xí xam yiyxaclm, w dlt ynnk vavaté wl yi dytdyqbkm náctaxkm,
rkmqk vytnk yi mb dtímqail ymqkhl. qlhl ymql ry hagrl dktk uby ikhay tydkty
yi nl uby mkigrl haol hyn gytiahl ia hyn krygrl hy hbngaiyk; uby, dbym k xí
xy nk xbhktli, il ym xktkvannk uby k én my nk gkxfakmyi. hbngaiyk ym
dtaigadkn w fayi ikgahk, w hy nlm rahknclm naikoym uby rkw yi yn qlflml,
uby mli xbgrlm, kiqacblm w xbw fbyilm, k fbyi mycbtl uby il ny gkfy dlgk
dktqy k nk mai dkt hbngaiyk, dlt ubayi mb nbckt mytá pkxlml w ilxftkhl yi
nlm vyiahytlm macnlm, glxl nl rk mahl qtlwk dlt ynyik, w ymdkñk dlt nk
gkvk, kbiuby gli xyolt qíqbnl w pkxk. dlt lqtk dktqy, ubaytl uby yiqayihki
vbymqtkm myñltíkm uby mkigrl dkiek ym bil hy nlm xám ctkgalmlm ymgbhytlm
uby okxám matvaó k gkfknnytl kihkiqy; qayiy k vygym bikm maxdnagahkhym qki
kcbhkm, uby yn dyimkt ma ym maxdny l kcbhl gkbmk il dyubyñl gliqyiql; qayiy
xknagakm uby ny glihyiki dlt fynnkgl, w hymgbahlm uby ny glipatxki dlt
flfl; hbhk hy qlhl w gtéynl qlhl; gbkihl dayiml uby my vk k hymdyñkt hy
qliql, mkny gli bikm hamgtygaliym, uby ny nyvkiqki kn gaynl. paiknxyiqy, wl
il ny qtlgktík gli lqtl ymgbhytl, kbiuby xy haymyi hy kñkhahbtk bik gabhkh;
w kmí, ymqlw yi hbhk ma mytá fayi yivaktny kn clfaytil hy ubayi vbymqtk
ctkihyek ny rk rygrl xytgyh; kbiuby vyl yi én bik gaytqk kdqaqbh dktk ymql
hy clfytikt, uby kqbmáihlny qkiqagl yn yiqyihaxayiql, my mknhtík gli
gbknubaytk clfaytil, glxl yn tyw gli mbm kngkfknkm; w xám, uby wk dlt
xbgrkm yzdytayigakm mkfyxlm uby il ym xyiymqyt ia xbgrk rkfanahkh ia xbgrkm
nyqtkm dktk myt bil clfytikhlt, dbym rkw dlt krí gayiql uby kdyikm mkfyt
nyyt, w clfaytiki glxl bilm catapknqym; yn qluby ymqá yi uby qyicki fbyik
aiqyigaói w hymyyi kgytqkt yi qlhl; uby ibigk nym pknqktá ubayi nym
kglimyoy w yigkxaiy yi nl uby rki hy rkgyt, glxl nlm clfytikhltym
gkfknnytlm w il nyqtkhlm, uby myiqyigaki gli kmymlt. kglimyoktíkny wl uby
ia qlxy glrygrl, ia daythk hytygrl, w lqtkm glmannkm uby xy ubyhki yi yn
ymqóxkcl, uby mknhtái k mb qayxdl, dktk bqanahkh hy mkigrl w dtlvygrl hy nk
íimbnk uby clfytikty.

k ymqy dbiql nnyckfki hy mb glnlubal yn hbuby, nk hbubymk w hli ubaolqy,
gbkihl lwytli xbgrkm vlgym w ctki tbxlt hy cyiqy yi yn dknkgal; w k hymrltk
yiqtó mkigrl yi nk mknk, qlhl kmbmqkhl, gli bi gytikhytl dlt fkfkhlt, w
qtkm én xbgrlm xlelm, l, dlt xyolt hygat, dígktlm hy glgaik w lqtk cyiqy
xyibhk, w bil vyiík gli bi ktqymligannl hy kcbk, uby yi nk glnlt w dlgk
naxdayek xlmqtkfk myt hy ptyckt; mycbíkny w dytmycbíkny yn hy nk ktqymk, w
dtlgbtkfk gli qlhk mlnagaqbh dliétmynk w yigkoátmynk hyfkol hy nkm fktfkm,
w lqtl dígktl xlmqtkfk ubytétmynkm nkvkt.

-¿ubé ym ymql, rytxkilm? -dtycbiqó nk hbubymk-. ¿ubé ym ymql? ¿ubé ubytéam
k ymy fbyi rlxfty? ¿góxl w il glimahytáam uby ymqá ynygql clfytikhlt?

k nl uby tymdlihaó yn dígktl fktfytl:

-il ubayty ymqy myñlt hyoktmy nkvkt, glxl ym bmkiek, w glxl my nk nkvó yn
hbuby xa myñlt w yn myñlt mb kxl.

-mí ubaytl -tymdlihaó mkigrl gli xbgrk gónytk-, dytl ubyttík uby pbymy gli
qlknnkm xám naxdakm, gli nyoík xkm gnktk w gli xkilm il qki mbgakm; uby il
rkw qkiqk hapytyigak hy xí k xa kxl, uby k én ny nkvyi gli kcbk hy áicynym
w k xí gli nyoík hy hakfnlm. nkm bmkiekm hy nkm qayttkm w hy nlm dknkgalm
hy nlm dtíigadym qkiql mli fbyikm gbkiql il hki dymkhbxfty, dytl nk
glmqbxfty hyn nkvkqltal uby kubí my bmk dylt ym uby hy hagadnaikiqym. wl
ymqlw naxdal hy fktfkm w il qyicl iygymahkh hy myxyokiqym typtacytalm; w yn
uby my nnyckty k nkvktxy ia k qlgktxy k bi dynl hy nk gkfyek, hacl, hy xa
fktfk, rkfnkihl gli yn hyfahl kgkqkxayiql, ny hkté qkn dbñkhk uby ny hyoy
yn dbñl yickmqkhl yi nlm gkmglm; uby ymqkm qknym gytyxliakm w okflikhbtkm
xám dktygyi fbtnkm uby ckmkolm hy rbémdyhym.

dytygahk hy tamk ymqkfk nk hbubymk, vayihl nk gónytk w lwyihl nkm tkeliym
hy mkigrl, dytl il hal xbgrl cbmql k hli ubaolqy vytny qki xkn khynañkhl
gli nk okmdykhk qlknnk, w qki tlhykhl hy qkiqlm yiqtyqyiahlm hy glgaik; w
kmí, rkgayihl bik dtlpbihk tyvytyigak k nlm hbubym, glxl uby nym dyhík
nagyigak dktk rkfnkt, gli vle tydlmkhk haol k nk gkiknnk:

-¡rlnk, myñltym gkfknnytlm! vbymkm xytgyhym hyoyi kn xkigyfl, w vbénvkimy
dlt hlihy vaiaytli, l dlt lqtk dktqy ma my nym kiqlokty, uby xa ymgbhytl ym
naxdal qkiql glxl lqtl, w ymkm ktqymannkm mli dktk én ymqtygrkm w dyikiqym
fúgktlm. qlxyi xa glimyol w héoyiny, dltuby ia én ia wl mkfyxlm hy kgrkuby
hy fbtnkm.

glcaóny nk tkeói hy nk flgk mkigrl, w dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-¡il, mail nnécbyimy k rkgyt fbtnk hyn xlmqtyigl, uby kmí nl mbptaté glxl
krltk ym hy ilgry! qtkacki kubí bi dyaiy, l nl uby ubamaytyi, w knxlrágyixy
ymqkm fktfkm, w ma mkgktyi hynnkm glmk uby lpyihk k nk naxdayek, uby xy
qtkmubanyi k gtbgym.

k ymqk mkeói, mai hyokt nk tamk, haol nk hbubymk:

-mkigrl dkiek qayiy tkeói yi qlhl gbkiql rk hagrl, w nk qyihtá yi qlhl
gbkiql haoyty: én ym naxdal, w, glxl én hagy, il qayiy iygymahkh hy
nkvktmy; w ma ibymqtk bmkiek il ny gliqyiqk, mb knxk yi mb dknxk, gbkiql
xám, uby vlmlqtlm, xaiamqtlm hy nk naxdayek, rkféam kihkhl hyxkmakhkxyiqy
hy tyxamlm w hymgbahkhlm, w il mé ma hack kqtyvahlm, k qtkyt k qkn
dytmlikoy w k qknym fktfkm, yi nbckt hy pbyiqym w kcbkxkianym hy ltl dbtl w
hy knyxkikm qlknnkm, ktqymannkm w hltikolm hy dknl w tlhannkm hy
kdktkhltym. dytl, yi pai, mlam xknlm w xkn ikgahlm, w il dlhéam hyokt, glxl
xknkihtaiym uby mlam, hy xlmqtkt nk loytaek uby qyiéam gli nlm ymgbhytlm hy
nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm.

gtywytli nlm kdagktkhlm xaiamqtlm, w kbi yn xkymqtymknk, uby vyiík gli
ynnlm, uby nk hbubymk rkfnkfk hy vytkm; w kmí, ubaqktli yn gytikhytl hyn
dygrl hy mkigrl, w qlhlm glipbmlm w gkma glttahlm my pbytli w ny hyoktli;
yn gbkn, vaéihlmy pbytk hy kubyn, k mb dktygyt, mbxl dynactl, my pby k
raigkt hy tlhannkm kiqy nk hbubymk w haol:

-hy ctkihym myñltkm, ctkihym xytgyhym my ymdytki; ymqk uby nk vbymqtk
xytgyh rlw xy rk pygrl il dbyhy dkcktmy gli xyilm, ma il ym gli hymykt
vytxy ktxkhl gkfknnytl kihkiqy, dktk lgbdktxy qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk yi
mytvat k qki knqk myñltk. nkftkhlt mlw, mkigrl dkiek xy nnkxl, gkmkhl mlw,
raolm qyicl w hy ymgbhytl matvl: ma gli kncbik hymqkm glmkm dbyhl mytvat k
vbymqtk ctkihyek, xyilm qkthkté wl yi lfyhygyt uby vbymqtk myñltík yi
xkihkt.

-fayi dktygy, mkigrl -tymdlihaó nk hbubymk-, uby rkféam kdtyihahl k myt
gltqém yi nk ymgbynk hy nk xamxk gltqymík; fayi dktygy, ubaytl hygat, uby
lm rkféam gtakhl k nlm dygrlm hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby hyfy hy myt nk
ikqk hy nlm glxyhaxayiqlm w nk pnlt hy nkm gytyxliakm, l gataxliakm, glxl
vlm hygím. fayi rkwk qkn myñlt w qkn gtakhl: yn bil, dlt iltqy hy nk
kihkiqy gkfknnytík; w yn lqtl, dlt ymqtynnk hy nk ymgbhytan pahynahkh.
nyvkiqklm, mkigrl kxacl, uby wl mkqampkté vbymqtkm gltqymíkm gli rkgyt uby
yn hbuby xa myñlt, nl xám dtymql uby dbhayty, lm gbxdnk nk xytgyh dtlxyqahk
hyn clfaytil.

gli ymql gymó nk dnáqagk, w hli ubaolqy my pby k tydlmkt nk maymqk, w nk
hbubymk dahaó k mkigrl uby, ma il qyiík xbgrk ckik hy hltxat, vaiaymy k
dkmkt nk qkthy gli ynnk w gli mbm hligynnkm yi bik xbw ptymgk mknk. mkigrl
tymdlihaó uby, kbiuby ytk vythkh uby qyiík dlt glmqbxfty hltxat gbkqtl l
gaigl rltkm nkm maymqkm hyn vytkil, uby, dlt mytvat k mb flihkh, én
dtlgbtktík gli qlhkm mbm pbytekm il hltxat kubyn hík iaicbik, w vyihtík
lfyhayiqy k mb xkihkhl, w pbymy. yn hbuby hal ibyvkm óthyiym glxl my
qtkqkmy k hli ubaolqy glxl k gkfknnytl kihkiqy, mai mknat bi dbiql hyn
ymqanl glxl gbyiqki uby my qtkqkfki nlm kiqacblm gkfknnytlm.





gkdíqbnl zzzaaa. hy nk mkftlmk dnáqagk uby nk hbubymk w mbm hligynnkm
dkmktli gli mkigrl dkiek, hacik hy uby my nyk w hy uby my ilqy


gbyiqk, dbym, nk ramqltak, uby mkigrl il hbtxaó kubynnk maymqk, mail uby,
dlt gbxdnat mb dknkftk, vail yi glxayihl k vyt k nk hbubymk; nk gbkn, gli
yn cbmql uby qyiík hy lítny, ny rael myiqkt obiql k mí yi bik mannk fkok,
kbiuby mkigrl, hy dbtl fayi gtakhl, il ubytík myiqktmy; dytl nk hbubymk ny
haol uby my myiqkmy glxl clfytikhlt w rkfnkmy glxl ymgbhytl, dbymql uby dlt
yiqtkxfkm glmkm xytygík yn xamxl ymgkñl hyn gah tbw híke gkxdykhlt.

yiglcaó mkigrl nlm rlxftlm, lfyhygaó w myiqómy, w qlhkm nkm hligynnkm w
hbyñkm hy nk hbubymk nk tlhyktli, kqyiqkm, gli ctkihímaxl manyigal, k
ymgbgrkt nl uby hatík; dytl nk hbubymk pby nk uby rkfnó dtaxytl, hagayihl:

-krltk uby ymqkxlm mlnlm, w uby kubí il ilm lwy ikhay, ubyttík wl uby yn
myñlt clfytikhlt xy kmlnvaymy gaytqkm hbhkm uby qyicl, ikgahkm hy nk
ramqltak uby hyn ctki hli ubaolqy kihk wk axdtymk; bik hy nkm gbknym hbhkm
ym uby, dbym yn fbyi mkigrl ibigk val k hbngaiyk, hacl, k nk myñltk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, ia ny nnyvó nk gktqk hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy, dltuby my
ubyhó yi yn naftl hy xyxltak yi mayttk xltyik, góxl my kqtyvaó k paicat nk
tymdbymqk, w kubynnl hy uby nk rknnó krygrkihl qtacl, mayihl qlhl fbtnk w
xyiqatk, w qki yi hkñl hy nk fbyik ldaiaói hy nk mai dkt hbngaiyk, w qlhkm
uby il vayiyi fayi gli nk gknahkh w pahynahkh hy nlm fbyilm ymgbhytlm.

k ymqkm tkeliym, mai tymdlihyt gli kncbik, my nyvkiqó mkigrl hy nk mannk,
w, gli dkmlm ubyhlm, yn gbytdl kclfakhl w yn hyhl dbymql mlfty nlm nkfalm,
kihbvl dlt qlhk nk mknk nyvkiqkihl nlm hlmynym; w nbycl, ymql rygrl, my
vlnvaó k myiqkt w haol:

-krltk, myñltk xík, uby ry vamql uby il ilm ymgbgrk ikhay hy mlnkdk, pbytk
hy nlm gatgbimqkiqym, mai qyxlt ia mlftymknql tymdlihyté k nl uby my xy rk
dtycbiqkhl, w k qlhl kubynnl uby my xy dtycbiqkty; w nl dtaxytl uby hacl ym
uby wl qyicl k xa myñlt hli ubaolqy dlt nlgl tyxkqkhl, dbymql uby kncbikm
vygym hagy glmkm uby, k xa dktygyt, w kbi hy qlhlm kubynnlm uby ny
ymgbgrki, mli qki hamgtyqkm w dlt qki fbyi gkttan yigkxaikhkm, uby yn xymxl
mkqkiám il nkm dlhtík hygat xyoltym; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, vythkhytkxyiqy w
mai ymgtúdbnl, k xí my xy rk kmyiqkhl uby ym bi xyiqygkql. dbym, glxl wl
qyicl ymql yi yn xkcíi, xy kqtyvl k rkgytny gtyyt nl uby il nnyvk daym ia
gkfyek, glxl pby kubynnl hy nk tymdbymqk hy nk gktqk, w nl hy rkftá myam l
lgrl híkm, uby kúi il ymqá yi ramqltak; glivayiy k mkfyt: nl hyn yigkiql hy
xa myñltk hlñk hbngaiyk, uby ny ry hkhl k yiqyihyt uby ymqá yigkiqkhk, il
mayihl xám vythkh uby dlt nlm gyttlm hy Úfyhk.

tlcóny nk hbubymk uby ny gliqkmy kubyn yigkiqkxyiql l fbtnk, w mkigrl my nl
gliqó qlhl hyn xymxl xlhl uby rkfík dkmkhl, hy uby il dlgl cbmql tygafaytli
nlm lwyiqym; w, dtlmacbayihl yi mb dnáqagk, haol nk hbubymk:

-hy nl uby yn fbyi mkigrl xy rk gliqkhl xy kihk ftaigkihl bi ymgtúdbnl yi
yn knxk w bi gaytql mbmbttl nnyck k xam líhlm, uby xy hagy: ''dbym hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk ym nlgl, xyicbkhl w xyiqygkql, w mkigrl dkiek mb
ymgbhytl nl glilgy, w, gli qlhl yml, ny matvy w ny macby w vk kqyiahl k nkm
vkikm dtlxymkm mbwkm, mai hbhk kncbik hyfy hy myt én xám nlgl w qliql uby
mb kxl; w, mayihl ymql kmí, glxl nl ym, xkn gliqkhl qy mytá, myñltk
hbubymk, ma kn qkn mkigrl dkiek ny hkm íimbnk uby clfaytiy, dltuby yn uby
il mkfy clfytiktmy k mí, ¿góxl mkftá clfytikt k lqtlm?''

-dkt halm, myñltk -haol mkigrl-, uby ymy ymgtúdbnl vayiy gli dktql hytygrl;
dytl híckny vbymk xytgyh uby rkfny gnktl, l glxl ubamayty, uby wl glilegl
uby hagy vythkh: uby ma wl pbytk hamgtyql, híkm rk uby rkfík hy rkfyt
hyokhl k xa kxl. dytl émqk pby xa mbytqy, w émqk xa xknkihkiek; il dbyhl
xám, mycbatny qyicl: mlxlm hy bi xamxl nbckt, ry glxahl mb dki, ubaétlny
fayi, ym kctkhygahl, halxy mbm dlnnailm, w, mlfty qlhl, wl mlw payn; w kmí,
ym axdlmafny uby ilm dbyhk kdktqkt lqtl mbgyml uby yn hy nk dknk w kekhói.
w ma vbymqtk knqkiytík il ubamayty uby my xy hé yn dtlxyqahl clfaytil, hy
xyilm xy rael halm, w dlhtík myt uby yn il hátxyny tyhbihkmy yi dtl hy xa
gligayigak; uby, xkcbytk qliql, my xy yiqayihy kubyn typtái hy ''dlt mb xkn
ny ikgaytli knkm k nk rltxack''; w kbi dlhtík myt uby my pbymy xám kíik
mkigrl ymgbhytl kn gaynl, uby il mkigrl clfytikhlt. qki fbyi dki rkgyi kubí
glxl yi ptkigak; w hy ilgry qlhlm nlm ckqlm mli dkthlm, w kmke hy
hymhagrkhk ym nk dytmlik uby k nkm hlm hy nk qkthy il my rk hymkwbikhl; w
il rkw ymqóxkcl uby myk bi dknxl xkwlt uby lqtl, yn gbkn my dbyhy nnyikt,
glxl mbyny hygatmy, hy dkok w hy ryil; w nkm kvygaqkm hyn gkxdl qayiyi k
halm dlt mb dtlvyyhlt w hymdyimytl; w xám gknayiqki gbkqtl vktkm hy dkñl hy
gbyigk uby lqtkm gbkqtl hy níxamqy hy myclvak; w kn hyokt ymqy xbihl w
xyqytilm nk qayttk khyiqtl, dlt qki ymqtygrk myihk vk yn dtíigady glxl yn
oltiknytl, w il lgbdk xám daym hy qayttk yn gbytdl hyn dkdk uby yn hyn
mkgtamqái, kbiuby myk xám knql yn bil uby yn lqtl; uby kn yiqtkt yi yn rlwl
qlhlm ilm kobmqkxlm w yiglcyxlm, l ilm rkgyi kobmqkt w yiglcyt, xkn uby ilm
dymy w k fbyikm ilgrym. w qltil k hygat uby ma vbymqtk myñltík il xy
ubamayty hkt nk íimbnk dlt qliql, wl mkfté il hátmyxy ikhk dlt hamgtyql; w
wl ry líhl hygat uby hyqtám hy nk gtbe ymqá yn hakfnl, w uby il ym ltl qlhl
nl uby tynbgy, w uby hy yiqty nlm fbywym, ktkhlm w glwbihkm mkgktli kn
nkftkhlt jkxfk dktk myt tyw hy ymdkñk, w hy yiqty nlm ftlgkhlm, dkmkqayxdlm
w taubyekm mkgktli k tlhtacl dktk myt glxahl hy gbnyftkm, ma ym uby nkm
qtlvkm hy nlm tlxkigym kiqacblm il xayiqyi.

-w ¡góxl uby il xayiqyi! -haol k ymqk mkeói hlñk tlhtícbye nk hbyñk, uby
ytk bik hy nkm ymgbgrkiqym-: uby bi tlxkigy rkw uby hagy uby xyqaytli kn
tyw tlhtacl, vavl vavl, yi bik qbxfk nnyik hy mkdlm, gbnyftkm w nkcktqlm, w
uby hy knní k hlm híkm haol yn tyw hymhy hyiqtl hy nk qbxfk, gli vle
hlnayiqy w fkok:

wk xy glxyi, wk xy glxyi

dlt hl xám dygkhl rkfík;

w, mycúi ymql, xbgrk tkeói qayiy ymqy myñlt yi hygat uby ubayty xám myt xám
nkftkhlt uby tyw, ma ny rki hy glxyt mkfkihaokm.

il dbhl nk hbubymk qyiyt nk tamk, lwyihl nk maxdnagahkh hy mb hbyñk, ia
hyoó hy khxatktmy yi lít nkm tkeliym w typtkiym hy mkigrl, k ubayi haol:

-wk mkfy yn fbyi mkigrl uby nl uby bik vye dtlxyqy bi gkfknnytl dtlgbtk
gbxdnatnl, kbiuby ny gbymqy nk vahk. yn hbuby, xa myñlt w xktahl, kbiuby il
ym hy nlm kihkiqym, il dlt yml hyok hy myt gkfknnytl, w kmí, gbxdnatá nk
dknkftk hy nk dtlxyqahk íimbnk, k dymkt hy nk aivahak w hy nk xknagak hyn
xbihl. ymqé mkigrl hy fbyi áiaxl, uby gbkihl xyilm nl dayimy my vytá
myiqkhl yi nk mannk hy mb íimbnk w yi nk hy mb ymqkhl, w yxdbñktá mb
clfaytil, uby gli lqtl hy ftlgkhl hy qtym knqlm nl hymygry. nl uby wl ny
yigktcl ym uby xaty góxl clfaytik mbm vkmknnlm, khvatqayihl uby qlhlm mli
nyknym w fayi ikgahlm.

-yml hy clfytiktnlm fayi -tymdlihaó mkigrl- il rkw dktk ubé yigktcátxynl,
dltuby wl mlw gktaqkqavl hy xíl w qyicl glxdkmaói hy nlm dlftym; w k ubayi
gbygy w kxkmk, il ny rbtqym rlckek; w dktk xa mkiqacbkhk uby il xy rki hy
ygrkt hkhl pknml; mlw dyttl vayol, w yiqayihl qlhl qbm, qbm, w mé
hymdkfanktxy k mbm qayxdlm, w il glimayiql uby xy kihyi xbmktkñkm kiqy nlm
lolm, dltuby mé hóihy xy kdtayqk yn ekdkql: híclnl dltuby nlm fbyilm
qyihtái glixacl xkil w gligkvahkh, w nlm xknlm, ia day ia yiqtkhk. w
dktégyxy k xí uby yi ymql hy nlm clfaytilm qlhl ym glxyiekt, w dlhtík myt
uby k ubaigy híkm hy clfytikhlt xy glxaymy nkm xkilm qtkm yn lpagal w
mbdaymy xám hén uby hy nk nkflt hyn gkxdl, yi uby xy ry gtakhl.

-vlm qyiéam tkeói tkeói, mkigrl -haol nk hbubymk-, uby ikhay ikgy yimyñkhl,
w hy nlm rlxftym my rkgyi nlm lfamdlm, uby il hy nkm dayhtkm. dytl,
vlnvayihl k nk dnáqagk uby dlgl rk qtkqáfkxlm hyn yigkiql hy nk myñltk
hbngaiyk, qyicl dlt glmk gaytqk w xám uby kvytacbkhk uby kubynnk
axkcaikgaói uby mkigrl qbvl hy fbtnkt k mb myñlt w hktny k yiqyihyt uby nk
nkftkhltk ytk hbngaiyk, w uby ma mb myñlt il nk glilgík hyfík hy myt dlt
ymqkt yigkiqkhk, qlhk pby aivyigaói hy kncbil hy nlm yigkiqkhltym uby kn
myñlt hli ubaolqy dytmacbyi; dltuby tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy wl mé hy fbyik
dktqy uby nk vannkik uby hal yn ftaigl mlfty nk dlnnaik ytk w ym hbngaiyk
hyn qlflml, w uby yn fbyi mkigrl, dyimkihl myt yn yickñkhlt, ym yn
yickñkhl; w il rkw dliyt xám hbhk yi ymqk vythkh uby yi nkm glmkm uby ibigk
vaxlm; w mydk yn myñlt mkigrl dkiek uby qkxfaéi qyiyxlm kgá yigkiqkhltym
uby ilm ubaytyi fayi, w ilm hagyi nl uby dkmk dlt yn xbihl, dbtk w
myigannkxyiqy, mai yityhlm ia xáubaikm; w gtékxy mkigrl uby nk vannkik
ftaigkhltk ytk w ym hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby ymqá yigkiqkhk glxl nk xkhty
uby nk dktaó; w gbkihl xyilm ilm dyimyxlm, nk rkfyxlm hy vyt yi mb dtldak
pacbtk, w yiqligym mknhtá mkigrl hyn yickñl yi uby vavy.

-fayi dbyhy myt qlhl yml -haol mkigrl dkiek-; w kcltk ubaytl gtyyt nl uby
xa kxl gbyiqk hy nl uby val yi nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm, hlihy hagy uby val k
nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml yi yn xymxl qtkoy w ráfaql uby wl haoy uby nk
rkfík vamql gbkihl nk yigkiqé dlt mlnl xa cbmql; w qlhl hyfaó hy myt kn
tyvém, glxl vbymk xytgyh, myñltk xík, hagy, dltuby hy xa tbai aicyial il my
dbyhy ia hyfy dtymbxat uby pkftagkmy yi bi aimqkiqy qki kcbhl yxfbmqy, ia
gtyl wl uby xa kxl ym qki nlgl uby gli qki pnkgk w xkctk dytmbkmaói glxl nk
xík gtywymy bik glmk qki pbytk hy qlhl qétxail. dytl, myñltk, il dlt ymql
mytá fayi uby vbymqtk flihkh xy qyick dlt xknévlnl, dbym il ymqá lfnackhl
bi dlttl glxl wl k qknkhtkt nlm dyimkxayiqlm w xknagakm hy nlm démaxlm
yigkiqkhltym: wl paicí kubynnl dlt ymgkdktxy hy nkm tañkm hy xa myñlt hli
ubaolqy, w il gli aiqyigaói hy lpyihytny; w ma rk mknahl kn tyvém, halm
ymqá yi yn gaynl, uby obeck nlm gltkeliym.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol nk hbubymk-; dytl híckxy kcltk, mkigrl, ubé ym ymql
uby hagy hy nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm, uby cbmqktík mkfytnl.

yiqligym mkigrl dkiek ny gliqó dbiql dlt dbiql nl uby ubyhk hagrl kgytgk hy
nk qkn kvyiqbtk. lwyihl nl gbkn nk hbubymk, haol:

-hymqy mbgyml my dbyhy aipytat uby, dbym yn ctki hli ubaolqy hagy uby val
knní k nk xymxk nkftkhltk uby mkigrl val k nk mknahk hyn qlflml, mai hbhk
ym hbngaiyk, w uby kihki dlt kubí nlm yigkiqkhltym xbw namqlm w
hyxkmakhkxyiqy gbtalmlm.

-yml hacl wl -haol mkigrl dkiek-, uby ma xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml ymqá
yigkiqkhk, mb hkñl; uby wl il xy qyicl hy qlxkt, wl, gli nlm yiyxaclm hy xa
kxl, uby hyfyi hy myt xbgrlm w xknlm. vythkh myk uby nk uby wl va pby bik
nkftkhltk, w dlt nkftkhltk nk qbvy, w dlt qkn nkftkhltk nk obecbé; w ma
kubénnk ytk hbngaiyk, il rk hy ymqkt k xa gbyiqk, ia rk hy glttyt dlt xí, l
mlfty ynnl, xltyik. il, mail áihyimy k gkhk qtaubyqy glixacl k haxy w
hatyqy, "mkigrl nl haol, mkigrl nl rael, mkigrl qltió w mkigrl vlnvaó",
glxl ma mkigrl pbymy kncúi ubayiubaytk, w il pbymy yn xamxl mkigrl dkiek,
yn uby kihk wk yi naftlm dlt ymy xbihl khynkiqy, mycúi xy haol mkimói
gkttkmgl, uby, dlt nl xyilm, ym dytmlik fkgrannytkhk dlt mknkxkigk, w nlm
qknym il dbyhyi xyiqat ma il ym gbkihl my nym kiqlok l nym vayiy xbw k
gbyiql; kmí uby, il rkw dktk ubé ikhay my qlxy glixacl, w dbym uby qyicl
fbyik pkxk, w, mycúi lí hygat k xa myñlt, uby xám vkny yn fbyi ilxfty uby
nkm xbgrkm taubyekm, yigáoyixy ymy clfaytil w vytái xktkvannkm; uby ubayi
rk mahl fbyi ymgbhytl mytá fbyi clfytikhlt.

-qlhl gbkiql kubí rk hagrl yn fbyi mkigrl -haol nk hbubymk- mli myiqyigakm
gkqliakikm, l, dlt nl xyilm, mkgkhkm hy nkm xymxkm yiqtkñkm hyn xamxl
xagkyn vytail, pnltyiqafbm lggahaq kiiam. yi pai, yi pai, rkfnkihl k mb
xlhl, hyfkol hy xknk gkdk mbyny rkfyt fbyi fyfyhlt.

-yi vythkh, myñltk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby yi xa vahk ry fyfahl hy xknagak;
gli myh fayi dlhtík myt, dltuby il qyicl ikhk hy radógtaqk: fyfl gbkihl
qyicl ckik, w gbkihl il nk qyicl w gbkihl xy nl hki, dlt il dktygyt l
xynaihtlml l xkngtakhl; uby k bi ftaiham hy bi kxacl, ¿ubé gltkeói rk hy
rkfyt qki hy xátxln uby il rkck nk tkeói? dytl, kbiuby nkm gknel, il nkm
yimbgal; gbkiql xám, uby nlm ymgbhytlm hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, gkma hy
lthaiktal fyfyi kcbk, dltuby mayxdty kihki dlt pnltymqkm, mynvkm w dtkhlm,
xliqkñkm w tamglm, mai rknnkt bik xamytaglthak hy vail, ma hki dlt ynnk bi
lol.

-wl nl gtyl kmí -tymdlihaó nk hbubymk-. w dlt krltk, váwkmy mkigrl k
tydlmkt, uby hymdbém rkfnktyxlm xám nktcl w hktyxlm lthyi glxl vkwk dtymql
k yigkoktmy, glxl én hagy, kubyn clfaytil.

hy ibyvl ny fymó nkm xkilm mkigrl k nk hbubymk, w ny mbdnagó ny ragaymy
xytgyh hy uby my qbvaymy fbyik gbyiqk gli mb tbgal, dltuby ytk nk nbxfty hy
mbm lolm.

-¿ubé tbgal ym émqy? -dtycbiqó nk hbubymk.

-xa kmil -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby dlt il ilxftktny gli ymqy ilxfty, ny mbynl
nnkxkt yn tbgal; w k ymqk myñltk hbyñk ny tlcbé, gbkihl yiqté yi ymqy
gkmqannl, qbvaymy gbyiqk gli én, w keltómy hy xkiytk glxl ma nk rbfaytk
hagrl uby ytk pyk l vayok, hyfayihl myt xám dtldal w ikqbtkn hy nkm hbyñkm
dyimkt obxyiqlm uby kbqltaekt nkm mknkm. ¡lr, vánkxy halm, w gbái xkn
ymqkfk gli ymqkm myñltkm bi rahkncl hy xa nbckt!

-mytík kncúi vannkil -haol hlñk tlhtícbye, nk hbyñk-, uby ma én pbytk
rahkncl w fayi ikgahl, én nkm dbmaytk mlfty yn gbytil hy nk nbik.

-kcltk fayi -haol nk hbubymk-, il rkwk xám: gknny hlñk tlhtícbye w
mlmaécbymy yn myñlt dkiek, w ubéhymy k xa gktcl yn tycknl hyn tbgal; uby,
dlt myt knrkok hy mkigrl, ny dlihté wl mlfty nkm iañkm hy xam lolm.

-yi nk gkfknnytaek fkmqk uby ymqé -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby mlfty nkm iañkm
hy nlm lolm hy vbymqtk ctkihyek ia én ia wl mlxlm hacilm hy ymqkt mónl bi
xlxyiql, w kmí nl glimaiqatík wl glxl hktxy hy dbñknkhkm; uby, kbiuby hagy
xa myñlt uby yi nkm gltqymíkm kiqym my rk hy dythyt dlt gktqk hy xám uby hy
xyilm, yi nkm obxyiqanym w kmí iañkm my rk hy at gli yn glxdám yi nk xkil w
gli xyhahl qétxail.

-nnévyny -haol nk hbubymk- mkigrl kn clfaytil, w knná ny dlhtá tycknkt glxl
ubamayty, w kbi obfanktny hyn qtkfkol.

-il dayimy vbymk xytgyh, myñltk hbubymk, uby rk hagrl xbgrl -haol mkigrl-;
uby wl ry vamql at xám hy hlm kmilm k nlm clfaytilm, w uby nnyvkmy wl yn
xíl il mytík glmk ibyvk.

nkm tkeliym hy mkigrl tyilvktli yi nk hbubymk nk tamk w yn gliqyiql; w,
yivaáihlny k tydlmkt, ynnk pby k hkt gbyiqk kn hbuby hy nl uby gli én rkfík
dkmkhl, w yiqty nlm hlm haytli qtkek w lthyi hy rkgyt bik fbtnk k hli
ubaolqy uby pbymy pkxlmk w vaiaymy fayi gli yn ymqanl gkfknnytymgl, yi yn
gbkn ny ragaytli xbgrkm, qki dtldakm w hamgtyqkm, uby mli nkm xyoltym
kvyiqbtkm uby yi ymqk ctkihy ramqltak my gliqayiyi.





gkdíqbnl zzzav. uby gbyiqk hy nk ilqagak uby my qbvl hy góxl my rkfík hy
hymyigkiqkt nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby ym bik hy nkm kvyiqbtkm xám
pkxlmkm hymqy naftl


ctkihy ytk yn cbmql uby tygyfíki yn hbuby w nk hbubymk hy nk glivytmkgaói
hy hli ubaolqy w hy nk hy mkigrl dkiek; w, glipatxáihlmy yi nk aiqyigaói
uby qyiíki hy rkgytnym kncbikm fbtnkm uby nnyvkmyi vamnbxftym w kdktayigakm
hy kvyiqbtkm, qlxktli xlqavl hy nk uby hli ubaolqy wk nym rkfík gliqkhl hy
nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm, dktk rkgytny bik uby pbymy pkxlmk (dytl hy nl uby
xám nk hbubymk my khxatkfk ytk uby nk maxdnagahkh hy mkigrl pbymy qkiqk uby
rbfaymy vyiahl k gtyyt myt vythkh aipknafny uby hbngaiyk hyn qlflml
ymqbvaymy yigkiqkhk, rkfayihl mahl én xymxl yn yigkiqkhlt w yn yxfbmqytl hy
kubyn iyclgal); w kmí, rkfayihl hkhl lthyi k mbm gtakhlm hy qlhl nl uby
rkfíki hy rkgyt, hy knní k myam híkm ny nnyvktli k gkek hy xliqytík, gli
qkiql kdktkql hy xliqytlm w gkekhltym glxl dbhaytk nnyvkt bi tyw gltlikhl.
haétliny k hli ubaolqy bi vymqahl hy xliqy w k mkigrl lqtl vythy, hy
paiímaxl dkñl; dytl hli ubaolqy il my ny ubaml dliyt, hagayihl uby lqtl hík
rkfík hy vlnvyt kn hbtl yoytgagal hy nkm ktxkm w uby il dlhík nnyvkt
glimacl cbkthkttldkm ia tydlmqytíkm. mkigrl mí qlxó yn uby ny haytli, gli
aiqyigaói hy vyihytny yi nk dtaxytk lgkmaói uby dbhaymy.

nnyckhl, dbym, yn ymdytkhl hík, ktxómy hli ubaolqy, vamqaómy mkigrl, w,
yigaxk hy mb tbgal, uby il ny ubaml hyokt kbiuby ny hkfki bi gkfknnl, my
xyqaó yiqty nk qtldk hy nlm xliqytlm. nk hbubymk mknaó faekttkxyiqy
khytyekhk, w hli ubaolqy, hy dbtl gltqém w glxyhahl, qlxó nk tayihk hy mb
dknkptéi, kbiuby yn hbuby il ubytík glimyiqatnl, w, paiknxyiqy, nnycktli k
bi flmuby uby yiqty hlm knqímaxkm xliqkñkm ymqkfk, hlihy, qlxkhlm nlm
dbymqlm, dktkiekm w vytyhkm, w tydktqahk nk cyiqy dlt hapytyiqym dbymqlm,
my glxyieó nk gkek gli ctkihy ymqtbyihl, ctaqk w vlgytík, hy xkiytk uby
bilm k lqtlm il dlhíki lítmy, kmí dlt yn nkhtahl hy nlm dyttlm glxl dlt yn
mli hy nkm flgaikm.

kdyómy nk hbubymk, w, gli bi kcbhl vyikfnl yi nkm xkilm, my dbml yi bi
dbymql dlt hlihy ynnk mkfík uby mlníki vyiat kncbilm okfkníym. kdyómy
kmaxamxl yn hbuby w hli ubaolqy, w dbmaétlimy k mbm nkhlm; mkigrl my dbml
hyqtám hy qlhlm, mai kdyktmy hyn tbgal, k ubayi il lmktk hymkxdktkt, dltuby
il ny mbgyhaymy kncúi hymxái. w, kdyikm rkfíki myiqkhl yn day w dbymql yi
knk gli lqtlm xbgrlm gtakhlm mbwlm, gbkihl, kglmkhl hy nlm dyttlm w mycbahl
hy nlm gkekhltym, vaytli uby rkgak ynnlm vyiík bi hymxymbtkhl okfkní,
gtboayihl hayiqym w glnxannlm w kttlokihl ymdbxk dlt nk flgk; w yi
vaéihlny, yxftkekihl mb ymgbhl w dbymqk xkil k mb ymdkhk, my khynkiqó k
tygyfatny hli ubaolqy. nl xymxl rael yn hbuby gli mb vyikfnl; dytl k qlhlm
my khynkiqktk nk hbubymk, ma yn hbuby il my nl ymqltfktk. mónl mkigrl, yi
vayihl kn vknayiqy kiaxkn, hymkxdktó kn tbgal w hal k glttyt gbkiql dbhl,
w, dtlgbtkihl mbfatmy mlfty bik knqk yigaik, il pby dlmafny; kiqym, ymqkihl
wk k nk xaqkh hén, kmahl hy bik tkxk, dbcikihl mbfat k nk gaxk, pby qki
gltql hy vyiqbtk w qki hymctkgakhl, uby my hymckoó nk tkxk, w, kn vyiat kn
mbynl, my ubyhó yi yn katy, kmahl hy bi ckigrl hy nk yigaik, mai dlhyt
nnyckt kn mbynl. w, vaéihlmy kmí, w uby yn mkwl vythy my ny tkmckfk, w
dktygaéihlny uby ma kubyn paytl kiaxkn knní knnyckfk ny dlhík kngkiekt,
glxyieó k hkt qkiqlm ctaqlm w k dyhat mlglttl gli qkiql kríigl, uby qlhlm
nlm uby ny líki w il ny vyíki gtywytli uby ymqkfk yiqty nlm hayiqym hy
kncbik paytk.

paiknxyiqy, yn glnxannbhl okfkní ubyhó kqtkvymkhl hy nkm gbgrannkm hy
xbgrlm vyikfnlm uby my ny dbmaytli hynkiqy; w, vlnvayihl nk gkfyek hli
ubaolqy k nlm ctaqlm hy mkigrl, uby wk dlt ynnlm ny rkfík glilgahl, valny
dyihayiqy hy nk yigaik w nk gkfyek kfkol, w kn tbgal obiql k én, uby il ny
hymkxdktó yi mb gknkxahkh; w hagy gahy rkxyqy uby dlgkm vygym val k mkigrl
dkiek mai vyt kn tbgal, ia kn tbgal mai vyt k mkigrl: qkn ytk nk kxamqkh w
fbyik py uby yiqty nlm hlm my cbkthkfki.

nnycó hli ubaolqy w hymglncó k mkigrl; yn gbkn, vaéihlmy nafty w yi yn
mbynl, xató nl hymckttkhl hyn mkwl hy xliqy, w dymóny yi yn knxk; uby dyimó
uby qyiík yi yn vymqahl bi xkwltkecl. yi ymql, kqtkvymktli kn okfkní
dlhytlml mlfty bik kgéxank, w, gbftaéihlny gli xkqkm hy tlxytl w gli tkxkm
hy xatql, ny nnyvktli, glxl yi myñkn hy vaqltalmlm hymdlolm, k bikm ctkihym
qayihkm hy gkxdkñk uby yi nk xaqkh hyn flmuby ymqkfki dbymqkm, hlihy
rknnktli nkm xymkm yi lthyi w nk glxahk khytyekhk, qki mbxdqblmk w ctkihy,
uby my ygrkfk fayi hy vyt yi ynnk nk ctkihyek w xkciapagyigak hy ubayi nk
hkfk. mkigrl, xlmqtkihl nkm nnkckm k nk hbubymk hy mb tlql vymqahl, haol:

-ma ymqk gkek pbytk hy nayftym l hy dkoktannlm, mycbtl ymqbvaytk xa mkwl hy
vytmy yi ymqy ymqtyxl. wl il mé ubé cbmql my tygafy hy ymdytkt k bi kiaxkn
uby, ma lm kngkiek gli bi glnxannl, lm dbyhy ubaqkt nk vahk; wl xy kgbythl
rkfyt líhl gkiqkt bi tlxkigy kiqacbl uby hagy:

   hy nlm lmlm mykm glxahl,
   glxl pkvank yn ilxftkhl.

-Émy pby bi tyw clhl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby, wyihl k gkek hy xliqytík, ny
glxaó bi lml.

-yml ym nl uby wl hacl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: uby il ubyttík wl uby nlm
dtíigadym w nlm tywym my dbmaymyi yi myxyokiqym dynactlm, k qtbygl hy bi
cbmql uby dktygy uby il ny rkfík hy myt, dbym glimamqy yi xkqkt k bi kiaxkn
uby il rk glxyqahl hynaql kncbil.

-kiqym lm yickñáam, mkigrl -tymdlihaó yn hbuby-, dltuby yn yoytgagal hy nk
gkek hy xliqy ym yn xám glivyiayiqy w iygymktal dktk nlm tywym w dtíigadym
uby lqtl kncbil. nk gkek ym bik axkcyi hy nk cbyttk: rkw yi ynnk
ymqtkqkcyxkm, kmqbgakm, aimahakm dktk vyigyt k mb mknvl kn yiyxacl;
dkhégyimy yi ynnk ptílm ctkihímaxlm w gknltym aiqlnytkfnym; xyilmgáfkmy yn
lgal w yn mbyñl, glttlfótkimy nkm pbytekm, kcaníqkimy nlm xayxftlm hyn uby
nk bmk, w, yi tymlnbgaói, ym yoytgagal uby my dbyhy rkgyt mai dytobagal hy
ikhay w gli cbmql hy xbgrlm; w nl xyolt uby én qayiy ym uby il ym dktk
qlhlm, glxl nl ym yn hy nlm lqtlm céiytlm hy gkek, yzgydql yn hy nk
vlnkqytík, uby qkxfaéi ym mónl dktk tywym w ctkihym myñltym. kmí uby, ¡lr
mkigrl!, xbhkh hy ldaiaói, w, gbkihl myáam clfytikhlt, lgbdklm yi nk gkek w
vytéam glxl lm vkny bi dki dlt gayiql.

-yml il -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: yn fbyi clfytikhlt, nk daytik ubyftkhk w yi
gkmk. ¡fbyil mytík uby vaiaymyi nlm iyclgakiqym k fbmgktny pkqackhlm w én
ymqbvaymy yi yn xliqy rlncáihlmy! ¡kmí yirltkxknk kihktík yn clfaytil! xík
py, myñlt, nk gkek w nlm dkmkqayxdlm xám rki hy myt dktk nlm rlnckekiym uby
dktk nlm clfytikhltym. yi nl uby wl dayiml yiqtyqyiytxy ym yi obckt kn
qtabipl yivahkhl nkm dkmgbkm, w k nlm flnlm nlm hlxaiclm w paymqkm; uby
ymkm gkekm ia gkelm il hagyi gli xa glihagaói ia rkgyi gli xa gligayigak.

-dnyck k halm, mkigrl, uby kmí myk, dltuby hyn hagrl kn rygrl rkw ctki
qtygrl.

-rkwk nl uby rbfayty -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby kn fbyi dkckhlt il ny hbynyi
dtyihkm, w xám vkny kn uby halm kwbhk uby kn uby xbgrl xkhtbck, w qtadkm
nnyvki daym, uby il daym k qtadkm; ubaytl hygat uby ma halm xy kwbhk, w wl
rkcl nl uby hyfl gli fbyik aiqyigaói, mai hbhk uby clfytikté xyolt uby bi
cytapknqy. ¡il, mail dóickixy yn hyhl yi nk flgk w vytái ma kdtayql l il!

-¡xknhaql mykm hy halm w hy qlhlm mbm mkiqlm, mkigrl xknhaql -haol hli
ubaolqy-, w gbáihl mytá yn hík, glxl lqtkm xbgrkm vygym ry hagrl, hlihy wl
qy vyk rkfnkt mai typtkiym bik tkeói glttayiqy w gligytqkhk! vbymqtkm
ctkihyekm hyoyi k ymqy qliql, myñltym xílm, uby nym xlnytá nkm knxkm, il
mónl dbymqkm yiqty hlm, mail yiqty hlm xan typtkiym, qtkíhlm qki k mkeói w
qki k qayxdl gbkiql ny hé halm k én nk mknbh, l k xí ma nlm ubyttík
ymgbgrkt.

-nlm typtkiym hy mkigrl dkiek -haol nk hbubymk-, dbymql uby mli xám uby nlm
hyn glxyihkhlt ctaycl, il dlt yml mli yi xyilm hy ymqaxkt, dlt nk ftyvyhkh
hy nkm myiqyigakm. hy xí mé hygat uby xy hki xám cbmql uby lqtlm, kbiuby
myki xyolt qtkíhlm w gli xám mkeói kglxlhkhlm.

gli ymqlm w lqtlm yiqtyqyiahlm tkelikxayiqlm, mknaytli hy nk qayihk kn
flmuby, w yi tyubytat kncbikm dktkiekm, w dtymql, my nym dkmó yn hík w my
nym vail nk ilgry, w il qki gnktk ia qki mymck glxl nk mkeói hyn qayxdl
dyhík, uby ytk yi nk xaqkh hyn vytkil; dytl bi gaytql gnktlymgbtl uby qtbol
glimacl kwbhó xbgrl k nk aiqyigaói hy nlm hbubym; w, kmí glxl glxyieó k
kilgrygyt, bi dlgl xám khynkiqy hyn gtydúmgbnl, k hymrltk dktygaó uby qlhl
yn flmuby dlt qlhkm gbkqtl dktqym my kthík, w nbycl my lwytli dlt kubí w
dlt knní, w dlt kgá w dlt kgbnná, aipaiaqkm gltiyqkm w lqtlm aimqtbxyiqlm
hy cbyttk, glxl hy xbgrkm qtldkm hy gkfknnytík uby dlt yn flmuby dkmkfk. nk
nbe hyn pbycl, yn mli hy nlm fénaglm aimqtbxyiqlm, gkma gycktli w kqtliktli
nlm lolm w nlm líhlm hy nlm gatgbimqkiqym, w kbi hy qlhlm nlm uby yi yn
flmuby ymqkfki. nbycl my lwytli aipaiaqlm nynaníym, kn bml hy xltlm gbkihl
yiqtki yi nkm fkqknnkm, mliktli qtlxdyqkm w gnktaiym, tyqbxfktli qkxfltym,
tymliktli dípktlm, gkma qlhlm k bi qayxdl, qki gliqail w qki kdtaymk, uby
il qbvaytk myiqahl yn uby il ubyhktk mai én kn mli glipbml hy qkiqlm
aiqtbxyiqlm. dkmxómy yn hbuby, mbmdyihaómy nk hbubymk, khxatómy hli
ubaolqy, qyxfnó mkigrl dkiek, w, paiknxyiqy, kbi rkmqk nlm xymxlm mkfahltym
hy nk gkbmk my ymdkiqktli. gli yn qyxlt nym glcaó yn manyigal, w bi
dlmqannói uby yi qtkoy hy hyxlial nym dkmó dlt hynkiqy, qlgkihl yi vle hy
gltiyqk bi rbygl w hymxymbtkhl gbytil, uby bi tligl w ymdkiqlml mli
hymdyhík.

-¡rlnk, rytxkil glttyl! -haol yn hbuby-, ¿ubaéi mlam, khóihy vkam, w ubé
cyiqy hy cbyttk ym nk uby dlt ymqy flmuby dktygy uby kqtkvaymk?

k nl uby tymdlihaó yn glttyl gli vle rlttímlik w hymyipkhkhk:

-wl mlw yn hakfnl; vlw k fbmgkt k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk; nk cyiqy uby
dlt kubí vayiy mli myam qtldkm hy yigkiqkhltym, uby mlfty bi gkttl
qtabipkiqy qtkyi k nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml. yigkiqkhk vayiy gli yn
cknnkthl ptkigém xliqymailm, k hkt lthyi k hli ubaolqy hy góxl rk hy myt
hymyigkiqkhk nk qkn myñltk.

-ma vlm pbétkhym hakfnl, glxl hygím w glxl vbymqtk pacbtk xbymqtk, wk
rbfaétkhym glilgahl kn qkn gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, dbym ny
qyiéam hynkiqy.

-yi halm w yi xa gligayigak -tymdlihaó yn hakfnl- uby il xatkfk yi ynnl,
dltuby qtkacl yi qkiqkm glmkm havytqahlm nlm dyimkxayiqlm, uby hy nk
dtaigadkn k uby vyiík my xy lnvahkfk.

-mai hbhk -haol mkigrl- uby ymqy hyxlial hyfy hy myt rlxfty hy fayi w fbyi
gtamqakil, dltuby, k il mytnl, il obtktk yi halm w yi xa gligayigak. krltk
wl qyicl dktk xí uby kbi yi yn xymxl aipaytil hyfy hy rkfyt fbyik cyiqy.

nbycl yn hyxlial, mai kdyktmy, yigkxaikihl nk vamqk k hli ubaolqy, haol:

-k qa, yn gkfknnytl hy nlm nyliym (uby yiqty nkm ckttkm hynnlm qy vyk wl),
xy yivík yn hymctkgakhl dytl vknayiqy gkfknnytl xliqymailm, xkiháihlxy uby
hy mb dktqy qy hack uby ny ymdytym yi yn xamxl nbckt uby qy qldkty, k gkbmk
uby qtky glimacl k nk uby nnkxki hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, gli lthyi hy hktqy nk
uby ym xyiymqyt dktk hymyigkiqktnk. w, dlt il myt dktk xám xa vyiahk, il rk
hy myt xám xa ymqkhk: nlm hyxlialm glxl wl ubyhyi gliqacl, w nlm áicynym
fbyilm gli ymqlm myñltym.

w, yi hagayihl ymql, qlgó yn hymkpltkhl gbytil, w vlnvaó nkm ymdknhkm w
pbymy, mai ymdytkt tymdbymqk hy iaicbil.

tyilvómy nk khxatkgaói yi qlhlm, ymdygaknxyiqy yi mkigrl w hli ubaolqy: yi
mkigrl, yi vyt uby, k hymdygrl hy nk vythkh, ubytíki uby ymqbvaymy
yigkiqkhk hbngaiyk; yi hli ubaolqy, dlt il dlhyt kmycbtktmy ma ytk vythkh l
il nl uby ny rkfík dkmkhl yi nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm. w, ymqkihl ynyvkhl yi
ymqlm dyimkxayiqlm, yn hbuby ny haol:

-¿dayimk vbymqtk xytgyh ymdytkt, myñlt hli ubaolqy?

-dbym ¿il? -tymdlihaó én-. kubí ymdytkté aiqtédahl w pbytqy, ma xy vaiaymy
k yxfymqat qlhl yn aipaytil.

-dbym ma wl vyl lqtl hakfnl w lacl lqtl gbytil glxl yn dkmkhl, kmí ymdytkté
wl kubí glxl yi pnkihym -haol mkigrl.

yi ymql, my gyttó xám nk ilgry, w glxyiektli k hamgbttat xbgrkm nbgym dlt
yn flmuby, fayi kmí glxl hamgbttyi dlt yn gaynl nkm yzrknkgaliym mygkm hy
nk qayttk, uby dktygyi k ibymqtk vamqk ymqtynnkm uby glttyi. lwómy kmaxamxl
bi ymdkiqlml tbahl, kn xlhl hy kubyn uby my gkbmk hy nkm tbyhkm xkgaekm uby
mbynyi qtkyt nlm gkttlm hy fbywym, hy gbwl grattíl ámdytl w gliqaibkhl my
hagy uby rbwyi nlm nlflm w nlm lmlm, ma nlm rkw dlt hlihy dkmki. kñkhaómy k
qlhk ymqk qyxdymqkh lqtk uby nkm kbxyiqó qlhkm, uby pby uby dktygík
vythkhytkxyiqy uby k nkm gbkqtl dktqym hyn flmuby my ymqkfki hkihl k bi
xamxl qayxdl gbkqtl tyigbyiqtlm l fkqknnkm, dltuby knní mlikfk yn hbtl
ymqtbyihl hy ymdkiqlmk ktqannytík, kgbnná my hamdktkfki aipaiaqkm
ymgldyqkm, gytgk gkma mlikfki nkm vlgym hy nlm glxfkqayiqym, nyolm my
tyaqytkfki nlm nananíym kcktyilm.

paiknxyiqy, nkm gltiyqkm, nlm gbytilm, nkm flgaikm, nlm gnktaiym, nkm
qtlxdyqkm, nlm qkxfltym, nk ktqannytík, nlm ktgkfbgym, w, mlfty qlhl, yn
qyxytlml tbahl hy nlm gkttlm, pltxkfki qlhlm obiqlm bi mli qki glipbml w
qki rlttyihl, uby pby xyiymqyt uby hli ubaolqy my vknaymy hy qlhl mb
gltkeói dktk mbptatny; dytl yn hy mkigrl vail k qayttk, w hal gli én
hymxkwkhl yi nkm pknhkm hy nk hbubymk, nk gbkn ny tygafaó yi ynnkm, w k
ctki dtaymk xkihó uby ny ygrkmyi kcbk yi yn tlmqtl. ríelmy kmí, w én vlnvaó
yi mb kgbythl, k qayxdl uby wk bi gkttl hy nkm tygraikiqym tbyhkm nnyckfk k
kubyn dbymql.

qatáfkiny gbkqtl dytyelmlm fbywym, qlhlm gbfaytqlm hy dktkxyiqlm iyctlm; yi
gkhk gbytil qtkíki kqkhk w yigyihahk bik ctkihy rkgrk hy gytk, w yigaxk hyn
gkttl vyiík rygrl bi kmayiql knql, mlfty yn gbkn vyiík myiqkhl bi vyiytkfny
vayol, gli bik fktfk xám fnkigk uby nk xymxk iayvy, w qki nbyick uby ny
dkmkfk hy nk gaiqbtk; mb vymqahbtk ytk bik tldk nktck hy iyctl flgkgí, uby,
dlt vyiat yn gkttl nnyil hy aipaiaqkm nbgym, my dlhík fayi havamkt w
hamgytiat qlhl nl uby yi én vyiík. cbaáfkiny hlm pylm hyxlialm vymqahlm hyn
xymxl flgkgí, gli qki pylm tlmqtlm, uby mkigrl, rkfaéihlnlm vamql bik vye,
gyttó nlm lolm dlt il vytnlm lqtk. nnyckihl, dbym, yn gkttl k acbknkt kn
dbymql, my nyvkiqó hy mb knql kmayiql yn vayol vyiytkfny, w, dbymql yi day,
hkihl bik ctki vle, haol:

-wl mlw yn mkfal natckihyl.

w dkmó yn gkttl khynkiqy, mai rkfnkt xám dknkftk. qtkm émqy dkmó lqtl gkttl
hy nk xamxk xkiytk, gli lqtl vayol yiqtliaekhl; yn gbkn, rkgayihl uby yn
gkttl my hyqbvaymy, gli vle il xyilm ctkvy uby yn lqtl, haol:

-wl mlw yn mkfal knubapy, yn ctkihy kxacl hy btckihk nk hymglilgahk.

w dkmó khynkiqy.

nbycl, dlt yn xamxl gliqaiyiqy, nnycó lqtl gkttl; dytl yn uby vyiík myiqkhl
yi yn qtlil il ytk vayol glxl nlm hyxám, mail rlxftói tlfbmql w hy xknk
gkqkhbtk, yn gbkn, kn nnyckt, nyvkiqáihlmy yi day, glxl nlm lqtlm, haol gli
vle xám tligk w xám yihakfnkhk:

-wl mlw ktgknábm yn yigkiqkhlt, yiyxacl xltqkn hy kxkhím hy ckbnk w hy qlhk
mb dktyiqynk.

w dkmó khynkiqy. dlgl hymvakhlm hy knní ragaytli knql ymqlm qtym gkttlm, w
gymó yn yipkhlml tbahl hy mbm tbyhkm, w nbycl my lwó lqtl, il tbahl, mail
bi mli hy bik mbkvy w gligytqkhk xúmagk pltxkhl, gli uby mkigrl my knyctó,
w nl qbvl k fbyik myñkn; w kmí, haol k nk hbubymk, hy ubayi bi dbiql ia bi
dkml my kdktqkfk:

-myñltk, hlihy rkw xúmagk il dbyhy rkfyt glmk xknk.

-qkxdlgl hlihy rkw nbgym w gnktahkh -tymdlihaó nk hbubymk.

k nl uby tydnagó mkigrl:

-nbe hk yn pbycl w gnktahkh nkm rlcbytkm, glxl nl vyxlm yi nkm uby ilm
gytgki, w fayi dlhtík myt uby ilm kftkmkmyi, dytl nk xúmagk mayxdty ym
aihagal hy tyclgaolm w hy paymqkm.

-ynnl hatá -haol hli ubaolqy, uby qlhl nl ymgbgrkfk.

w haol fayi, glxl my xbymqtk yi yn gkdíqbnl macbayiqy.





gkdíqbnl zzzv. hlihy my dtlmacby nk ilqagak uby qbvl hli ubaolqy hyn
hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk, gli lqtlm khxatkfnym mbgymlm


kn glxdám hy nk kctkhkfny xúmagk vaytli uby rkgak ynnlm vyiík bi gkttl hy
nlm uby nnkxki qtabipknym qatkhl hy myam xbnkm dkthkm, yigbfytqkhkm,
yxdytl, hy nayiel fnkigl, w mlfty gkhk bik vyiík bi hagadnaikiqy hy nbe,
kmaxymxl vymqahl hy fnkigl, gli bik rkgrk hy gytk ctkihy yigyihahk yi nk
xkil. ytk yn gkttl hlm vygym, w kbi qtym, xkwlt uby nlm dkmkhlm, w nlm
nkhlm, w yigaxk hén, lgbdkfki hlgy lqtlm hagadnaikiqym knflm glxl nk iayvy,
qlhlm gli mbm rkgrkm yigyihahkm, vamqk uby khxatkfk w ymdkiqkfk obiqkxyiqy;
w yi bi nyvkiqkhl qtlil vyiík myiqkhk bik iaipk, vymqahk hy xan vynlm hy
qynk hy dnkqk, ftannkihl dlt qlhlm ynnlm aipaiaqkm rlokm hy ktcyiqytík hy
ltl, uby nk rkgíki, ma il tagk, k nl xyilm vamqlmkxyiqy vymqahk. qtkík yn
tlmqtl gbfaytql gli bi qtkimdktyiqy w hynagkhl gyihkn, hy xlhl uby, mai
axdyhatnl mbm naelm, dlt yiqty ynnlm my hymgbftík bi rytxlmímaxl tlmqtl hy
hligynnk, w nkm xbgrkm nbgym hkfki nbckt dktk hamqaicbat nk fynnyek w nlm
kñlm, uby, kn dktygyt, il nnyckfki k vyaiqy ia fkokfki hy haye w mayqy.

obiql k ynnk vyiík bik pacbtk vymqahk hy bik tldk hy nkm uby nnkxki
tlekckiqym, rkmqk nlm daym, gbfaytqk nk gkfyek gli bi vynl iyctl; dytl, kn
dbiql uby nnycó yn gkttl k ymqkt ptyiqy k ptyiqy hy nlm hbubym w hy hli
ubaolqy, gymó nk xúmagk hy nkm grataxíkm, w nbycl nk hy nkm ktdkm w nkúhym
uby yi yn gkttl mlikfki; w, nyvkiqáihlmy yi day nk pacbtk hy nk tldk, nk
kdktqó k yiqtkxflm nkhlm, w, ubaqáihlmy yn vynl hyn tlmqtl, hymgbftaó
dkqyiqyxyiqy myt nk xymxk pacbtk hy nk xbytqy, hymgktikhk w pyk, hy uby hli
ubaolqy tygafaó dymkhbxfty w mkigrl xayhl, w nlm hbubym ragaytli kncúi
myiqaxayiql qyxytlml. knekhk w dbymqk yi day ymqk xbytqy vavk, gli vle kncl
hltxahk w gli nyicbk il xbw hymdaytqk, glxyieó k hygat hymqk xkiytk:

   -wl mlw xytníi, kubyn uby nkm ramqltakm
   hagyi uby qbvy dlt xa dkhty kn hakfnl
   (xyiqatk kbqltaekhk hy nlm qayxdlm),
   dtíigady hy nk xácagk w xliktgk
   w ktgravl hy nk gayigak eltlámqtagk,
   éxbnl k nkm yhkhym w k nlm macnlm
   uby mlnkdkt dtyqyihyi nkm rkekñkm
   hy nlm kihkiqym ftkvlm gkfknnytlm
   k ubayi wl qbvy w qyicl ctki gktañl.
   w, dbymql uby ym hy nlm yigkiqkhltym,
   hy nlm xkclm l xácaglm gliqail
   hbtk nk glihagaói, ámdytk w pbytqy,
   nk xík ym qaytik, fnkihk w kxltlmk,
   w kxack hy rkgyt fayi k qlhkm cyiqym.
   yi nkm gkvytikm nóftyckm hy haqy,
   hlihy ymqkfk xa knxk yiqtyqyiahk
   yi pltxkt gaytqlm tlxflm w gktáqytym,
   nnycó nk vle hlnayiqy hy nk fynnk
   w mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.
   mbdy mb yigkiqkxyiql w mb hymctkgak,
   w mb qtkmpltxkgaói hy cyiqan hkxk
   yi túmqagk knhykik; glihlníxy,
   w, yigyttkihl xa ymdítaqb yi yn rbygl
   hymqk ymdkiqlmk w paytk ilqlxík,
   hymdbém hy rkfyt tyvbynql gayi xan naftlm
   hymqk xa gayigak yihyxliakhk w qltdy,
   vyicl k hkt yn tyxyhal uby glivayiy
   k qkxkñl hlnlt, k xkn qkxkñl.
   ¡lr qú, cnltak w rlilt hy gbkiqlm vamqyi
   nkm qúiagkm hy kgytl w hy hakxkiqy,
   nbe w pktln, myihytl, iltqy w cbík
   hy kubynnlm uby, hyokihl yn qltdy mbyñl
   w nkm lgalmkm dnbxkm, my kglxlhki
   k bmkt yn yoytgagal aiqlnytkfny
   hy nkm mkictayiqkm w dymkhkm ktxkm!
   k qa hacl ¡lr vktói, glxl my hyfy
   dlt okxám knkfkhl!, k qa, vknayiqy
   obiqkxyiqy w hamgtyql hli ubaolqy,
   hy nk xkigrk ymdnyihlt, hy ymdkñk ymqtynnk,
   uby dktk tyglftkt mb ymqkhl dtaxl
   nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml,
   ym xyiymqyt uby mkigrl, qb ymgbhytl,
   my hé qtym xan kelqym w qtygayiqlm
   yi kxfkm mbm vknayiqym dlmkhytkm,
   kn katy hymgbfaytqkm, w hy xlhl
   uby ny ymgbyeki, ny kxktcbyi w ny yipkhyi.
   w yi ymql my tymbynvyi qlhlm gbkiqlm
   hy mb hymctkgak rki mahl nlm kbqltym,
   w k ymql ym xa vyiahk, xam myñltym.

-¡vlql k qkn! -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl-. il hacl wl qtym xan kelqym, dytl
kmí xy hkté wl qtym glxl qtym dbñknkhkm. ¡vánkqy yn hakfnl dlt xlhl hy
hymyigkiqkt! ¡wl il mé ubé qayiyi uby vyt xam dlmkm gli nlm yigkiqlm! ¡dkt
halm uby ma yn myñlt xytníi il rk rknnkhl lqtk xkiytk glxl hymyigkiqkt k nk
myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, yigkiqkhk my dlhtá at k nk mydbnqbtk!

-qlxktlm ry wl -haol hli ubaolqy-, hli vannkil, rktql hy kolm, w kxkttktlm
ry k bi átfln, hymibhl glxl vbymqtk xkhty lm dktaó; w il hacl wl qtym xan w
qtygayiqlm, mail myam xan w myamgayiqlm kelqym lm hkté, qki fayi dyckhlm
uby il my lm gkacki k qtym xan w qtygayiqlm qatliym. w il xy tydnaubéam
dknkftk, uby lm kttkigkté yn knxk.

lwyihl nl gbkn xytníi, haol:

-il rk hy myt kmí, dltuby nlm kelqym uby rk hy tygyfat yn fbyi mkigrl rki
hy myt dlt mb vlnbiqkh, w il dlt pbytek, w yi yn qayxdl uby én ubamayty;
uby il my ny dliy qétxail myñknkhl; dytl dytxíqymyny uby ma én ubamayty
tyhyxat mb vyokgaói dlt nk xaqkh hy ymqy vkdbnkxayiql, dbyhy hyokt uby my
nlm hé koyik xkil, kbiuby myk kncl dymkhk.

-ia koyik, ia dtldak, ia dymkhk, ia dlt dymkt -tydnagó mkigrl-: k xí il xy
rk hy qlgkt kncbik xkil. ¿dktí wl, dlt vyiqbtk, k nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml, dktk uby dkcbyi xam dlmkm nl uby dygktli mbm lolm? yn myñlt xa kxl
mí, uby ym dktqy mbwk, dbym nk nnkxk k gkhk dkml xa vahk, xa knxk, mbmqyiql
w kttaxl mbwl, my dbyhy w hyfy kelqkt dlt ynnk w rkgyt qlhkm nkm
hanacyigakm iygymktakm dktk mb hymyigkiql; dytl, ¿kelqktxy wl...?
¡kfytibigal!

kdyikm kgkfó hy hygat ymql mkigrl, gbkihl, nyvkiqáihlmy yi day nk ktcyiqkhk
iaipk uby obiql kn ymdítaqb hy xytníi vyiík, ubaqáihlmy yn mbqan vynl hyn
tlmqtl, ny hymgbftaó qkn, uby k qlhlm dktygaó xkm uby hyxkmakhkxyiqy
rytxlml, w, gli bi hymyipkhl vktlian w gli bik vle il xbw khkxkhk, rkfnkihl
hytygrkxyiqy gli mkigrl dkiek, haol:

-¡lr xknkvyiqbtkhl ymgbhytl, knxk hy gáiqktl, gltkeói hy kngltiluby, hy
yiqtkñkm cbaoyñkm w kdyhytiknkhkm! ma qy xkihktki, nkhtói hymbynnkgktkm,
uby qy kttloktkm hy bik knqk qltty kn mbynl; ma qy dahaytki, yiyxacl hyn
céiytl rbxkil, uby qy glxaytkm bik hlgyik hy mkdlm, hlm hy nkcktqlm w qtym
hy gbnyftkm; ma qy dytmbkhaytki k uby xkqktkm k qb xboyt w k qbm raolm gli
kncúi qtbgbnyiql w kcbhl knpkioy, il pbytk xktkvannk uby qy xlmqtktkm
xynaihtlml w ymubavl; dytl rkgyt gkml hy qtym xan w qtygayiqlm kelqym, uby
il rkw iañl hy nk hlgqtaik, dlt tbai uby myk, uby il my nlm nnyvy gkhk xym,
khxatk, khktvk, ymdkiqk k qlhkm nkm yiqtkñkm dakhlmkm hy nlm uby nl
ymgbgrki, w kbi nkm hy qlhlm kubynnlm uby nl vaiaytyi k mkfyt gli yn
hamgbtml hyn qayxdl. dli, ¡lr xamytkfny w yihbtygahl kiaxkn!, dli, hacl,
ymlm qbm lolm hy xkgrbynl ymdkiqkhael yi nkm iañkm hymqlm xílm, glxdktkhlm
k tbqankiqym ymqtynnkm, w vytámnlm nnltkt ranl k ranl w xkhyok k xkhyok,
rkgayihl mbtglm, gkttytkm w myihkm dlt nlm rytxlmlm gkxdlm hy xam xyoannkm.
xbévkqy, mlgkttói w xknaiqyigalikhl xlimqtl, uby nk yhkh qki pnltahk xík,
uby kúi my ymqá qlhkvík yi yn haye w... hy nlm kñlm, dbym qyicl haye w
ibyvy w il nnycl k vyaiqy, my glimbxy w xktgraqk hyfkol hy nk gltqyek hy
bik túmqagk nkftkhltk; w ma krltk il nl dktyegl, ym xytgyh dktqagbnkt uby
xy rk rygrl yn myñlt xytníi, uby ymqá dtymyiqy, mónl dltuby qy yiqytiyegk
xa fynnyek; uby nkm náctaxkm hy bik kpnacahk rytxlmbtk vbynvyi yi knclhói
nlm tamglm, w nlm qactym yi lvyokm. hkqy, hkqy yi ymkm gktikekm, fymqaói
aihóxaql, w mkgk hy rktói ymy ftíl, uby k mónl glxyt w xám glxyt qy
aignaik, w dli yi nafytqkh nk nambtk hy xam gktiym, nk xkimyhbxfty hy xa
glihagaói w nk fynnyek hy xa pke; w ma dlt xí il ubaytym kfnkihktqy ia
tyhbgatqy k kncúi tkelikfny qétxail, rkenl dlt ymy dlfty gkfknnytl uby k qb
nkhl qayiym; dlt qb kxl, hacl, hy ubayi ymqlw vayihl yn knxk, uby nk qayiy
kqtkvymkhk yi nk cktckiqk, il haye hyhlm hy nlm nkfalm, uby il ymdytk mail
qb tícahk l fnkihk tydbymqk, l dktk mknatmy dlt nk flgk, l dktk vlnvytmy kn
ymqóxkcl.

qyiqómy, lwyihl ymql, nk cktckiqk hli ubaolqy w haol, vlnvaéihlmy kn hbuby:

-dlt halm, myñlt, uby hbngaiyk rk hagrl nk vythkh, uby kubí qyicl yn knxk
kqtkvymkhk yi nk cktckiqk, glxl bik ibye hy fknnymqk.

-¿ubé hygím vlm k ymql, mkigrl? -dtycbiqó nk hbubymk.

-hacl, myñltk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, nl uby qyicl hagrl: uby hy nlm kelqym,
kfytibigal.

-kftyibigal rkféam hy hygat, mkigrl, w il glxl hygím -haol yn hbuby.

-héoyxy vbymqtk ctkihyek -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby il ymqlw kcltk dktk xatkt
yi mlqanyekm ia yi nyqtkm xám k xyilm; dltuby xy qayiyi qki qbtfkhl ymqlm
kelqym uby xy rki hy hkt, l xy qyicl hy hkt, uby il mé nl uby xy hacl, ia
nl uby xy rkcl. dytl ubyttík wl mkfyt hy nk myñltk xa myñltk hlñk hbngaik
hyn qlflml khóihy kdtyihaó yn xlhl hy tlckt uby qayiy: vayiy k dyhatxy uby
xy kftk nkm gktiym k kelqym, w nnáxkxy knxk hy gáiqktl w fymqaói aihóxaql,
gli bik qatkxatk hy xknlm ilxftym, uby yn hakfnl nlm mbptk. ¿dlt vyiqbtk
mli xam gktiym hy ftligy, l vkxy k xí kncl yi uby my hymyigkiqy l il? ¿ubé
gkikmqk hy tldk fnkigk, hy gkxamkm, hy qlgkhltym w hy ymgktdaiym, kiuby
il nlm ckmql, qtky hynkiqy hy mí dktk kfnkihktxy, mail bi vaqbdytal w lqtl,
mkfayihl kubyn typtái uby hagyi dlt krí, uby bi kmil gktckhl hy ltl mbfy
nacytl dlt bik xliqkñk, w uby háhavkm ubyftkiqki dyñkm, w k halm tlckihl w
gli yn xkel hkihl, w uby xám vkny bi "qlxk" uby hlm "qy hkté"? dbym yn
myñlt xa kxl, uby rkfík hy qtkytxy nk xkil dlt yn gyttl w rknkcktxy dktk
uby wl xy ragaymy hy nkik w hy knclhói gkthkhl, hagy uby ma xy glcy xy
kxkttktá hymibhl k bi átfln w xy hlfnktá nk dktkhk hy nlm kelqym; w rkfíki
hy glimahytkt ymqlm nkmqaxkhlm myñltym uby il mlnkxyiqy dahyi uby my kelqy
bi ymgbhytl, mail bi clfytikhlt; glxl ubayi hagy: "fyfy gli cbaihkm".
kdtyihki, kdtyihki xbgrl hy yirltkxknk k mkfyt tlckt, w k mkfyt dyhat, w k
qyiyt gtakiek, uby il mli qlhlm nlm qayxdlm bilm, ia ymqái nlm rlxftym
mayxdty hy bi fbyi rbxlt. ymqlw wl krltk tyvyiqkihl hy dyik dlt vyt xa mkwl
vythy tlql, w vayiyi k dyhatxy uby xy kelqy hy xa vlnbiqkh, ymqkihl ynnk
qki koyik hynnl glxl hy vlnvytxy gkgauby.

-dbym yi vythkh, kxacl mkigrl -haol yn hbuby-, uby ma il lm kfnkiháam xám
uby bik ftyvk xkhbtk, uby il rkféam hy yxdbñkt yn clfaytil. ¡fbyil mytík
uby wl yivakmy k xam aimbnkilm bi clfytikhlt gtbyn, hy yiqtkñkm
dyhytiknaikm, uby il my hlfnyck k nkm náctaxkm hy nkm kpnacahkm hligynnkm,
ia k nlm tbyclm hy hamgtyqlm, axdytalmlm w kiqacblm yigkiqkhltym w mkfalm!
yi tymlnbgaói, mkigrl, l vlm rkféam hy myt kelqkhl, l lm rki hy kelqkt, l
il rkféam hy myt clfytikhlt.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ¿il my xy hktíki hlm híkm hy qétxail dktk dyimkt
nl uby xy ymqá xyolt?

-il, yi iaicbik xkiytk -haol xytníi-; kubí, yi ymqy aimqkiqy w yi ymqy
nbckt, rk hy ubyhkt kmyiqkhl nl uby rk hy myt hymqy iyclgal, l hbngaiyk
vlnvytá k nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm w k mb dtímqail ymqkhl hy nkftkhltk, l wk,
yi yn myt uby ymqá, mytá nnyvkhk k nlm ynímylm gkxdlm, hlihy ymqktá
ymdytkihl my gbxdnk yn iúxytl hyn vádbnl.

-yk, fbyi mkigrl -haol nk hbubymk-, fbyi áiaxl w fbyik glttymdlihyigak kn
dki uby rkféam glxahl hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy, k ubayi qlhlm hyfyxlm mytvat w
kctkhkt, dlt mb fbyik glihagaói w dlt mbm knqkm gkfknnytíkm. hkh yn mí,
raol, hymqk kelqkaik, w váwkmy yn hakfnl dktk hakfnl w yn qyxlt dktk
xyeubail; uby bi fbyi gltkeói ubyftkiqk xknk vyiqbtk, glxl vlm fayi mkféam.

k ymqkm tkeliym tymdlihaó gli émqkm hamdktkqkhkm mkigrl, uby, rkfnkihl gli
xytníi, ny dtycbiqó:

-híckxy vbymk xytgyh, myñlt xytníi: gbkihl nnycó kubí yn hakfnl glttyl w
hal k xa kxl bi tygkhl hyn myñlt xliqymailm, xkiháihlny hy mb dktqy uby ny
ymdytkmy kubí, dltuby vyiík k hkt lthyi hy uby nk myñltk hlñk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml my hymyigkiqkmy, w rkmqk kcltk il ryxlm vamql k xliqymailm, ia k mbm
myxyokm.

k nl gbkn tymdlihaó xytníi:

-yn hakfnl, kxacl mkigrl, ym bi aciltkiqy w bi ctkihímaxl fynnkgl: wl ny
yivaé yi fbmgk hy vbymqtl kxl, dytl il gli tygkhl hy xliqymailm, mail xíl,
dltuby xliqymailm my ymqá yi mb gbyvk yiqyihayihl, l, dlt xyolt hygat,
ymdytkihl mb hymyigkiql, uby kúi ny pknqk nk glnk dlt hymlnnkt. ma lm hyfy
kncl, l qyiéam kncbik glmk uby iyclgakt gli én, wl lm nl qtkyté w dlihté
hlihy vlm xám ubamaétyhym. w, dlt kcltk, kgkfkh hy hkt yn mí hymqk
hagadnaik, w gtyyhxy uby lm mytá hy xbgrl dtlvygrl, kmí dktk yn knxk glxl
dktk yn gbytdl: dktk yn knxk, dlt nk gktahkh gli uby nk rktéam; dktk yn
gbytdl, dltuby wl mé uby mlam hy glxdnyzaói mkicbíiyk, w il lm dlhtá rkgyt
hkñl mkgktlm bi dlgl hy mkicty.

-xbgrlm xéhaglm rkw yi yn xbihl: rkmqk nlm yigkiqkhltym mli xéhaglm
-tydnagó mkigrl-; dytl, dbym qlhlm xy nl hagyi, kbiuby wl il xy nl vyl,
hacl uby mlw gliqyiql hy hktxy nlm qtym xan w qtygayiqlm kelqym, gli
glihagaói uby xy nlm qyicl hy hkt gkhk w gbkihl uby wl ubamayty, mai uby my
xy dlick qkmk yi nlm híkm ia yi yn qayxdl; w wl dtlgbtkté mknat hy nk hybhk
nl xám dtymql uby myk dlmafny, dltuby clgy yn xbihl hy nk rytxlmbtk hy nk
myñltk hlñk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, dbym, mycúi dktygy, kn tyvém hy nl uby wl
dyimkfk, yi ypygql ym rytxlmk. rk hy myt qkxfaéi glihagaói uby il ry hy
ymqkt lfnackhl k mkgktxy mkicty gli nk hagadnaik, w uby ma kncbilm kelqym
pbytyi hy xlmubyl, my xy rki hy qlxkt yi gbyiqk. aqyi, uby ma xy yttkty yi
yn iúxytl, yn myñlt xytníi, dbym nl mkfy qlhl, rk hy qyiyt gbahkhl hy
gliqktnlm w hy kvamktxy nlm uby xy pknqki l nlm uby xy mlftki.

-hy nkm mlftkm il rkftá uby kvamkt -tymdlihaó xytníi-, dltuby, nnyckihl kn
gkfkn iúxytl, nbycl ubyhktá hy axdtlvaml hymyigkiqkhk nk myñltk hbngaiyk, w
vyihtá k fbmgkt, glxl kctkhygahk, kn fbyi mkigrl, w k hktny ctkgakm, w kbi
dtyxalm, dlt nk fbyik lftk. kmí uby il rkw hy ubé qyiyt ymgtúdbnl hy nkm
mlftkm ia hy nkm pknqkm, ia yn gaynl dytxaqk uby wl yickñy k ikhay, kbiuby
myk yi bi dynl hy nk gkfyek.

-¡yk, dbym, k nk xkil hy halm! -haol mkigrl-. wl glimayiql yi xa xknk
vyiqbtk; hacl uby wl kgydql nk dyiaqyigak gli nkm glihagaliym kdbiqkhkm.

kdyikm haol ymqkm únqaxkm dknkftkm mkigrl, gbkihl vlnvaó k mlikt nk xúmagk
hy nkm grataxíkm w my vlnvaytli k hamdktkt aipaiaqlm ktgkfbgym, w hli
ubaolqy my glncó hyn gbynnl hy mkigrl, háihlny xan fymlm yi nk ptyiqy w yi
nkm xyoannkm. nk hbubymk w yn hbuby w qlhlm nlm gatgbimqkiqym haytli
xbymqtkm hy rkfyt tygyfahl ctkihímaxl gliqyiql, w yn gkttl glxyieó k
gkxaikt; w, kn dkmkt, nk rytxlmk hbngaiyk aignaió nk gkfyek k nlm hbubym w
rael bik ctki tyvytyigak k mkigrl.

w wk, yi ymql, my vyiík k xám kihkt yn knfk, knycty w tambyñk: nkm
pnltygannkm hy nlm gkxdlm my hymglnnkfki w ytcbíki, w nlm níubahlm
gtamqknym hy nlm kttlwbynlm, xbtxbtkihl dlt yiqty fnkigkm w dkthkm cbaokm,
afki k hkt qtafbql k nlm tílm uby nlm ymdytkfki. nk qayttk knycty, yn gaynl
gnktl, yn katy naxdal, nk nbe mytyik, gkhk bil dlt mí w qlhlm obiqlm, hkfki
xkiapaymqkm myñknym uby yn hík, uby kn kbtltk vyiík damkihl nkm pknhkm,
rkfík hy myt mytyil w gnktl. w, mkqampygrlm nlm hbubym hy nk gkek w hy
rkfyt glimycbahl mb aiqyigaói qki hamgtyqk w pynagyxyiqy, my vlnvaytli k mb
gkmqannl, gli dtlmbdbymql hy mycbihkt yi mbm fbtnkm, uby dktk ynnlm il
rkfík vytkm uby xám cbmql nym haymyi.





gkdíqbnl zzzva. hlihy my gbyiqk nk ymqtkñk w okxám axkcaikhk kvyiqbtk hy nk
hbyñk hlnltahk, knakm hy nk glihymk qtapknha, gli bik gktqk uby mkigrl
dkiek ymgtafaó k mb xboyt qytymk dkiek


qyiík bi xkwlthlxl yn hbuby hy xbw fbtnymgl w hymyipkhkhl aicyial, yn gbkn
rael nk pacbtk hy xytníi w kglxlhó qlhl yn kdktkql hy nk kvyiqbtk dkmkhk,
glxdbml nlm vytmlm w rael uby bi dkoy ragaymy k hbngaiyk. paiknxyiqy, gli
aiqytvyigaói hy mbm myñltym, lthyió lqtk hyn xám ctkgalml w ymqtkñl
ktqapagal uby dbyhy axkcaiktmy.

dtycbiqó nk hbubymk k mkigrl lqtl hík ma rkfík glxyiekhl nk qktyk hy nk
dyiaqyigak uby rkfík hy rkgyt dlt yn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk. haol uby mí,
w uby kubynnk ilgry my rkfík hkhl gaigl kelqym. dtycbiqóny nk hbubymk uby
gli ubé my nlm rkfík hkhl. tymdlihaó uby gli nk xkil.

-yml -tydnagó nk hbubymk- xám ym hktmy hy dknxkhkm uby hy kelqym. wl qyicl
dktk xí uby yn mkfal xytníi il ymqktá gliqyiql gli qkiqk fnkihbtk; xyiymqyt
mytá uby yn fbyi mkigrl rkck kncbik hagadnaik hy kftlolm, l hy nkm hy
gkiynliym, uby my hyoyi myiqat; dltuby nk nyqtk gli mkicty yiqtk, w il my
rk hy hkt qki fktkqk nk nafytqkh hy bik qki ctki myñltk glxl nl ym hbngaiyk
dlt qki dlgl dtygal; w khvaytqk mkigrl uby nkm lftkm hy gktahkh uby my
rkgyi qafak w pnlokxyiqy il qayiyi xétaql ia vknyi ikhk.

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-héxy vbymqtk myñltík kncbik hagadnaik l tkxkn glivyiayiqy, uby wl xy hkté
gli én glxl il xy hbynk hyxkmakhl, dltuby rkcl mkfyt k vbymk xytgyh uby,
kbiuby mlw túmqagl, xam gktiym qayiyi xám hy knclhói uby hy ymdktql, w il
mytá fayi uby wl xy hymgtíy dlt yn dtlvygrl koyil.

-myk yi fbyik rltk -tymdlihaó nk hbubymk-: wl lm hkté xkñkik bik hagadnaik
uby lm vyick xbw kn obmql w my kglxlhy gli nk qytibtk hy vbymqtkm gktiym,
glxl ma pbytki mbm rytxkikm dtldakm.

k nl uby haol mkigrl:

-mydk vbymqtk knqyek, myñltk xík hy xa áiaxk, uby wl qyicl ymgtaqk bik
gktqk k xa xboyt qytymk dkiek, háihlny gbyiqk hy qlhl nl uby xy rk mbgyhahl
hymdbém uby xy kdktqé hynnk; kubí nk qyicl yi yn myil, uby il ny pknqk xám
hy dliytny yn mlftyymgtaql; ubyttík uby vbymqtk hamgtygaói nk nywymy,
dltuby xy dktygy uby vk glipltxy k nl hy clfytikhlt, hacl, kn xlhl uby
hyfyi hy ymgtafat nlm clfytikhltym.

-¿w ubaéi nk ilqó? -dtycbiqó nk hbubymk.

-¿ubaéi nk rkfík hy ilqkt mail wl, dygkhlt hy xí? -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

-¿w ymgtafímqymnk vlm? -haol nk hbubymk.

-ia dlt dayiml -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby wl il mé nyyt ia ymgtafat, dbymql
uby mé patxkt.

-vyáxlmnk -haol nk hbubymk-, uby k fbyi mycbtl uby vlm xlmqtéam yi ynnk nk
gknahkh w mbpagayigak hy vbymqtl aicyial.

mkgó mkigrl bik gktqk kfaytqk hyn myil, w, qlxáihlnk nk hbubymk, val uby
hygík hymqk xkiytk:

gktqk hy mkigrl dkiek k qytymk dkiek, mb xboyt

ma fbyilm kelqym xy hkfki, fayi gkfknnytl xy afk; ma fbyi clfaytil xy
qyicl, fbyilm kelqym xy gbymqk. ymql il nl yiqyihytám qú, qytymk xík, dlt
krltk; lqtk vye nl mkftám. rkm hy mkfyt, qytymk, uby qyicl hyqytxaikhl uby
kihym yi glgry, uby ym nl uby rkgy kn gkml, dltuby qlhl lqtl kihkt ym kihkt
k ckqkm. xboyt hy bi clfytikhlt ytym, ¡xatk ma qy tlytá ikhay nlm ekigkolm!
krí qy yivíl bi vymqahl vythy hy gkekhlt, uby xy hal xa myñltk nk hbubymk;
kglxóhkny yi xlhl uby matvk hy mkwk w gbytdlm k ibymqtk raok. hli ubaolqy,
xa kxl, mycúi ry líhl hygat yi ymqk qayttk, ym bi nlgl gbythl w bi
xyiqygkql ctkgalml, w uby wl il ny vlw yi ekck. ryxlm ymqkhl yi nk gbyvk hy
xliqymailm, w yn mkfal xytníi rk ygrkhl xkil hy xí dktk yn hymyigkiql hy
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby dlt knná my nnkxk knhliek nltyiel: gli qtym xan w
qtygayiqlm kelqym, xyilm gaigl, uby xy ry hy hkt, ubyhktá hymyigkiqkhk glxl
nk xkhty uby nk dktaó. il hatám hymql ikhk k ikhay, dltuby dli nl qbwl yi
gligyol, w bilm hatái uby ym fnkigl w lqtlm uby ym iyctl. hy kubí k dlglm
híkm xy dktqaté kn clfaytil, khlihy vlw gli ctkihímaxl hymyl hy rkgyt
haiytlm, dltuby xy rki hagrl uby qlhlm nlm clfytikhltym ibyvlm vki gli ymqy
xymxl hymyl; qlxktény yn dbnml, w kvamktéqy ma rkm hy vyiat k ymqkt glixacl
l il. yn tbgal ymqá fbyil, w my qy yiglxayihk xbgrl; w il ny dayiml hyokt,
kbiuby xy nnyvktki k myt ctki qbtgl. nk hbubymk xa myñltk qy fymk xan vygym
nkm xkilm; vbénvyny yn tyqltil gli hlm xan, uby il rkw glmk uby xyilm
gbymqy ia vknck xám fktkqk, mycúi hagy xa kxl, uby nlm fbyilm
glxyhaxayiqlm. il rk mahl halm mytvahl hy hydktktxy lqtk xknyqk gli lqtlm
gayi ymgbhlm, glxl nk hy xkttkm, dytl il qy hé dyik, qytymk xík, uby yi
mknvl ymqá yn uby tydagk, w qlhl mknhtá yi nk glnkhk hyn clfaytil; mail uby
xy rk hkhl ctki dyik uby xy hagyi uby ma bik vye ny dtbyfl, uby xy qyicl hy
glxyt nkm xkilm qtkm én; w ma kmí pbymy, il xy glmqktík xbw fktkql, kbiuby
nlm ymqtldykhlm w xkiglm wk my qayiyi mb gknlioík yi nk naxlmik uby dahyi;
kmí uby, dlt bik vík l dlt lqtk, qú rkm hy myt tagk, hy fbyik vyiqbtk. halm
qy nk hé, glxl dbyhy, w k xí xy cbkthy dktk mytvatqy. hymqy gkmqannl, k
vyaiqy hy obnal hy 1614.

qb xktahl yn clfytikhlt,

mkigrl dkiek.

yi kgkfkihl nk hbubymk hy nyyt nk gktqk, haol k mkigrl:

-yi hlm glmkm kihk bi dlgl hymgkxaikhl yn fbyi clfytikhlt: nk bik, yi hygat
l hkt k yiqyihyt uby ymqy clfaytil my ny rki hkhl dlt nlm kelqym uby my rk
hy hkt, mkfayihl én, uby il nl dbyhy iyckt, uby gbkihl yn hbuby, xa myñlt,
my ny dtlxyqaó, il my mlñkfk rkfyt kelqym yi yn xbihl; nk lqtk ym uby my
xbymqtk yi ynnk xbw glhagalml, w il ubyttík uby ltéckil pbymy, dltuby nk
glhagak tlxdy yn mkgl, w yn clfytikhlt glhagalml rkgy nk obmqagak
hymclfytikhk.

-wl il nl hacl dlt qkiql, myñltk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w ma k vbymk xytgyh ny
dktygy uby nk qkn gktqk il vk glxl rk hy at, il rkw mail tkmcktnk w rkgyt
lqtk ibyvk, w dlhtík myt uby pbymy dylt ma xy nl hyoki k xa gknyqty.

-il, il -tydnagó nk hbubymk-, fbyik ymqá émqk, w ubaytl uby yn hbuby nk
vyk.

gli ymql my pbytli k bi okthíi, hlihy rkfíki hy glxyt kubyn hík. xlmqtó nk
hbubymk nk gktqk hy mkigrl kn hbuby, hy uby tygafaó ctkihímaxl gliqyiql.
glxaytli, w hymdbém hy knekhl nlm xkiqynym, w hymdbém hy rkfytmy
yiqtyqyiahl bi fbyi ymdkgal gli nk mkftlmk glivytmkgaói hy mkigrl, k
hymrltk my lwó yn mli qtamqímaxl hy bi dípktl w yn hy bi tligl w
hymqyxdnkhl qkxflt. qlhlm xlmqtktli knfltlqktmy gli nk glipbmk, xktgakn w
qtamqy ktxliík, ymdygaknxyiqy hli ubaolqy, uby il gkfík yi mb kmayiql hy
dbtl knfltlqkhl; hy mkigrl il rkw uby hygat mail uby yn xayhl ny nnyvó k mb
kglmqbxftkhl typbcal, uby ytk yn nkhl l pknhkm hy nk hbubymk, dltuby tykn w
vythkhytkxyiqy yn mli uby my ymgbgrkfk ytk qtamqímaxl w xknyigónagl.

w, ymqkihl qlhlm kmí mbmdyimlm, vaytli yiqtkt dlt yn okthíi khynkiqy hlm
rlxftym vymqahlm hy nbql, qki nbycl w qyihahl uby nym kttkmqtkfk dlt yn
mbynl; émqlm vyiíki qlgkihl hlm ctkihym qkxfltym, kmaxamxl gbfaytqlm hy
iyctl. k mb nkhl vyiík yn dípktl, iyctl w daexayiql glxl nlm hyxám. mycbík
k nlm qtym bi dytmlikoy hy gbytdl kcackiqkhl, kxkiqkhl, il uby vymqahl, gli
bik iyctímaxk nlfk, gbwk pknhk ytk kmaxamxl hymkpltkhk hy ctkihy. dlt
yigaxk hy nk nlfk ny gyñík w kqtkvymkfk bi kigrl qkryní, qkxfaéi iyctl, hy
ubayi dyihík bi hymxymbtkhl knpkioy hy cbktiagaliym w vkaik iyctk. vyiík
gbfaytql yn tlmqtl gli bi qtkmdktyiqy vynl iyctl, dlt ubayi my yiqtydktygík
bik nlicímaxk fktfk, fnkigk glxl nk iayvy. xlvík yn dkml kn mli hy nlm
qkxfltym gli xbgrk ctkvyhkh w tydlml. yi pai, mb ctkihyek, mb gliqliyl, mb
iyctbtk w mb kglxdkñkxayiql dbhaytk w dbhl mbmdyihyt k qlhlm kubynnlm uby
mai glilgytny ny xatktli.

nnycó, dbym, gli yn ymdkgal w dtlmldldywk typytahk k raigktmy hy tlhannkm
kiqy yn hbuby, uby yi day, gli nlm hyxám uby knní ymqkfki, ny kqyihík; dytl
yn hbuby yi iaicbik xkiytk ny glimaiqaó rkfnkt rkmqk uby my nyvkiqkmy.
ríelnl kmí yn ymdkiqkol dtlhacalml, w, dbymql yi day, kneó yn kiqapke hyn
tlmqtl w rael dkqyiqy nk xám rlttyihk, nk xám nktck, nk xám fnkigk w xám
dlfnkhk fktfk uby rkmqk yiqligym rbxkilm lolm rkfíki vamql, w nbycl
hymyigkoó w kttkigó hyn kigrl w hankqkhl dygrl bik vle ctkvy w mliltk, w,
dliayihl nlm lolm yi yn hbuby, haol:

-knqímaxl w dlhytlml myñlt, k xí xy nnkxki qtapknhíi yn hy nk fktfk fnkigk;
mlw ymgbhytl hy nk glihymk qtapknha, dlt lqtl ilxfty nnkxkhk nk hbyñk
hlnltahk, hy dktqy hy nk gbkn qtkacl k vbymqtk ctkihyek bik yxfkokhk, w ym
uby nk vbymqtk xkciapagyigak myk mytvahk hy hktnk pkgbnqkh w nagyigak dktk
yiqtkt k hygatny mb gbaqk, uby ym bik hy nkm xám ibyvkm w xám khxatkfnym
uby yn xám gbaqkhl dyimkxayiql hyn ltfy dbyhk rkfyt dyimkhl. w dtaxytl
ubayty mkfyt ma ymqá yi ymqy vbymqtl gkmqannl yn vknytlml w okxám vyigahl
gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, yi gbwk fbmgk vayiy k day w mai
hymkwbiktmy hymhy yn tyail hy gkihkwk rkmqk ymqy vbymqtl ymqkhl, glmk uby
my dbyhy w hyfy qyiyt k xankctl l k pbytek hy yigkiqkxyiql. ynnk ubyhk k nk
dbytqk hymqk pltqknyek l gkmk hy gkxdl, w il kcbkthk dktk yiqtkt mail
vbymqtl fyiydnágaql. haoy.

w qlmaó nbycl w xkilmyómy nk fktfk hy kttafk kfkol gli yiqtkxfkm xkilm, w
gli xbgrl mlmaycl ymqbvl kqyihayihl nk tymdbymqk hyn hbuby, uby pby:

-wk, fbyi ymgbhytl qtapknhíi hy nk fnkigk fktfk, rk xbgrlm híkm uby qyiyxlm
ilqagak hy nk hymctkgak hy xa myñltk nk glihymk qtapknha, k ubayi nlm
yigkiqkhltym nk rkgyi nnkxkt nk hbyñk hlnltahk; fayi dlhéam, ymqbdyihl
ymgbhytl, hygatny uby yiqty w uby kubí ymqá yn vknayiqy gkfknnytl hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, hy gbwk glihagaói cyiytlmk dbyhy dtlxyqytmy gli
mycbtahkh qlhl kxdktl w qlhk kwbhk; w kmaxamxl ny dlhtéam hygat hy xa dktqy
uby ma xa pkvlt ny pbyty iygymktal, il ny rk hy pknqkt, dbym wk xy qayiy
lfnackhl k hátmyny yn myt gkfknnytl, k ubayi ym kiyol w gligytiayiqy
pkvltygyt k qlhk mbytqy hy xboytym, yi ymdygakn k nkm hbyñkm vabhkm,
xyilmgkfkhkm w hlnltahkm, gbkn nl hyfy ymqkt mb myñltík.

lwyihl nl gbkn qtapknhíi, aignaió nk tlhannk rkmqk yn mbynl, w, rkgayihl kn
dípktl w qkxfltym myñkn uby qlgkmyi, kn xamxl mli w kn xamxl dkml uby rkfík
yiqtkhl, my vlnvaó k mknat hyn okthíi, hyokihl k qlhlm khxatkhlm hy mb
dtymyigak w glxdlmqbtk. w, vlnvaéihlmy yn hbuby k hli ubaolqy, ny haol:

-yi pai, pkxlml gkfknnytl, il dbyhyi nkm qaiayfnkm hy xknagak ia hy nk
aciltkigak yigbftat w ymgbtygyt nk nbe hyn vknlt w hy nk vatqbh. hacl ymql
dltuby kdyikm rk myam híkm uby nk vbymqtk flihkh ymqá yi ymqy gkmqannl,
gbkihl wk lm vayiyi k fbmgkt hy nbyñkm w kdktqkhkm qayttkm, w il yi
gkttlekm ia yi htlxyhktalm, mail k day w yi kwbikm; nlm qtamqym, nlm
kpnacahlm, glipakhlm uby rki hy rknnkt yi ymy pltqímaxl ftkel yn tyxyhal hy
mbm gbaqkm w qtkfkolm, xytgyh k vbymqtkm ctkihym rkekñkm, uby glttyi w
tlhyki qlhl nl hymgbfaytql hy nk qayttk.

-ubamaytk wl, myñlt hbuby -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby ymqbvaytk kubí
dtymyiqy kubyn fyihaql tynacalml uby k nk xymk yn lqtl hík xlmqtó qyiyt qki
xkn qknkiqy w qki xknk loytaek gliqtk nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, dktk uby
vaytk dlt vamqk hy lolm ma nlm qknym gkfknnytlm mli iygymktalm yi yn xbihl:
qlgktk, dlt nl xyilm, gli nk xkil uby nlm yzqtklthaiktakxyiqy kpnacahlm w
hymglimlnkhlm, yi gkmlm ctkihym w yi hymhagrkm ailtxym il vki k fbmgkt mb
tyxyhal k nkm gkmkm hy nlm nyqtkhlm, ia k nk hy nlm mkgtamqkiym hy nkm
knhykm, ia kn gkfknnytl uby ibigk rk kgytqkhl k mknat hy nlm qétxailm hy mb
nbckt, ia kn dytyelml gltqymkil uby kiqym fbmgk ibyvkm dktk typytatnkm w
gliqktnkm, uby dtlgbtk rkgyt lftkm w rkekñkm dktk uby lqtlm nkm gbyiqyi w
nkm ymgtafki; yn tyxyhal hy nkm gbaqkm, yn mlglttl hy nkm iygymahkhym, yn
kxdktl hy nkm hligynnkm, yn glimbynl hy nkm vabhkm, yi iaicbik mbytqy hy
dytmlikm my rknnk xyolt uby yi nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym, w hy mytnl wl hlw
aipaiaqkm ctkgakm kn gaynl, w hlw dlt xbw fayi yxdnykhl gbknubayt hymxái w
qtkfkol uby yi ymqy qki rlitlml yoytgagal dbyhk mbgyhytxy. vyick ymqk hbyñk
w dahk nl uby ubamayty, uby wl ny naftkté mb tyxyhal yi nk pbytek hy xa
ftkel w yi nk aiqtédahk tymlnbgaói hy xa kiaxlml ymdítaqb.





gkdíqbnl zzzvaa. hlihy my dtlmacby nk pkxlmk kvyiqbtk hy nk hbyñk hlnltahk


yi ymqtyxl my rlncktli yn hbuby w nk hbubymk hy vyt gbái fayi afk
tymdlihayihl k mb aiqyigaói hli ubaolqy, w k ymqk mkeói haol mkigrl:

-il ubyttík wl uby ymqk myñltk hbyñk dbmaymy kncúi qtldayel k nk dtlxymk hy
xa clfaytil, dltuby wl ry líhl hygat k bi flqagktal qlnyhkil uby rkfnkfk
glxl bi mancbytl uby hlihy aiqytvaiaymyi hbyñkm il dlhík mbgyhyt glmk
fbyik. ¡vánkxy halm, w ubé xkn ymqkfk gli ynnkm yn qkn flqagktal! hy nl uby
wl mkgl uby, dbym qlhkm nkm hbyñkm mli yipkhlmkm y axdytqaiyiqym, hy
gbknubaytk gknahkh w glihagaói uby myki, ¿ubé mytái nkm uby mli hlnltahkm,
glxl rki hagrl uby ym ymqk glihymk qtym pknhkm, l qtym glnkm?; uby yi xa
qayttk pknhkm w glnkm, glnkm w pknhkm, qlhl ym bil.

-gknnk, mkigrl kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby, dbym ymqk myñltk hbyñk hy qki
nbyñym qayttkm vayiy k fbmgktxy, il hyfy myt hy kubynnkm uby yn flqagktal
qyiík yi mb iúxytl, gbkiql xám uby émqk ym glihymk, w gbkihl nkm glihymkm
matvyi hy hbyñkm, mytá matvayihl k tyaikm w k yxdytkqtagym, uby yi mbm
gkmkm mli myñltímaxkm uby my matvyi hy lqtkm hbyñkm.

k ymql tymdlihaó hlñk tlhtícbye, uby my rknnó dtymyiqy:

-hbyñkm qayiy xa myñltk nk hbubymk yi mb mytvagal, uby dbhaytki myt
glihymkm ma nk pltqbik ubamaytk, dytl knná vki nywym hl ubaytyi tywym; w
ikhay hack xkn hy nkm hbyñkm, w xám hy nkm kiqacbkm w hligynnkm; uby,
kbiuby wl il nl mlw, fayi my xy kngkiek w my xy qtkmnbgy nk vyiqkok uby
rkgy bik hbyñk hligynnk k bik hbyñk vabhk; w ubayi k ilmlqtkm qtkmubanó,
nkm qaoytkm ny ubyhktli yi nk xkil.

-gli qlhl yml -tydnagó mkigrl-, rkw qkiql uby qtkmubankt yi nkm hbyñkm,
mycúi xa fktfytl, gbkiql mytá xyolt il xyiykt yn kttle, kbiuby my dycby.

-mayxdty nlm ymgbhytlm -tymdlihaó hlñk tlhtícbye- mli yiyxaclm ibymqtlm;
uby, glxl mli hbyihym hy nkm kiqymknkm w ilm vyyi k gkhk dkml, nlm tkqlm
uby il tyeki, uby mli xbgrlm, nlm ckmqki yi xbtxbtkt hy ilmlqtkm,
hymyiqyttáihlilm nlm rbymlm w yiqyttáihlilm nk pkxk. dbym xáihlnym wl k nlm
nyñlm xlvafnym, uby, xkn uby nym dymy, ryxlm hy vavat yi yn xbihl, w yi nkm
gkmkm dtaigadknym, kbiuby xbtkxlm hy rkxfty w gbftkxlm gli bi iyctl xlioan
ibymqtkm hynagkhkm l il hynagkhkm gktiym, glxl ubayi gbfty l qkdk bi
xbnkhkt gli bi qkdae yi hík hy dtlgymaói. k py uby ma xy pbytk hkhl, w yn
qayxdl nl dahaytk, uby wl haytk k yiqyihyt, il mónl k nlm dtymyiqym, mail k
qlhl yn xbihl, góxl il rkw vatqbh uby il my yigaytty yi bik hbyñk.

-wl gtyl -haol nk hbubymk- uby xa fbyik hlñk tlhtícbye qayiy tkeói, w xbw
ctkihy; dytl glivayiy uby kcbkthy qayxdl dktk vlnvyt dlt mí w dlt nkm hyxám
hbyñkm, dktk glipbihat nk xknk ldaiaói hy kubyn xkn flqagktal, w
hymkttkackt nk uby qayiy yi mb dygrl yn ctki mkigrl dkiek.

k nl uby mkigrl tymdlihaó:

-hymdbém uby qyicl rbxlm hy clfytikhlt my xy rki ubaqkhl nlm vácbahlm hy
ymgbhytl, w il my xy hk dlt gbkiqkm hbyñkm rkw bi gkftkrícl.

khynkiqy dkmktki gli yn glnlubal hbyñymgl, ma il lwytki uby yn dípktl w nlm
qkxfltym vlnvíki k mlikt, dlt hlihy yiqyihaytli uby nk hbyñk hlnltahk
yiqtkfk. dtycbiqó nk hbubymk kn hbuby ma mytík fayi at k tygyfatnk, dbym
ytk glihymk w dytmlik dtaigadkn.

-dlt nl uby qayiy hy glihymk -tymdlihaó mkigrl, kiqym uby yn hbuby
tymdlihaymy-, fayi ymqlw yi uby vbymqtkm ctkihyekm mkncki k tygyfatnk; dytl
dlt nl hy hbyñk, mlw hy dktygyt uby il my xbyvki bi dkml.

-¿ubaéi qy xyqy k qa yi ymql, mkigrl? -haol hli ubaolqy.

-¿ubaéi, myñlt? -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. wl xy xyql, uby dbyhl xyqytxy, glxl
ymgbhytl uby rk kdtyihahl nlm qétxailm hy nk gltqymík yi nk ymgbynk hy
vbymk xytgyh, uby ym yn xám gltqém w fayi gtakhl gkfknnytl uby rkw yi qlhk
nk gltqymkiík; w yi ymqkm glmkm, mycúi ry líhl hygat k vbymk xytgyh, qkiql
my daythy dlt gktqk hy xám glxl dlt gktqk hy xyilm; w kn fbyi yiqyihyhlt,
dlgkm dknkftkm.

-kmí ym, glxl mkigrl hagy -haol yn hbuby-: vytyxlm yn qknny hy nk glihymk,
w dlt én qkiqyktyxlm nk gltqymík uby my ny hyfy.

yi ymql, yiqtktli nlm qkxfltym w yn dípktl, glxl nk vye dtaxytk.

w kubí, gli ymqy ftyvy gkdíqbnl, hal pai yn kbqlt, w glxyieó yn lqtl,
macbayihl nk xymxk kvyiqbtk, uby ym bik hy nkm xám ilqkfnym hy nk ramqltak.





gkdíqbnl zzzvaaa. hlihy my gbyiqk nk uby hal hy mb xknk kihkiek nk hbyñk
hlnltahk


hyqtám hy nlm qtamqym xúmaglm glxyiektli k yiqtkt dlt yn okthíi khynkiqy
rkmqk gkiqahkh hy hlgy hbyñkm, tydktqahkm yi hlm ranytkm, qlhkm vymqahkm hy
bilm xlioanym kigrlm, kn dktygyt, hy kikmglqy fkqkikhl, gli bikm qlgkm
fnkigkm hy hynckhl gkiyubí, qki nbyickm uby mónl yn tafyqy hyn xlioan
hymgbftíki. qtkm ynnkm vyiík nk glihymk qtapknha, k ubayi qtkík hy nk xkil
yn ymgbhytl qtapknhíi hy nk fnkigk fktfk, vymqahk hy paiímaxk w iyctk
fkwyqk dlt ptamkt, uby, k vyiat ptamkhk, hymgbftaytk gkhk ctkil hyn ctkihlt
hy bi cktfkiel hy nlm fbyilm hy xktqlm. nk glnk, l pknhk, l glxl nnkxktnk
ubamaytyi, ytk hy qtym dbiqkm, nkm gbknym my mbmqyiqkfki yi nkm xkilm hy
qtym dkoym, kmaxymxl vymqahlm hy nbql, rkgayihl bik vamqlmk w xkqyxáqagk
pacbtk gli kubynnlm qtym áicbnlm kgbqlm uby nkm qtym dbiqkm pltxkfki, dlt
nl gbkn gkwytli qlhlm nlm uby nk pknhk dbiqakcbhk xatktli uby dlt ynnk my
hyfík nnkxkt nk glihymk qtapknha, glxl ma haoémyxlm nk glihymk hy nkm qtym
pknhkm; w kmí hagy fyiyicyna uby pby vythkh, w uby hy mb dtldal kdynnahl my
nnkxk nk glihymk nlfbik, k gkbmk uby my gtakfki yi mb glihkhl xbgrlm nlflm,
w uby ma glxl ytki nlflm pbytki elttkm, nk nnkxktki nk glihymk elttbik, dlt
myt glmqbxfty yi kubynnkm dktqym qlxkt nlm myñltym nk hyilxaikgaói hy mbm
ilxftym hy nk glmk l glmkm yi uby xám mbm ymqkhlm kfbihki; yxdytl ymqk
glihymk, dlt pkvltygyt nk ilvyhkh hy mb pknhk, hyoó yn nlfbik w qlxó yn
qtapknha.

vyiíki nkm hlgy hbyñkm w nk myñltk k dkml hy dtlgymaói, gbfaytqlm nlm
tlmqtlm gli bilm vynlm iyctlm w il qtkmdktyiqym glxl yn hy qtapknhíi, mail
qki kdtyqkhlm uby iaicbik glmk my qtkmnbgíki.

kmí glxl kgkfó hy dktygyt yn hbyñymgl ymgbkhtói, yn hbuby, nk hbubymk w hli
ubaolqy my dbmaytli yi day, w qlhlm kubynnlm uby nk ymdkgalmk dtlgymaói
xatkfki. dktktli nkm hlgy hbyñkm w ragaytli gknny, dlt xyhal hy nk gbkn nk
hlnltahk my khynkiqó, mai hyoktnk hy nk xkil qtapknhíi, vayihl nl gbkn yn
hbuby, nk hbubymk w hli ubaolqy, my khynkiqktli lftk hy hlgy dkmlm k
tygyfatnk. ynnk, dbymqk nkm tlhannkm yi yn mbynl, gli vle kiqym fkmqk w
tligk uby mbqan w hanagkhk, haol:

-vbymqtkm ctkihyekm myki mytvahkm hy il rkgyt qkiqk gltqymík k ymqy mb
gtakhl; hacl, k ymqk mb gtakhk, dltuby, mycúi mlw hy hlnltahk, il kgytqkté
k tymdlihyt k nl uby hyfl, k gkbmk uby xa ymqtkñk w okxám vamqk hymhagrk xy
rk nnyvkhl yn yiqyihaxayiql il mé khóihy, w hyfy hy myt xbw nyolm, dbym
gbkiql xám ny fbmgl xyilm ny rknnl.

-mai én ymqktík -tymdlihaó yn hbuby-, myñltk glihymk, yn uby il hymgbftaymy
dlt vbymqtk dytmlik vbymqtl vknlt, yn gbkn, mai xám vyt, ym xytygyhlt hy
qlhk nk ikqk hy nk gltqymík w hy qlhk nk pnlt hy nkm fayi gtakhkm
gytyxliakm.

w, nyvkiqáihlnk hy nk xkil, nk nnyvó k kmyiqkt yi bik mannk obiql k nk
hbubymk, nk gbkn nk tygafaó kmaxamxl gli xbgrl glxyhaxayiql.

hli ubaolqy gknnkfk, w mkigrl kihkfk xbytql dlt vyt yn tlmqtl hy nk
qtapknha w hy kncbik hy mbm xbgrkm hbyñkm, dytl il pby dlmafny rkmqk uby
ynnkm hy mb ctkhl w vlnbiqkh my hymgbftaytli.

mlmyckhlm qlhlm w dbymqlm yi manyigal, ymqkfki ymdytkihl ubaéi ny rkfík hy
tlxdyt, w pby nk hbyñk hlnltahk gli ymqkm dknkftkm:

-glipakhk ymqlw, myñlt dlhytlmímaxl, rytxlmímaxk myñltk w hamgtyqímaxlm
gatgbimqkiqym, uby rk hy rknnkt xa gbaqímaxk yi vbymqtlm vknytlmímaxlm
dygrlm kglcaxayiql il xyilm dnágahl uby cyiytlml w hlnltlml, dltuby ynnk ym
qkn, uby ym fkmqkiqy k yiqytiygyt nlm xátxlnym, w k kfnkihkt nlm hakxkiqym,
w k xlnapagkt nlm kgytlm hy nlm xám yihbtygahlm gltkeliym hyn xbihl; dytl,
kiqym uby mknck k nk dnkek hy vbymqtlm líhlm, dlt il hygat ltyokm, ubamaytk
uby xy ragaytki mkfahltk ma ymqá yi ymqy ctyxal, glttl w glxdkñík yn
kgyihtkhímaxl gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrímaxk w mb ymgbhytímaxl
dkiek.

-yn dkiek -kiqym uby lqtl tymdlihaymy, haol mkigrl- kubí ymqk, w yn hli
ubaolqímaxl kmaxamxl; w kmí, dlhtéam, hlnltlmímaxk hbyñímaxk, hygat nl uby
ubamaytahímaxam, uby qlhlm ymqkxlm dtliqlm w kdktyokhímaxlm k myt vbymqtlm
mytvahltímaxlm.

yi ymql my nyvkiqó hli ubaolqy, w, yigkxaikihl mbm tkeliym k nk hlnltahk
hbyñk, haol:

-ma vbymqtkm gbaqkm, kicbmqakhk myñltk, my dbyhyi dtlxyqyt kncbik ymdytkiek
hy tyxyhal dlt kncúi vknlt l pbytekm hy kncúi kihkiqy gkfknnytl, kubí ymqái
nkm xíkm, uby, kbiuby pnkgkm w ftyvym, qlhkm my yxdnyktái yi vbymqtl
mytvagal. wl mlw hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, gbwl kmbxdql ym kgbhat k qlhk
mbytqy hy xyiymqytlmlm, w, mayihl ymql kmí, glxl nl ym, il rkféam xyiymqyt,
myñltk, gkdqkt fyiyvlnyigakm ia fbmgkt dtyáxfbnlm, mail, k nk nnkik w mai
tlhylm, hygat vbymqtlm xknym, uby líhlm lm ymgbgrki uby mkftái, ma il
tyxyhaktnlm, hlnytmy hynnlm.

lwyihl nl gbkn, nk hlnltahk hbyñk rael myñkn hy ubytyt kttloktmy k nlm daym
hy hli ubaolqy, w kbi my kttloó, w, dbcikihl dlt kftkeátmynlm, hygík:

-kiqy ymqlm daym w daytikm xy kttlol, ¡lr gkfknnytl aivagql!, dlt myt nlm
uby mli fkmkm w glnbikm hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík; ymqlm daym ubaytl fymkt,
hy gbwlm dkmlm dyihy w gbynck qlhl yn tyxyhal hy xa hymctkgak, ¡lr vknytlml
kihkiqy, gbwkm vythkhytkm pkekñkm hyoki kqtám w ymgbtygyi nkm pkfbnlmkm hy
nlm kxkhamym, ymdnkihakiym w fynakiamym!

w, hyokihl k hli ubaolqy, my vlnvaó k mkigrl dkiek, w, kmaéihlny hy nkm
xkilm, ny haol:

-¡lr qú, yn xám nykn ymgbhytl uby okxám matvaó k gkfknnytl kihkiqy yi nlm
dtymyiqym ia yi nlm dkmkhlm macnlm, xám nbyicl yi flihkh uby nk fktfk hy
qtapknhíi, xa kglxdkñkhlt, uby ymqá dtymyiqy!, fayi dbyhym dtygaktqy uby yi
mytvat kn ctki hli ubaolqy matvym yi gaptk k qlhk nk gkqytvk hy gkfknnytlm
uby rki qtkqkhl nkm ktxkm yi yn xbihl. glioútlqy, dlt nl uby hyfym k qb
flihkh pahynímaxk, xy mykm fbyi aiqytgymlt gli qb hbyñl, dktk uby nbycl
pkvltyegk k ymqk rbxanímaxk w hymhagrkhímaxk glihymk.

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-hy uby myk xa flihkh, myñltík xík, qki nktck w ctkihy glxl nk fktfk hy
vbymqtl ymgbhytl, k xí xy rkgy xbw dlgl kn gkml; fktfkhk w gli faclqym
qyick wl xa knxk gbkihl hymqk vahk vkwk, uby ym nl uby axdltqk, uby hy nkm
fktfkm hy kgá dlgl l ikhk xy gbtl; dytl, mai ymkm mlgknañkm ia dnycktakm,
wl tlckté k xa kxl, uby mé uby xy ubayty fayi, w xám kcltk uby xy rk
xyiymqyt dktk gaytql iyclgal, uby pkvltyegk w kwbhy k vbymk xytgyh yi qlhl
nl uby dbhayty. vbymk xytgyh hymyxfkúny mb gbaqk w gbéiqyilmnk, w hyoy
rkgyt, uby qlhlm ilm yiqyihytyxlm.

tyvyiqkfki hy tamk gli ymqkm glmkm nlm hbubym, glxl kubynnlm uby rkfíki
qlxkhl yn dbnml k nk qkn kvyiqbtk, w knkfkfki yiqty mí nk kcbhyek w
hamaxbnkgaói hy nk qtapknha, nk gbkn, vlnvaéihlmy k myiqkt, haol:

-«hyn pkxlml tyail hy gkihkwk, uby gky yiqty nk ctki qtkdlfkik w yn xkt hyn
mbt, hlm nycbkm xám knná hyn gkfl glxltíi, pby myñltk nk tyaik hlñk
xkcbigak, vabhk hyn tyw ktgradaynk, mb myñlt w xktahl, hy gbwl xkqtaxlial
qbvaytli w dtlgtyktli k nk aipkiqk kiqlilxkmak, rytyhytk hyn tyail, nk gbkn
hagrk aipkiqk kiqlilxkmak my gtaó w gtygaó hyfkol hy xa qbqynk w hlgqtaik,
dlt myt wl nk xám kiqacbk w nk xám dtaigadkn hbyñk hy mb xkhty. mbgyhaó,
dbym, uby, wyihl híkm w vaiayihl híkm, nk iañk kiqlilxkmak nnycó k yhkh hy
gkqltgy kñlm, gli qki ctki dytpygaói hy rytxlmbtk, uby il nk dbhl mbfat xám
hy dbiql nk ikqbtknyek. ¡dbym hackxlm kcltk uby nk hamgtygaói ytk xlglmk!
kmí ytk hamgtyqk glxl fynnk, w ytk nk xám fynnk hyn xbihl, w nl ym, ma wk
nlm rkhlm aivahalmlm w nkm dktgkm yihbtygahkm il nk rki gltqkhl nk ymqkxfty
hy nk vahk. dytl il rkftái, uby il rki hy dytxaqat nlm gaynlm uby my rkck
qkiql xkn k nk qayttk glxl mytík nnyvktmy yi kctke yn tkgaxl hyn xám
rytxlml vyhbñl hyn mbynl. hy ymqk rytxlmbtk, w il glxl my hyfy yigktygahk
hy xa qltdy nyicbk, my yikxltó bi iúxytl aipaiaql hy dtíigadym, kmí
ikqbtknym glxl ymqtkioytlm, yiqty nlm gbknym lmó nyvkiqkt nlm dyimkxayiqlm
kn gaynl hy qkiqk fynnyek bi gkfknnytl dktqagbnkt uby yi nk gltqy ymqkfk,
glipakhl yi mb xlgyhkh w yi mb faekttík, w yi mbm xbgrkm rkfanahkhym w
ctkgakm, w pkganahkh w pynagahkh hy aicyial; dltuby rkcl mkfyt k vbymqtkm
ctkihyekm, ma il nl qayiyi dlt yilol, uby qlgkfk bik cbaqkttk uby nk rkgík
rkfnkt, w xám uby ytk dlyqk w ctki fkanktíi, w mkfík rkgyt bik okbnk hy
dáoktlm, uby mlnkxyiqy k rkgytnkm dbhaytk ckikt nk vahk gbkihl my vaytk yi
ymqtyxk iygymahkh, uby qlhkm ymqkm dktqym w ctkgakm mli fkmqkiqym k
hyttafkt bik xliqkñk, il uby bik hynagkhk hligynnk. dytl qlhk mb cyiqanyek
w fbyi hlikaty w qlhkm mbm ctkgakm w rkfanahkhym pbytki dlgk l iaicbik
dktqy dktk tyihat nk pltqknyek hy xa iañk, ma yn nkhtói hymbynnkgktkm il
bmktk hyn tyxyhal hy tyihatxy k xí dtaxytl. dtaxytl ubaml yn xknkihtíi w
hymknxkhl vkckxbihl ctkioyktxy nk vlnbiqkh w glrygrktxy yn cbmql, dktk uby
wl, xkn kngkahy, ny yiqtyckmy nkm nnkvym hy nk pltqknyek uby cbkthkfk. yi
tymlnbgaói: én xy khbnó yn yiqyihaxayiql w xy taihaó nk vlnbiqkh gli il mé
ubé haoym w ftaiglm uby xy hal, dytl nl uby xám xy rael dlmqtkt w hkt
glixacl dlt yn mbynl pbytli bikm gldnkm uby ny lí gkiqkt bik ilgry hymhy
bik tyok uby gkík k bik gknnyobynk hlihy én ymqkfk, uby, ma xkn il xy
kgbythl, hygíki:

   hy nk hbngy xa yiyxack
   ikgy bi xkn uby kn knxk rayty,
   w, dlt xám qltxyiql, ubayty
   uby my mayiqk w il my hack.

dktygaóxy nk qtlvk hy dytnkm, w mb vle hy knxífkt, w hymdbém kgá, hacl,
hymhy yiqligym, vayihl yn xkn yi uby gkí dlt ymqlm w lqtlm myxyokiqym
vytmlm, ry glimahytkhl uby hy nkm fbyikm w gligytqkhkm tydúfnagkm my rkfíki
hy hymqyttkt nlm dlyqkm, glxl kglimyokfk dnkqói, k nl xyilm, nlm nkmgavlm,
dltuby ymgtafyi bikm gldnkm, il glxl nkm hyn xktubém hy xkiqbk, uby
yiqtyqayiyi w rkgyi nnltkt nlm iañlm w k nkm xboytym, mail bikm kcbhyekm
uby, k xlhl hy fnkihkm ymdaikm, lm kqtkvaymki yn knxk, w glxl tkwlm lm
raytyi yi ynnk, hyokihl mkil yn vymqahl. w lqtk vye gkiqó:

   vyi, xbytqy, qki ymglihahk
   uby il qy mayiqk vyiat,
   dltuby yn dnkgyt hyn xltat
   il xy qltiy k hkt nk vahk.

w hymqy okye lqtkm gldnaqkm w ymqtkxflqym, uby gkiqkhlm yigkiqki w ymgtaqlm
mbmdyihyi. dbym, ¿ubé gbkihl my rbxannki k glxdliyt bi céiytl hy vytml uby
yi gkihkwk my bmkfk yiqligym, k ubayi ynnlm nnkxkfki mycbahannkm? knní ytk
yn ftaigkt hy nkm knxkm, yn tyqlekt hy nk tamk, yn hymkmlmaycl hy nlm
gbytdlm w, paiknxyiqy, yn kelcby hy qlhlm nlm myiqahlm. w kmí, hacl,
myñltym xílm, uby nlm qknym qtlvkhltym gli obmql qíqbnl nlm hyfíki
hymqyttkt k nkm amnkm hy nlm nkcktqlm. dytl il qayiyi ynnlm nk gbndk, mail
nlm maxdnym uby nlm knkfki w nkm flfkm uby nlm gtyyi; w ma wl pbytk nk
fbyik hbyñk uby hyfík, il xy rkfíki hy xlvyt mbm qtkmilgrkhlm gligydqlm, ia
rkfík hy gtyyt myt vythkh kubyn hygat: "vavl xbtayihl, kthl yi yn wynl,
qayxfnl yi yn pbycl, ymdytl mai ymdytkiek, dátqlxy w ubéhlxy", gli lqtlm
axdlmafnym hymqk tknyk, hy uby ymqái mbm ymgtaqlm nnyilm. dbym, ¿ubé gbkihl
dtlxyqyi yn péiaz hy ktkfak, nk gltlik hy ktahakik, nlm gkfknnlm hyn mln,
hyn mbt nkm dytnkm, hy qífkt yn ltl w hy dkigkwk yn fánmkxl? kubí ym hlihy
ynnlm knktcki xám nk dnbxk, glxl nym gbymqk dlgl dtlxyqyt nl uby okxám
dayimki ia dbyhyi gbxdnat. dytl, ¿hóihy xy havaytql? ¡kw hy xí, hymhagrkhk!
¿ubé nlgbtk l ubé hymkqail xy nnyvk k gliqkt nkm koyikm pknqkm, qyiayihl
qkiql uby hygat hy nkm xíkm? ¡kw hy xí, lqtk vye, mai vyiqbtk!, uby il xy
taihaytli nlm vytmlm, mail xa maxdnagahkh; il xy kfnkihktli nkm xúmagkm,
mail xa navakihkh: xa xbgrk aciltkigak w xa dlgl khvytqaxayiql kftaytli yn
gkxail w hymyxfktkektli nk myihk k nlm dkmlm hy hli gnkvaol, uby émqy ym yn
ilxfty hyn typytahl gkfknnytl; w kmí, mayihl wl nk xyhakiytk, én my rknnó
bik w xbw xbgrkm vygym yi nk ymqkigak hy nk dlt xí, w il dlt én, yickñkhk
kiqlilxkmak, hyfkol hyn qíqbnl hy vythkhytl ymdlml; uby, kbiuby dygkhltk,
il glimaiqaytk uby mai myt mb xktahl nk nnycktk k nk vatk hy nk mbynk hy
mbm ekdkqannkm. ¡il, il, yml il: yn xkqtaxlial rk hy at khynkiqy yi
gbknubayt iyclgal hymqlm uby dlt xí my qtkqkty! mlnkxyiqy rbfl bi hkñl yi
ymqy iyclgal, uby pby yn hy nk hymacbknhkh, dlt myt hli gnkvaol bi
gkfknnytl dktqagbnkt, w nk aipkiqk kiqlilxkmak rytyhytk, glxl wk ry hagrl,
hyn tyail. kncbilm híkm ymqbvl yigbfaytqk w mlnkdkhk yi nk mkckgahkh hy xa
tygkql ymqk xktkñk, rkmqk uby xy dktygaó uby nk afk hymgbftayihl k xám
kihkt il mé ubé raigrkeói hyn vayiqty hy kiqlilxkmak, gbwl qyxlt ilm rael
yiqtkt yi fbtyl k nlm qtym, w mknaó hén uby, kiqym uby my mknaymy k nbe yn
xkn tygkhl, hli gnkvaol dahaymy kiqy yn vagktal dlt mb xboyt k kiqlilxkmak,
yi py hy bik géhbnk uby hy myt mb ymdlmk nk aipkiqk ny rkfík rygrl, ilqkhk
dlt xa aicyial, gli qkiqk pbytek, uby nkm hy mkimói il dbhaytki tlxdytnk.
ragaétlimy nkm hanacyigakm, val yn vagktal nk géhbnk, qlxó yn qkn vagktal
nk glipymaói k nk myñltk, glipymó hy dnkil, xkihónk hydlmaqkt yi gkmk hy bi
kncbkgan hy gltqy xbw rlitkhl...»

k ymqk mkeói, haol mkigrl:

-qkxfaéi yi gkihkwk rkw kncbkganym hy gltqy, dlyqkm w mycbahannkm, dlt nl
uby dbyhl obtkt uby axkcail uby qlhl yn xbihl ym bil. dytl hémy vbymk
xytgyh dtaymk, myñltk qtapknha, uby ym qkthy w wk xy xbytl dlt mkfyt yn pai
hymqk qki nktck ramqltak.

-mí rkté -tymdlihaó nk glihymk.





gkdíqbnl zzzaz. hlihy nk qtapknha dtlmacby mb ymqbdyihk w xyxltkfny
ramqltak


hy gbknubaytk dknkftk uby mkigrl hygík, nk hbubymk cbmqkfk qkiql glxl my
hymymdytkfk hli ubaolqy; w, xkiháihlny uby gknnkmy, nk hlnltahk dtlmacbaó
hagayihl:

-«yi pai, kn gkfl hy xbgrkm hyxkihkm w tymdbymqkm, glxl nk aipkiqk my
ymqkfk mayxdty yi mbm qtygy, mai mknat ia vktakt hy nk dtaxytk hygnktkgaói,
yn vagktal myiqyigaó yi pkvlt hy hli gnkvaol, w my nk yiqtycó dlt mb
nycíqaxk ymdlmk, hy nl uby tygafaó qkiql yilol nk tyaik hlñk xkcbigak,
xkhty hy nk aipkiqk kiqlilxkmak, uby hyiqtl hy qtym híkm nk yiqyttkxlm.»

-hyfaó hy xltat, mai hbhk -haol mkigrl.

-¡gnktl ymqá! -tymdlihaó qtapknhíi-, uby yi gkihkwk il my yiqayttki nkm
dytmlikm vavkm, mail nkm xbytqkm.

-wk my rk vamql, myñlt ymgbhytl -tydnagó mkigrl-, yiqyttkt bi hymxkwkhl
gtywyihl myt xbytql, w dktygíkxy k xí uby ymqkfk nk tyaik xkcbigak lfnackhk
k hymxkwktmy kiqym uby k xltatmy; uby gli nk vahk xbgrkm glmkm my tyxyhaki,
w il pby qki ctkihy yn hamdktkqy hy nk aipkiqk uby lfnackmy k myiqatny
qkiql. gbkihl my rbfaytk gkmkhl ymk myñltk gli kncúi dkoy mbwl, l gli lqtl
gtakhl hy mb gkmk, glxl rki rygrl lqtkm xbgrkm, mycúi ry líhl hygat, pbytk
yn hkñl mai tyxyhal; dytl yn rkfytmy gkmkhl gli bi gkfknnytl qki
cyiqanrlxfty w qki yiqyihahl glxl kubí ilm ny rki daiqkhl, yi vythkh yi
vythkh uby, kbiuby pby iygyhkh, il pby qki ctkihy glxl my dayimk; dltuby,
mycúi nkm tycnkm hy xa myñlt, uby ymqá dtymyiqy w il xy hyoktá xyiqat, kmí
glxl my rkgyi hy nlm rlxftym nyqtkhlm nlm lfamdlm, my dbyhyi rkgyt hy nlm
gkfknnytlm, w xám ma mli kihkiqym, nlm tywym w nlm yxdytkhltym.

-tkeói qayiym, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy, glxl
qyick hlm hyhlm hy vyiqbtk, ymqá yi dlqyigak dtldaigbk hy myt yn xkwlt
myñlt hyn xbihl. dytl, dkmy khynkiqy nk myñltk hlnltahk, uby k xí my xy
qtkmnbgy uby ny pknqk dlt gliqkt nl kxktcl hymqk rkmqk kubí hbngy ramqltak.

-w ¡góxl ma ubyhk nl kxktcl! -tymdlihaó nk glihymk-, w qki kxktcl uby yi mb
glxdktkgaói mli hbngym nkm qbytkm w mkftlmkm nkm khynpkm. «xbytqk, dbym, nk
tyaik, w il hymxkwkhk, nk yiqyttkxlm; w, kdyikm nk gbftaxlm gli nk qayttk
w kdyikm ny haxlm yn únqaxl vkny, gbkihl,

ubam qknak pkihl qyxdytyq k nkgrtwxam?,

dbymql mlfty bi gkfknnl hy xkhytk, dktygaó yigaxk hy nk mydbnqbtk hy nk
tyaik yn cackiqy xknkxftbil, dtaxl gltxkil hy xkcbigak, uby obiql gli myt
gtbyn ytk yigkiqkhlt, yn gbkn gli mbm ktqym, yi vyickiek hy nk xbytqy hy mb
gltxkik, w dlt gkmqacl hyn kqtyvaxayiql hy hli gnkvaol, w dlt hymdygrl hy
nk hyxkmík hy kiqlilxkmak, nlm hyoó yigkiqkhlm mlfty nk xymxk mydbnqbtk: k
ynnk, glivytqahk yi bik oaxak hy ftligy, w k én, yi bi ymdkiqlml glglhtanl
hy bi xyqkn il glilgahl, w yiqty nlm hlm ymqá bi dkhtói, kmaxamxl hy xyqkn,
w yi én ymgtaqkm yi nyicbk matíkgk bikm nyqtkm uby, rkfaéihlmy hygnktkhl yi
nk gkihkwymgk, w krltk yi nk gkmqynnkik, yigayttki ymqk myiqyigak: "il
glftktái mb dtaxytk pltxk ymqlm hlm kqtyvahlm kxkiqym rkmqk uby yn vknytlml
xkigrycl vyick glixacl k nkm xkilm yi maicbnkt fkqknnk, uby dktk mlnl mb
ctki vknlt cbkthki nlm rkhlm ymqk ibigk vamqk kvyiqbtk". rygrl ymql, mkgó
hy nk vkaik bi kigrl w hymxymbtkhl knpkioy, w, kmaéihlxy k xí dlt nlm
gkfynnlm, rael paiqk hy ubytyt mycktxy nk clnk w gltqktxy gytgyi nk gkfyek.
qbtféxy, dycómyxy nk vle k nk cktckiqk, ubyhé xlríik yi qlhl ymqtyxl, dytl,
gli qlhl, xy ympltgé nl xám uby dbhy, w, gli vle qyxfnkhltk w hlnayiqy, ny
haoy qkiqkm w qknym glmkm, uby ny ragaytli mbmdyihyt nk yoygbgaói hy qki
tacbtlml gkmqacl. paiknxyiqy, rael qtkyt kiqy mí qlhkm nkm hbyñkm hy
dknkgal, uby pbytli ymqkm uby ymqái dtymyiqym, w, hymdbém hy rkfyt
yzkcytkhl ibymqtk gbndk w vaqbdytkhl nkm glihagaliym hy nkm hbyñkm, mbm
xknkm xkñkm w dyltym qtkekm, w gktckihl k qlhkm nk gbndk uby wl mlnk qyiík,
haol uby il ubytík gli dyik gkdaqkn gkmqacktilm, mail gli lqtkm dyikm
hankqkhkm, uby ilm haymyi bik xbytqy gavan w gliqaibk; w, yi kubyn xamxl
xlxyiql w dbiql uby kgkfó hy hygat ymql, myiqaxlm qlhkm uby my ilm kftíki
nlm dltlm hy nk gktk, w uby dlt qlhk ynnk ilm dbiekfki glxl gli dbiqkm hy
kcbokm. kgbhaxlm nbycl gli nkm xkilm k nlm tlmqtlm, w rknnáxlilm hy nk
xkiytk uby krltk vytéam.»

w nbycl nk hlnltahk w nkm hyxám hbyñkm knektli nlm kiqapkgym gli uby
gbfaytqkm vyiíki, w hymgbftaytli nlm tlmqtlm, qlhlm dlfnkhlm hy fktfkm,
gbánym tbfakm, gbánym iyctkm, gbánym fnkigkm w gbánym knfkttkekhkm, hy gbwk
vamqk xlmqtktli ubyhkt khxatkhlm yn hbuby w nk hbubymk, dkmxkhlm hli
ubaolqy w mkigrl, w kqóiaqlm qlhlm nlm dtymyiqym.

w nk qtapknha dtlmacbaó:

-«hymqk xkiytk ilm gkmqacó kubyn plnnói w xknaiqyigalikhl hy xknkxftbil,
gbftayihl nk fnkihbtk w xltfahye hy ibymqtlm tlmqtlm gli nk kmdytyek hymqkm
gythkm, uby dnbcbaytk kn gaynl uby kiqym gli mb hymxymbtkhl knpkioy ilm
rbfaytk hyttafkhl nkm qymqkm, uby il uby ilm kmlxftktk nk nbe hy ibymqtkm
gktkm gli ymqk flttk uby ilm gbfty; dltuby ma yiqtkxlm yi gbyiqk, myñltym
xílm (w ymql uby vlw k hygat kcltk nl ubamaytk hygat rygrlm xam lolm
pbyiqym, dytl nk glimahytkgaói hy ibymqtk hymctkgak, w nlm xktym uby rkmqk
kubí rki nnlvahl, nlm qayiyi mai rbxlt w myglm glxl ktamqkm, w kmí, nl haté
mai náctaxkm), hacl, dbym, uby ¿khóihy dlhtá at bik hbyñk gli fktfkm? ¿ubé
dkhty l ubé xkhty my hlnytá hynnk? ¿ubaéi nk hktá kwbhk? dbym, kbi gbkihl
qayiy nk qye namk w yn tlmqtl xktqataekhl gli xan mbytqym hy xyiobtoym w
xbhkm, kdyikm rknnk ubayi fayi nk ubaytk, ¿ubé rktá gbkihl hymgbftk rygrl
bi flmuby mb tlmqtl? ¡lr hbyñkm w glxdkñytkm xíkm, yi hymhagrkhl dbiql
ikgaxlm, yi rltk xyicbkhk ibymqtlm dkhtym ilm yicyihtktli!»

w, hagayihl ymql, hal xbymqtkm hy hymxkwktmy.





gkdíqbnl zn. hy glmkm uby kqkñyi w qlgki k ymqk kvyiqbtk w k ymqk
xyxltkfny ramqltak


tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy, qlhlm nlm uby cbmqki hy myxyokiqym ramqltakm glxl
émqk hyfyi hy xlmqtktmy kctkhygahlm k gahy rkxyqy, mb kbqlt dtaxytl, dlt nk
gbtalmahkh uby qbvl yi gliqktilm nkm myxíiaxkm hynnk, mai hyokt glmk, dlt
xyibhk uby pbymy, uby il nk mkgkmy k nbe hamqaiqkxyiqy: daiqk nlm
dyimkxayiqlm, hymgbfty nkm axkcaikgaliym, tymdlihy k nkm qágaqkm, kgnktk
nkm hbhkm, tymbynvy nlm ktcbxyiqlm; paiknxyiqy, nlm áqlxlm hyn xám gbtalml
hymyl xkiapaymqk. ¡lr kbqlt gynyféttaxl! ¡lr hli ubaolqy hagrlml! ¡lr
hbngaiyk pkxlmk! ¡lr mkigrl dkiek ctkgalml! qlhlm obiqlm w gkhk bil hy dlt
mí vaváam macnlm aipaiaqlm, dktk cbmql w cyiytkn dkmkqayxdl hy nlm
vavayiqym.

hagy, dbym, nk ramqltak uby, kmí glxl mkigrl val hymxkwkhk k nk hlnltahk,
haol:

-dlt nk py hy rlxfty hy fayi, obtl, w dlt yn macnl hy qlhlm xam dkmkhlm nlm
dkiekm, uby okxám ry líhl ia vamql, ia xa kxl xy rk gliqkhl, ia yi mb
dyimkxayiql rk gkfahl, myxyokiqy kvyiqbtk glxl émqk. vánckqy xan mkqkikmym,
dlt il xknhygatqy dlt yigkiqkhlt w cackiqy, xknkxftbil; w ¿il rknnkmqy lqtl
céiytl hy gkmqacl uby hkt k ymqkm dygkhltkm mail yn hy fktfktnkm? ¿góxl w
il pbytk xyolt, w k ynnkm nym ymqbvaytk xám k gbyiql, ubaqktnym nk xaqkh hy
nkm iktagym hy xyhal kttafk, kbiuby rkfnktki ckiclml, uby il dliytnym
fktfkm? kdlmqkté wl uby il qayiyi rkgayihk dktk dkckt k ubayi nkm tkdy.

-kmí ym nk vythkh, myñlt -tymdlihaó bik hy nkm hlgy-, uby il qyiyxlm
rkgayihk dktk xlihktilm; w kmí, ryxlm qlxkhl kncbikm hy ilmlqtkm dlt
tyxyhal krlttkqavl hy bmkt hy bilm dyclqym l dktgrym dyckolmlm, w
kdnagáihlnlm k nlm tlmqtlm, w qatkihl hy clndy, ubyhkxlm tkmkm w namkm glxl
plihl hy xltqytl hy dayhtk; uby, dbymql uby rkw yi gkihkwk xboytym uby
kihki hy gkmk yi gkmk k ubaqkt yn vynnl w k dbnat nkm gyokm w rkgyt lqtlm
xyiobtoym qlgkiqym k xboytym, ilmlqtkm nkm hbyñkm hy xa myñltk dlt okxám
ubamaxlm khxaqatnkm, dltuby nkm xám lnamgki k qytgytkm, rkfayihl hyokhl hy
myt dtaxkm; w ma dlt yn myñlt hli ubaolqy il mlxlm tyxyhakhkm, gli fktfkm
ilm nnyvktái k nk mydbnqbtk.

-wl xy dynktík nkm xíkm -haol hli ubaolqy- yi qayttk hy xltlm, ma il
tyxyhakmy nkm vbymqtkm.

k ymqy dbiql, vlnvaó hy mb hymxkwl nk qtapknha w haol:

-yn tyqaiqíi hymk dtlxymk, vknytlml gkfknnytl, yi xyhal hy xa hymxkwl nnycó
k xam líhlm, w rk mahl dktqy dktk uby wl hén vbynvk w glfty qlhlm xam
myiqahlm; w kmí, hy ibyvl lm mbdnagl, kihkiqy íignaql w myñlt aihlxkfny,
vbymqtk ctkgalmk dtlxymk my glivaytqk yi lftk.

-dlt xí il ubyhktá -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: vyh, myñltk, ubé ym nl uby
qyicl hy rkgyt, uby yn áiaxl ymqá xbw dtliql dktk mytvatlm.

-ym yn gkml -tymdlihaó nk hlnltahk -uby hymhy kubí kn tyail hy gkihkwk, ma
my vk dlt qayttk, rkw gaigl xan nycbkm, hlm xám k xyilm; dytl ma my vk dlt
yn katy w dlt nk níiyk tygqk, rkw qtym xan w hlgayiqkm w vyaiqy w mayqy. ym
qkxfaéi hy mkfyt uby xknkxftbil xy haol uby gbkihl nk mbytqy xy hydktkmy kn
gkfknnytl ibymqtl nafytqkhlt, uby én ny yivaktík bik gkfknckhbtk rktql
xyolt w gli xyilm xknagakm uby nkm uby mli hy tyqltil, dltuby rk hy myt
kubyn xymxl gkfknnl hy xkhytk mlfty ubayi nnyvó yn vknytlml dayttym tlfkhk
k nk naihk xkcknlik, yn gbkn gkfknnl my tacy dlt bik gnkvaok uby qayiy yi
nk ptyiqy, uby ny matvy hy ptyil, w vbynk dlt yn katy gli qkiqk nacytyek
uby dktygy uby nlm xymxlm hakfnlm ny nnyvki. ymqy qkn gkfknnl, mycúi ym
qtkhagaói kiqacbk, pby glxdbymql dlt kubyn mkfal xytníi; dtymqómyny k
dayttym, uby ytk mb kxacl, gli yn gbkn rael ctkihym vakoym, w tlfó, glxl my
rk hagrl, k nk naihk xkcknlik, nnyváihlnk k nkm kigkm dlt yn katy, hyokihl
yxflfkhlm k gbkiqlm hymhy nk qayttk nlm xatkfki; w il ny dtymqkfk mail k
ubayi én ubytík, l xyolt my nl dkckfk; w hymhy yn ctki dayttym rkmqk
krltk il mkfyxlm uby rkwk mbfahl kncbil yi én. hy knní ny rk mkgkhl
xknkxftbil gli mbm ktqym, w ny qayiy yi mb dlhyt, w my matvy hén yi mbm
vakoym, uby nlm rkgy dlt xlxyiqlm, dlt havytmkm dktqym hyn xbihl, w rlw
ymqá kubí w xkñkik yi ptkigak w lqtl hík yi dlqlmí; w ym nl fbyil uby yn
qkn gkfknnl ia glxy, ia hbytxy ia ckmqk ryttkhbtkm, w nnyvk bi dltqkiqy dlt
nlm katym, mai qyiyt knkm, uby yn uby nnyvk yigaxk dbyhy nnyvkt bik qkek
nnyik hy kcbk yi nk xkil mai uby my ny hyttkxy clqk, mycúi gkxaik nnkil w
tydlmkhl; dlt nl gbkn nk naihk xkcknlik my rlnckfk xbgrl hy kihkt gkfknnytk
yi én.

k ymql haol mkigrl:

-dktk kihkt tydlmkhl w nnkil, xa tbgal, dbymql uby il kihk dlt nlm katym;
dytl dlt nk qayttk, wl ny gbqaté gli gbkiqlm dltqkiqym rkw yi yn xbihl.

taétlimy qlhlm, w nk hlnltahk dtlmacbaó:

-w ymqy qkn gkfknnl, ma ym uby xknkxftbil ubayty hkt pai k ibymqtk
hymctkgak, kiqym uby myk xyhak rltk yiqtkhk nk ilgry, ymqktá yi ibymqtk
dtymyigak, dltuby én xy maciapagó uby nk myñkn uby xy hktík dlt hlihy wl
yiqyihaymy uby rkfík rknnkhl yn gkfknnytl uby fbmgkfk, mytík yivaktxy yn
gkfknnl, hlihy pbymy gli glxlhahkh w dtymqyek.

-w ¿gbáiqlm gkfyi yi ymy gkfknnl? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

nk hlnltahk tymdlihaó:

-hlm dytmlikm: nk bik yi nk mannk w nk lqtk yi nkm kigkm; w, dlt nk xkwlt
dktqy, ymqkm qknym hlm dytmlikm mli gkfknnytl w ymgbhytl, gbkihl pknqk
kncbik tlfkhk hligynnk.

-ubyttík wl mkfyt, myñltk hlnltahk -haol mkigrl-, ubé ilxfty qayiy ymy
gkfknnl.

-yn ilxfty -tymdlihaó nk hlnltahk- il ym glxl yn gkfknnl hy fynltlpliqy,
uby my nnkxkfk dyckml, ia glxl yn hyn xkcil knyokihtl, nnkxkhl fbgépknl, ia
glxl yn hyn pbtalml ltnkihl, gbwl ilxfty pby ftannkhltl, ia xyilm fkwktqy,
uby pby yn hy tyaiknhlm hy xliqknfái, ia ptliqail, glxl yn hy tbcytl, ia
fllqym ia dytaqlk, glxl hagyi uby my nnkxki nlm hyn mln, ia qkxdlgl my
nnkxk ltynak, glxl yn gkfknnl yi uby yn hymhagrkhl tlhtacl, únqaxl tyw hy
nlm clhlm, yiqtó yi nk fkqknnk hlihy dythaó nk vahk w yn tyail.

-wl kdlmqkté -haol mkigrl- uby, dbym il ny rki hkhl iaicbil hymlm pkxlmlm
ilxftym hy gkfknnlm qki glilgahlm, uby qkxdlgl ny rkftái hkhl yn hy xa kxl,
tlgaikiqy, uby yi myt dtldal yzgyhy k qlhlm nlm uby my rki ilxftkhl.

-kmí ym -tymdlihaó nk fktfkhk glihymk-, dytl qlhkvík ny gbkhtk xbgrl,
dltuby my nnkxk gnkvanyñl yn knícytl, gbwl ilxfty glivayiy gli yn myt hy
nyñl, w gli nk gnkvaok uby qtky yi nk ptyiqy, w gli nk nacytyek gli uby
gkxaik; w kmí, yi gbkiql kn ilxfty, fayi dbyhy glxdyqat gli yn pkxlml
tlgaikiqy.

-il xy hymgliqyiqk yn ilxfty -tydnagó mkigrl-, dytl ¿gli ubé ptyil l gli
ubé oáubaxk my clfaytik?

-wk ry hagrl -tymdlihaó nk qtapknha- uby gli nk gnkvaok, uby, vlnvaéihlnk k
bik dktqy l k lqtk, yn gkfknnytl uby vk yigaxk ny rkgy gkxaikt glxl ubayty,
l wk dlt nlm katym, l wk tkmqtykihl w gkma fkttayihl nk qayttk, l dlt yn
xyhal, uby ym yn uby my fbmgk w my rk hy qyiyt yi qlhkm nkm kggaliym fayi
lthyikhkm.

-wk nl ubyttík vyt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl dyimkt uby qyicl hy mbfat yi
én, ia yi nk mannk ia yi nkm kigkm, ym dyhat dytkm kn lnxl. ¡fbyil ym uby
kdyikm dbyhl qyiytxy yi xa tbgal, w mlfty bi knfkthk xám fnkihk uby nk
xymxk myhk, w ubyttíki krltk uby xy qbvaymy yi bikm kigkm hy qkfnk, mai
gloíi ia knxlrkhk kncbik! dkthaye, wl il xy dayiml xlnyt dlt ubaqkt nkm
fktfkm k ikhay: gkhk gbkn my tkdy glxl xám ny vaiayty k gbyiql, uby wl il
dayiml kglxdkñkt k xa myñlt yi qki nktcl vakoy. gbkiql xám, uby wl il hyfl
hy rkgyt kn gkml dktk yn tkdkxayiql hymqkm fktfkm glxl nl mlw dktk yn
hymyigkiql hy xa myñltk hbngaiyk.

-mí mlam, kxacl -tymdlihaó nk qtapknha-, w qkiql, uby, mai vbymqtk
dtymyigak, yiqayihl uby il rktyxlm ikhk.

-¡kubí hyn tyw! -haol mkigrl-: ¿ubé qayiyi uby vyt nlm ymgbhytlm gli nkm
kvyiqbtkm hy mbm myñltym? ¿rkimy hy nnyvkt ynnlm nk pkxk hy nkm uby kgkfki,
w ryxlm hy nnyvkt ilmlqtlm yn qtkfkol? ¡gbytdl hy xí! kbi ma haoymyi nlm
ramqltakhltym: "yn qkn gkfknnytl kgkfó nk qkn w qkn kvyiqbtk, dytl gli
kwbhk hy pbnkil, mb ymgbhytl, mai yn gbkn pbytk axdlmafny yn kgkfktnk".
dytl, ¡uby ymgtafki k mygkm: "hli dktknadlxyiói hy nkm qtym ymqtynnkm kgkfó
nk kvyiqbtk hy nlm myam vymqacnlm", mai ilxftkt nk dytmlik hy mb
ymgbhytl, uby my rknnó dtymyiqy k qlhl, glxl ma il pbytk yi yn xbihl!
krltk, myñltym, vbynvl k hygat uby xa myñlt my dbyhy at mlnl, w fbyi
dtlvygrl ny rkck, uby wl xy ubyhkté kubí, yi glxdkñík hy nk hbubymk xa
myñltk, w dlhtík myt uby gbkihl vlnvaymy rknnkmy xyoltkhk nk gkbmk hy nk
myñltk hbngaiyk yi qytgal w ubaiql; dltuby dayiml, yi nlm tkqlm lgalmlm w
hymlgbdkhlm, hktxy bik qkihk hy kelqym uby il xy nk gbftk dynl.

-gli qlhl yml, ny rkféam hy kglxdkñkt ma pbyty iygymktal, fbyi mkigrl,
dltuby lm nl tlcktái fbyilm; uby il rki hy ubyhkt dlt vbymqtl aiúqan qyxlt
qki dlfnkhlm nlm tlmqtlm hymqkm myñltkm; uby, gaytql, mytík xkn gkml.

-¡kubí hyn tyw lqtk vye! -tydnagó mkigrl-. gbkihl ymqk gktahkh my ragaytk
dlt kncbikm hligynnkm tyglcahkm, l dlt kncbikm iañkm hy nk hlgqtaik,
dbhaytk yn rlxfty kvyiqbtktmy k gbknubayt qtkfkol, dytl uby nl mbptk dlt
ubaqkt nkm fktfkm k hbyñkm, ¡xkn kñl! xkm uby nkm vaymy wl k qlhkm gli
fktfkm, hymhy nk xkwlt rkmqk nk xyilt, w hy nk xám xynaihtlmk rkmqk nk xám
tydbnckhk.

-xkn ymqáam gli nkm hbyñkm, mkigrl kxacl -haol nk hbubymk-: xbgrl lm vkam
qtkm nk ldaiaói hyn flqagktal qlnyhkil. dbym k py uby il qyiéam tkeói; uby
hbyñkm rkw yi xa gkmk uby dbyhyi myt yoyxdnl hy hbyñkm, uby kubí ymqá xa
hlñk tlhtícbye, uby il xy hyoktá hygat lqtk glmk.

-xkm uby nk hack vbymqtk yzgynyigak -haol tlhtícbye-, uby halm mkfy nk
vythkh hy qlhl, w fbyikm l xknkm, fktfkhkm l nkxdañkm uby mykxlm nkm
hbyñkm, qkxfaéi ilm dktaó ibymqtk xkhty glxl k nkm lqtkm xboytym; w, dbym
halm ilm ygró yi yn xbihl, Én mkfy dktk ubé, w k mb xamytaglthak xy kqyicl,
w il k nkm fktfkm hy ikhay.

-krltk fayi, myñltk tlhtícbye -haol hli ubaolqy-, w myñltk qtapknha w
glxdkñík, wl ymdytl yi yn gaynl uby xatktá gli fbyilm lolm vbymqtkm gbaqkm,
uby mkigrl rktá nl uby wl ny xkihkty, wk vaiaymy gnkvanyñl w wk xy vaymy
gli xknkxftbil; uby wl mé uby il rkftík ikvkok uby gli xám pkganahkh tkdkmy
k vbymqtkm xytgyhym glxl xa ymdkhk tkdktík hy nlm rlxftlm nk gkfyek hy
xknkxftbil; uby halm mbpty k nlm xknlm, dytl il dktk mayxdty.

-¡kw! -haol k ymqk mkeói nk hlnltahk-, gli fyiacilm lolm xatyi k vbymqtk
ctkihyek, vknytlml gkfknnytl, qlhkm nkm ymqtynnkm hy nkm tycaliym gynymqym,
y aipbihki yi vbymqtl áiaxl qlhk dtlmdytahkh w vknyiqík dktk myt ymgbhl w
kxdktl hyn vaqbdytlml w kfkqahl céiytl hbyñymgl, kflxaikhl hy flqagktalm,
xbtxbtkhl hy ymgbhytlm w mlgknañkhl hy dkoym; uby xkn rkwk nk fynnkgk uby
yi nk pnlt hy mb yhkh il my xyqaó dtaxytl k myt xliok uby k hbyñk.
¡hymhagrkhkm hy ilmlqtkm nkm hbyñkm, uby, kbiuby vyickxlm dlt níiyk tygqk,
hy vktói yi vktói, hyn xamxl régqlt yn qtlwkil, il hyoktki hy ygrktlm bi
vlm ibymqtkm myñltkm, ma dyimkmyi dlt ynnl myt tyaikm! ¡lr cackiqy
xknkxftbil, uby, kbiuby ytym yigkiqkhlt, ytym gytqímaxl yi qbm dtlxymkm!,
yivíkilm wk kn mai dkt gnkvanyñl, dktk uby ibymqtk hymhagrk my kgkfy, uby
ma yiqtk yn gknlt w ymqkm ibymqtkm fktfkm hbtki, ¡cbkw hy ibymqtk vyiqbtk!

haol ymql gli qkiql myiqaxayiql nk qtapknha, uby mkgó nkm náctaxkm hy nlm
lolm hy qlhlm nlm gatgbimqkiqym, w kbi kttkmó nlm hy mkigrl, w dtldbml yi
mb gltkeói hy kglxdkñkt k mb myñlt rkmqk nkm únqaxkm dktqym hyn xbihl, ma
ym uby yi ynnl glimamqaymy ubaqkt nk nkik hy kubynnlm vyiytkfnym tlmqtlm.





gkdíqbnl zna. hy nk vyiahk hy gnkvanyñl, gli yn pai hymqk hankqkhk kvyiqbtk


nnycó yi ymql nk ilgry, w gli ynnk yn dbiql hyqytxaikhl yi uby yn pkxlml
gkfknnl gnkvanyñl vaiaymy, gbwk qkthkiek pkqackfk wk k hli ubaolqy,
dktygaéihlny uby, dbym xknkxftbil my hyqyiík yi yivaktny, l uby én il ytk
yn gkfknnytl dktk ubayi ymqkfk cbkthkhk kubynnk kvyiqbtk, l uby xknkxftbil
il lmkfk vyiat gli én k maicbnkt fkqknnk. dytl vyam kubí gbkihl k hymrltk
yiqtktli dlt yn okthíi gbkqtl mknvkoym, vymqahlm qlhlm hy vythy wyhtk, uby
mlfty mbm rlxftlm qtkíki bi ctki gkfknnl hy xkhytk. dbmaétliny hy daym yi
yn mbynl, w bil hy nlm mknvkoym haol:

-mbfk mlfty ymqk xáubaik yn uby qbvayty áiaxl dktk ynnl.

-kubí -haol mkigrl- wl il mbfl, dltuby ia qyicl áiaxl ia mlw gkfknnytl.

w yn mknvkoy dtlmacbaó hagayihl:

-w lgbdy nkm kigkm yn ymgbhytl, ma ym uby nl qayiy, w píymy hyn vknytlml
xknkxftbil, uby ma il pbyty hy mb ymdkhk, hy iaicbik lqtk, ia hy lqtk
xknagak, mytá lpyihahl; w il rkw xám uby qltgyt ymqk gnkvaok uby mlfty yn
gbynnl qtky dbymqk, uby én nlm nnyvktá dlt nlm katym khlihy nlm kqayihy
xknkxftbil; dytl, dltuby nk knqyek w mbfnaxahkh hyn gkxail il nym gkbmy
vácbahlm, my rki hy gbftat nlm lolm rkmqk uby yn gkfknnl tynaigry, uby mytá
myñkn hy rkfyt hkhl pai k mb vakoy.

ymql hagrl, hyokihl k gnkvanyñl, gli cyiqan gliqaiyiqy my vlnvaytli dlt
hlihy rkfíki vyiahl. nk hlnltahk, kmí glxl val kn gkfknnl, gkma gli
náctaxkm haol k hli ubaolqy:

-vknytlml gkfknnytl, nkm dtlxymkm hy xknkxftbil rki mahl gaytqkm: yn
gkfknnl ymqá yi gkmk, ibymqtkm fktfkm gtygyi, w gkhk bik hy ilmlqtkm w gli
gkhk dynl hynnkm qy mbdnagkxlm ilm tkdym w qbihkm, dbym il ymqá yi xám mail
yi uby mbfkm yi én gli qb ymgbhytl w hym pynagy dtaigadal k vbymqtl ibyvl
vakoy.

-yml rkté wl, myñltk glihymk qtapknha, hy xbw fbyi ctkhl w hy xyolt
qknkiqy, mai dliytxy k qlxkt gloíi, ia gknektxy ymdbynkm, dlt il hyqyiytxy:
qkiqk ym nk ckik uby qyicl hy vytlm k vlm, myñltk, w k qlhkm ymqkm hbyñkm
tkmkm w xlihkm.

-yml il rkté wl -haol mkigrl-, ia hy xknl ia hy fbyi qknkiqy, yi iaicbik
xkiytk; w ma ym uby ymqy tkdkxayiql il my dbyhy rkgyt mai uby wl mbfk k nkm
kigkm, fayi dbyhy fbmgkt xa myñlt lqtl ymgbhytl uby ny kglxdkñy, w ymqkm
myñltkm lqtl xlhl hy knamktmy nlm tlmqtlm; uby wl il mlw ftbol, dktk cbmqkt
hy kihkt dlt nlm katym. w ¿ubé hatái xam aimbnkilm gbkihl mydki uby mb
clfytikhlt my kihk dkmykihl dlt nlm vayiqlm? w lqtk glmk xám: uby rkfayihl
qtym xan w qkiqkm nycbkm hy kubí k gkihkwk, ma yn gkfknnl my gkimk l yn
cackiqy my yilok, qkthktyxlm yi hkt nk vbynqk xyhak hlgyik hy kñlm, w wk ia
rkftá íimbnk ia íimbnlm yi yn xbihl uby xy glileki; w, dbym my hagy
glxúixyiqy uby yi nk qkthkiek vk yn dynactl, w uby gbkihl qy haytyi nk
vkubannk kgbhkm gli nk mlcbannk, dythóiyixy nkm fktfkm hymqkm myñltkm, uby
fayi my ymqá mki dyhtl yi tlxk; ubaytl hygat uby fayi xy ymqlw yi ymqk
gkmk, hlihy qkiqk xytgyh my xy rkgy w hy gbwl hbyñl qki ctki fayi ymdytl
glxl ym vytxy clfytikhlt.

k nl uby yn hbuby haol:

-mkigrl kxacl, nk íimbnk uby wl lm ry dtlxyqahl il ym xlvafny ia pbcaqavk:
tkígym qayiy qki rlihkm, ygrkhkm yi nlm kfamxlm hy nk qayttk, uby il nk
kttkigktái ia xbhktái hy hlihy ymqá k qtym qatliym; w, dbym vlm mkféam uby
mé wl uby il rkw iaicbil céiytl hy lpagal hymqlm hy xkwlt gkiqík uby il my
ctkioyy gli kncbik mbytqy hy glrygrl, gbán xám, gbán xyilm, yn uby wl
ubaytl nnyvkt dlt ymqy clfaytil ym uby vkam gli vbymqtl myñlt hli ubaolqy k
hkt gaxk w gkfl k ymqk xyxltkfny kvyiqbtk; uby krltk vlnváam mlfty
gnkvanyñl gli nk ftyvyhkh uby mb nacytyek dtlxyqy, ltk nk gliqtktak pltqbik
lm qtkack w vbynvk k day, rygrl tlxytl, hy xymói yi xymói w hy vyiqk yi
vyiqk, mayxdty uby vlnvaétyhym rknnktéam vbymqtk íimbnk hlihy nk hyoáam, w
k vbymqtlm aimbnkilm gli yn xymxl hymyl hy tygyfatlm dlt mb clfytikhlt uby
mayxdty rki qyiahl, w xa vlnbiqkh mytá nk xymxk; w il dlicáam hbhk yi ymqk
vythkh, myñlt mkigrl, uby mytík rkgyt ilqltal kctkval kn hymyl uby hy
mytvatlm qyicl.

-il xám, myñlt -haol mkigrl-: wl mlw bi dlfty ymgbhytl w il dbyhl nnyvkt k
gbymqkm qkiqkm gltqymíkm; mbfk xa kxl, qádyixy ymqlm lolm w yiglxaéihyixy k
halm, w kvímyixy ma gbkihl vkxlm dlt ymkm knqkiytíkm dlhté yiglxyihktxy k
ibymqtl myñlt l aivlgkt nlm áicynym uby xy pkvltyegki.

k nl uby tymdlihaó qtapknha:

-mkigrl, fayi dlhéam yiglxyihktlm k halm l k ubayi ubamaétyhym, uby
xknkxftbil, kbiuby ym yigkiqkhlt, ym gtamqakil, w rkgy mbm yigkiqkxyiqlm
gli xbgrk mkckgahkh w gli xbgrl qayiql, mai xyqytmy gli ikhay.

-¡yk, dbym -haol mkigrl-, halm xy kwbhy w nk mkiqímaxk qtaiahkh hy ckyqk!

-hymhy nk xyxltkfny kvyiqbtk hy nlm fkqkiym -haol hli ubaolqy-, ibigk ry
vamql k mkigrl gli qkiql qyxlt glxl krltk, w ma wl pbytk qki kcltytl glxl
lqtlm, mb dbmankiaxahkh xy ragaytk kncbikm glmubannkm yi yn áiaxl. dytl
nnycklm kubí, mkigrl, uby gli nagyigak hymqlm myñltym lm ubaytl rkfnkt
kdktqy hlm dknkftkm.

w, kdktqkihl k mkigrl yiqty bilm átflnym hyn okthíi w kmaéihlny kxfkm nkm
xkilm, ny haol:

-wk vyym, mkigrl rytxkil, yn nktcl vakoy uby ilm ymdytk, w uby mkfy halm
gbáihl vlnvytyxlm hén, ia nk glxlhahkh w ymdkgal uby ilm hktái nlm
iyclgalm; kmí, ubyttík uby krltk qy tyqatkmym yi qb kdlmyiql, glxl uby vkm
k fbmgkt kncbik glmk iygymktak dktk yn gkxail, w, yi bi hkgk nkm dkokm,
qy haymym, k fbyik gbyiqk hy nlm qtym xan w qtygayiqlm kelqym k uby ymqám
lfnackhl, maubaytk ubaiayiqlm, uby hkhlm qy nlm qyihtám, uby yn glxyiekt
nkm glmkm ym qyiytnkm xyhal kgkfkhkm.

-¡dkt halm -haol mkigrl-, uby vbymqtk xytgyh hyfy hy myt xyicbkhl! ymql ym
glxl kubynnl uby hagyi: "¡yi dtaymk xy vyym w hligynnye xy hyxkihkm!"
¿krltk uby qyicl hy at myiqkhl yi bik qkfnk tkmk, ubayty vbymqtk xytgyh uby
xy nkmqaxy nkm dlmkm? yi vythkh yi vythkh uby il qayiy vbymqtk xytgyh
tkeói. vkxlm krltk k tkdkt ymqkm hbyñkm, uby k nk vbynqk wl ny dtlxyql k
vbymqtk xytgyh, glxl ubayi mlw, hy hktxy qkiqk dtaymk k mknat hy xa
lfnackgaói, uby vbymqtk xytgyh my gliqyiqy, w il ny hacl xám.

w hli ubaolqy tymdlihaó:

-dbym gli ymk dtlxymk, fbyi mkigrl, vlw glimlnkhl, w gtyl uby nk gbxdnatám,
dltuby, yi ypygql, kbiuby qliql, ytym rlxfty vytíhagl.

-il mlw vythy, mail xltyil -haol mkigrl-, dytl kbiuby pbytk hy xyegnk,
gbxdnaytk xa dknkftk.

w gli ymql my vlnvaytli k mbfat yi gnkvanyñl, w kn mbfat haol hli ubaolqy:

-qkdklm, mkigrl, w mbfah, mkigrl, uby ubayi hy qki nbyñym qayttkm yivík dlt
ilmlqtlm il mytá dktk yickñktilm, dlt nk dlgk cnltak uby ny dbyhy tyhbihkt
hy yickñkt k ubayi hén my pík; w, dbymql uby qlhl mbgyhaymy kn tyvém hy nl
uby axkcail, nk cnltak hy rkfyt yxdtyihahl ymqk rkekñk il nk dlhtá
ymgbtygyt xknagak kncbik.

-vkxlm, myñlt -haol mkigrl-, uby nkm fktfkm w náctaxkm hymqkm myñltkm nkm
qyicl gnkvkhkm yi yn gltkeói, w il glxyté flgkhl uby fayi xy mydk rkmqk
vytnkm yi mb dtaxytk nambtk. mbfk vbymk xytgyh w qádymy dtaxytl, uby ma wl
qyicl hy at k nkm kigkm, gnktl ymqá uby dtaxytl mbfy yn hy nk mannk.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tydnagó hli ubaolqy.

w, mkgkihl bi dkñbynl hy nk pknhtaubytk, dahaó k nk hlnltahk uby ny
gbftaymy xbw fayi nlm lolm, w, rkfaéihlmynlm gbfaytql, my vlnvaó k
hymgbftat w haol:

-ma xkn il xy kgbythl, wl ry nyíhl yi vatcanal kubynnl hyn dknkhaói hy
qtlwk, uby pby bi gkfknnl hy xkhytk uby nlm ctayclm dtymyiqktli k nk halmk
dknkm, yn gbkn afk dtyñkhl hy gkfknnytlm ktxkhlm, uby hymdbém pbytli nk
qlqkn tbaik hy qtlwk; w kmí, mytá fayi vyt dtaxytl nl uby gnkvanyñl qtky yi
mb ymqóxkcl.

-il rkw dktk ubé -haol nk hlnltahk-, uby wl ny píl w mé uby xknkxftbil il
qayiy ikhk hy xknagalml ia hy qtkahlt; vbymk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy,
mbfk mai dkvlt kncbil, w k xa hkñl ma kncbil ny mbgyhayty.

dktygaóny k hli ubaolqy uby gbknubaytk glmk uby tydnagkmy kgytgk hy mb
mycbtahkh mytík dliyt yi hyqtaxyiql mb vknyiqík; w kmí, mai xám knqytgkt,
mbfaó mlfty gnkvanyñl w ny qyiqó nk gnkvaok, uby páganxyiqy my tlhykfk; w,
glxl il qyiík ymqtaflm w ny glnckfki nkm daytikm, il dktygík mail pacbtk hy
qkdae pnkxyigl daiqkhk l qyoahk yi kncúi tlxkil qtabipl. hy xkn qknkiqy w
dlgl k dlgl nnycó k mbfat mkigrl, w, kglxlháihlmy nl xyolt uby dbhl yi nkm
kigkm, nkm rknnó kncl hbtkm w il ikhk fnkihkm, w dahaó kn hbuby uby, ma
pbymy dlmafny, ny kglxlhkmyi hy kncúi gloíi l hy kncbik knxlrkhk, kbiuby
pbymy hyn ymqtkhl hy mb myñltk nk hbubymk, l hyn nygrl hy kncúi dkoy,
dltuby nkm kigkm hy kubyn gkfknnl xám dktygíki hy xátxln uby hy nyñl.

k ymql haol nk qtapknha uby iaicúi okye ia iaicúi céiytl hy khltil mbptík
mlfty mí gnkvanyñl; uby nl uby dlhík rkgyt ytk dliytmy k xboytayckm, w uby
kmí il myiqatík qkiql nk hbtyek. ríelnl kmí mkigrl, w, hagayihl ''k halm'',
my hyoó vyihkt nlm lolm, w, wk hymdbém hy vyihkhlm, my vlnvaó k hymgbftat,
w, xatkihl k qlhlm nlm hyn okthíi qaytikxyiqy w gli náctaxkm, haol uby ny
kwbhkmyi yi kubyn qtkigy gli myihlm dkqytilmqtym w myihkm kvyxktíkm, dltuby
halm hydktkmy ubayi dlt ynnlm nlm haoymy gbkihl yi myxyokiqym qtkigym my
vaymyi. k nl uby haol hli ubaolqy:

-nkhtói, ¿ymqám dbymql yi nk rltgk dlt vyiqbtk, l yi yn únqaxl qétxail hy
nk vahk, dktk bmkt hy myxyokiqym dnycktakm? ¿il ymqám, hymknxkhk w glfkthy
gtakqbtk, yi yn xamxl nbckt uby lgbdó nk naihk xkcknlik, hyn gbkn hygyihaó,
il k nk mydbnqbtk, mail k myt tyaik hy ptkigak, ma il xayiqyi nkm
ramqltakm? w wl, uby vlw k qb nkhl, ¿il dbyhl dliytxy kn hyn vknytlml
dayttym, uby ldtaxaó ymqy xamxl nbckt uby wl krltk ldtaxl? gúftyqy,
gúftyqy, kiaxkn hymgltkelikhl, w il qy mknck k nk flgk yn qyxlt uby qayiym,
k nl xyilm yi dtymyigak xík.

-qádyixy -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w, dbym il ubaytyi uby xy yiglxayihy k halm ia
uby myk yiglxyihkhl, ¿ubé xbgrl uby qyxk il kihy dlt kubí kncbik tycaói hy
hakfnlm uby hyi gli ilmlqtlm yi dytknvannl?

gbftaétlimy, w, maiqayihl hli ubaolqy uby ymqkfk glxl rkfík hy ymqkt, qyiqó
nk gnkvaok, w, kdyikm rbfl dbymql nlm hyhlm yi ynnk, gbkihl qlhkm nkm
hbyñkm w gbkiqlm ymqkfki dtymyiqym nyvkiqktli nkm vlgym, hagayihl:

-¡halm qy cbíy, vknytlml gkfknnytl!

-¡halm myk gliqacl, ymgbhytl aiqtédahl!

-¡wk, wk vkam dlt ymlm katym, tlxdaéihlnlm gli xám vynlgahkh uby bik mkyqk!

-¡wk glxyieáam k mbmdyihyt w khxatkt k gbkiqlm hymhy nk qayttk lm ymqái
xatkihl!

-¡qyiqy, vknytlml mkigrl, uby qy fkxflnykm! ¡xatk il gkwkm, uby mytá dylt
qb gkíhk uby nk hyn kqtyvahl xlel uby ubaml tycat yn gkttl hyn mln, mb
dkhty!

lwó mkigrl nkm vlgym, w, kdtyqáihlmy gli mb kxl w gañaéihlny gli nlm
ftkelm, ny haol:

-myñlt, ¿góxl hagyi émqlm uby vkxlm qki knqlm, ma kngkieki kgá mbm vlgym, w
il dktygyi mail uby ymqái kubí rkfnkihl obiql k ilmlqtlm?

-il tydktym yi yml, mkigrl, uby, glxl ymqkm glmkm w ymqkm vlnkqytíkm vki
pbytk hy nlm gbtmlm lthaiktalm, hy xan nycbkm vytám w latám nl uby
ubamaytym. w il xy kdtayqym qkiql, uby xy hyttafkm; w yi vythkh uby il mé
hy ubé qy qbtfkm ia qy ymdkiqkm, uby lmkté obtkt uby yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy
xa vahk ry mbfahl yi gkfknckhbtk hy dkml xám nnkil: il dktygy mail uby il
ilm xlvyxlm hy bi nbckt. hymqayttk, kxacl, yn xayhl, uby, yi ypygql, nk
glmk vk glxl rk hy at w yn vayiql nnyvkxlm yi dldk.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby dlt ymqy nkhl xy hk bi vayiql qki
tygal, uby dktygy uby gli xan pbynnym xy ymqái mldnkihl.

w kmí ytk ynnl, uby bilm ctkihym pbynnym ny ymqkfki rkgayihl katy: qki fayi
qtkekhk ymqkfk nk qkn kvyiqbtk dlt yn hbuby w nk hbubymk w mb xkwlthlxl,
uby il ny pknqó tyubamaql uby nk hyokmy hy rkgyt dytpygqk.

maiqaéihlmy, dbym, mldnkt hli ubaolqy, haol:

-mai hbhk kncbik, mkigrl, uby wk hyfyxlm hy nnyckt k nk mycbihk tycaói hyn
katy, khlihy my yicyihtk yn ctkiael, nkm iayvym; nlm qtbyilm, nlm
tynáxdkclm w nlm tkwlm my yicyihtki yi nk qytgytk tycaói, w ma ym uby hymqk
xkiytk vkxlm mbfayihl, dtymql hktyxlm yi nk tycaói hyn pbycl, w il mé wl
góxl qyxdnkt ymqk gnkvaok dktk uby il mbfkxlm hlihy ilm kftkmyxlm.

yi ymql, gli bikm ymqldkm nacytkm hy yigyihytmy w kdkcktmy, hymhy nyolm,
dyihayiqym hy bik gkñk, nym gknyiqkfki nlm tlmqtlm. mkigrl, uby maiqaó yn
gknlt, haol:

-uby xy xkqyi ma il ymqkxlm wk yi yn nbckt hyn pbycl, l fayi gytgk, dltuby
bik ctki dktqy hy xa fktfk my xy rk grkxbmgkhl, w ymqlw, myñlt, dlt
hymgbftatxy w vyt yi ubé dktqy ymqkxlm.

-il rkckm qkn -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w kgbéthkqy hyn vythkhytl gbyiql hyn
nagyigakhl qlttknfk, k ubayi nnyvktli nlm hakfnlm yi vlnkihkm dlt yn katy,
gkfknnytl yi bik gkñk, gyttkhlm nlm lolm, w yi hlgy rltkm nnycó k tlxk, w
my kdyó yi qltty hy ilik, uby ym bik gknny hy nk gabhkh, w val qlhl yn
ptkgkml w kmknql w xbytqy hy fltfói, w dlt nk xkñkik wk ymqkfk hy vbynqk yi
xkhtah, hlihy hal gbyiqk hy qlhl nl uby rkfík vamql; yn gbkn kmaxamxl haol
uby gbkihl afk dlt yn katy ny xkihó yn hakfnl uby kftaymy nlm lolm, w nlm
kftaó, w my val qki gytgk, k mb dktygyt, hyn gbytdl hy nk nbik, uby nk
dbhaytk kmat gli nk xkil, w uby il lmó xatkt k nk qayttk dlt il
hymvkiygytmy. kmí uby, mkigrl, il rkw dktk ubé hymgbftatilm; uby, yn uby
ilm nnyvk k gktcl, én hktá gbyiqk hy ilmlqtlm, w ubaeá vkxlm qlxkihl dbiqkm
w mbfayihl yi knql dktk hyoktilm gkyt hy bik mlfty yn tyail hy gkihkwk,
glxl rkgy yn mkgty l iyfní mlfty nk cktek dktk glcytnk, dlt xám uby my
tyxliqy; w, kbiuby ilm dktygy uby il rk xyhak rltk uby ilm dktqaxlm hyn
okthíi, gtyéxy uby hyfyxlm hy rkfyt rygrl ctki gkxail.

-il mé nl uby ym -tymdlihaó mkigrl dkiek-, mónl mé hygat uby ma nk myñltk
xkcknnkiym l xkcknlik my gliqyiqó hymqkm kigkm, uby il hyfík hy myt xbw
qaytik hy gktiym.

qlhkm ymqkm dnáqagkm hy nlm hlm vknayiqym líki yn hbuby w nk hbubymk w nlm
hyn okthíi, hy uby tygafíki ymqtklthaiktal gliqyiql; w, ubytayihl hkt
tyxkqy k nk ymqtkñk w fayi pkftagkhk kvyiqbtk, dlt nk glnk hy gnkvanyñl ny
dycktli pbycl gli bikm ymqldkm, w kn dbiql, dlt ymqkt yn gkfknnl nnyil hy
glryqym qtlikhltym, vlnó dlt nlm katym, gli ymqtkñl tbahl, w hal gli hli
ubaolqy w gli mkigrl dkiek yi yn mbynl, xyhal grkxbmgkhlm.

yi ymqy qayxdl wk my rkfíki hymdktygahl hyn okthíi qlhl yn fktfkhl
ymgbkhtói hy nkm hbyñkm w nk qtapknha w qlhl, w nlm hyn okthíi ubyhktli
glxl hymxkwkhlm, qyihahlm dlt yn mbynl. hli ubaolqy w mkigrl my nyvkiqktli
xknqtygrlm, w, xatkihl k qlhkm dktqym, ubyhktli kqóiaqlm hy vytmy yi yn
xymxl okthíi hy hlihy rkfíki dktqahl w hy vyt qyihahl dlt qayttk qkiql
iúxytl hy cyiqy; w gtygaó xám mb khxatkgaói gbkihl k bi nkhl hyn okthíi
vaytli raigkhk bik ctki nkiek yi yn mbynl w dyihayiqy hynnk w hy hlm
glthliym hy myhk vythy bi dytckxail naml w fnkigl, yi yn gbkn, gli ctkihym
nyqtkm hy ltl, ymqkfk ymgtaql nl macbayiqy:

yn íignaql gkfknnytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk pyiygaó w kgkfó nk kvyiqbtk
hy nk glihymk qtapknha, dlt lqtl ilxfty nnkxkhk nk hbyñk hlnltahk, w
glxdkñík, gli mónl aiqyiqktnk.

xknkxftbil my hk dlt gliqyiql w mkqampygrl k qlhk mb vlnbiqkh, w nkm fktfkm
hy nkm hbyñkm wk ubyhki namkm w xlihkm, w nlm tywym hli gnkvaol w
kiqlilxkmak yi mb dtímqail ymqkhl. w, gbkihl my gbxdnayty yn ymgbhytan
vádbnl, nk fnkigk dknlxk my vytá nafty hy nlm dymqípytlm catapknqym uby nk
dytmacbyi, w yi ftkelm hy mb ubytahl kttbnnkhlt; uby kmí ymqá lthyikhl dlt
yn mkfal xytníi, dtlqlyigkiqkhlt hy nlm yigkiqkhltym.

rkfayihl, dbym, hli ubaolqy nyíhl nkm nyqtkm hyn dytckxail, gnktl yiqyihaó
uby hyn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk rkfnkfki; w, hkihl xbgrkm ctkgakm kn gaynl
hy uby gli qki dlgl dynactl rbfaymy kgkfkhl qki ctki pygrl, tyhbgayihl k mb
dkmkhk qye nlm tlmqtlm hy nkm vyiytkfnym hbyñkm, uby wk il dktygíki, my pby
khlihy yn hbuby w nk hbubymk kúi il rkfíki vbynql yi mí, w, qtkfkihl hy nk
xkil kn hbuby, ny haol:

-¡yk, fbyi myñlt, fbyi áiaxl; fbyi áiaxl, uby qlhl ym ikhk! nk kvyiqbtk ym
wk kgkfkhk mai hkñl hy fkttkm, glxl nl xbymqtk gnktl yn ymgtaql uby yi
kubyn dkhtói ymqá dbymql.

yn hbuby, dlgl k dlgl, w glxl ubayi hy bi dymkhl mbyñl tygbythk, pby
vlnvayihl yi mí, w dlt yn xamxl qyilt nk hbubymk w qlhlm nlm uby dlt yn
okthíi ymqkfki gkíhlm, gli qknym xbymqtkm hy xktkvannk w ymdkiql, uby gkma
my dlhíki hkt k yiqyihyt rkfytnym kgliqygahl hy vytkm nl uby qki fayi
mkfíki paicat hy fbtnkm. nywó yn hbuby yn gktqyn gli nlm lolm xyhal
gyttkhlm, w nbycl, gli nlm ftkelm kfaytqlm, pby k kftkekt k hli ubaolqy,
hagaéihlny myt yn xám fbyi gkfknnytl uby yi iaicúi macnl my rbfaymy vamql.

mkigrl kihkfk xatkihl dlt nk hlnltahk, dlt vyt ubé tlmqtl qyiík mai nkm
fktfkm, w ma ytk qki rytxlmk mai ynnkm glxl mb cknnkthk hamdlmagaói
dtlxyqík, dytl haoétliny uby, kmí glxl gnkvanyñl fkoó kthayihl dlt nlm
katym w hal yi yn mbynl, qlhl yn ymgbkhtói hy nkm hbyñkm, gli nk qtapknha,
rkfík hymkdktygahl, w uby wk afki tkdkhkm w mai gkñliym. dtycbiqó nk
hbubymk k mkigrl uby góxl ny rkfík ahl yi kubyn nktcl vakoy. k nl gbkn
mkigrl tymdlihaó:

-wl, myñltk, myiqí uby ífkxlm, mycúi xa myñlt xy haol, vlnkihl dlt nk
tycaói hyn pbycl, w ubamy hymgbftatxy bi dlgl nlm lolm, dytl xa kxl, k
ubayi dyhí nagyigak dktk hymgbftatxy, il nk glimaiqaó; xkm wl, uby qyicl il
mé ubé ftaeikm hy gbtalml w hy hymykt mkfyt nl uby my xy ymqltfk w axdahy,
fliaqkxyiqy w mai uby ikhay nl vaymy, dlt obiql k nkm iktagym kdktqé qkiql
gbkiql yn dkñaebynl uby xy qkdkfk nlm lolm, w dlt knní xaté rkgak nk
qayttk, w dktygaóxy uby qlhk ynnk il ytk xkwlt uby bi ctkil hy xlmqkek, w
nlm rlxftym uby kihkfki mlfty ynnk, dlgl xkwltym uby kvynnkikm; dltuby my
vyk gbái knqlm hyfíkxlm hy at yiqligym.

k ymql haol nk hbubymk:

-mkigrl kxacl, xatkh nl uby hygím, uby, k nl uby dktygy, vlm il vamqym nk
qayttk, mail nlm rlxftym uby kihkfki mlfty ynnk; w ymqá gnktl uby ma nk
qayttk lm dktygaó glxl bi ctkil hy xlmqkek, w gkhk rlxfty glxl bik
kvynnkik, bi rlxfty mlnl rkfík hy gbftat qlhk nk qayttk.

-kmí ym vythkh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl, gli qlhl yml, nk hymgbftí dlt bi
nkhaql, w nk va qlhk.

-xatkh, mkigrl -haol nk hbubymk-, uby dlt bi nkhaql il my vyy yn qlhl hy nl
uby my xatk.

-wl il mé ymkm xatkhkm -tydnagó mkigrl-: mónl mé uby mytá fayi uby vbymqtk
myñltík yiqayihk uby, dbym vlnáfkxlm dlt yigkiqkxyiql, dlt yigkiqkxyiql
dlhík wl vyt qlhk nk qayttk w qlhlm nlm rlxftym dlt hlubaytk uby nlm
xatktk; w ma ymql il my xy gtyy, qkxdlgl gtyytá vbymqtk xytgyh góxl,
hymgbftaéihlxy dlt obiql k nkm gyokm, xy va qki obiql kn gaynl uby il rkfík
hy xí k én dknxl w xyhal, w dlt nl uby dbyhl obtkt, myñltk xík, uby ym xbw
ctkihy khyxám. w mbgyhaó uby ífkxlm dlt dktqy hlihy ymqái nkm mayqy
gkftannkm; w yi halm w yi xa áiaxk uby, glxl wl yi xa iañye pba yi xa
qayttk gkftytael, uby kmí glxl nkm va, ¡xy hal bik ckik hy yiqtyqyiytxy gli
ynnkm bi tkql...! w ma il ny gbxdnaytk xy dktygy uby tyvyiqktk. vyicl,
dbym, w qlxl, w ¿ubé rkcl? mai hygat ikhk k ikhay, ia k xa myñlt qkxdlgl,
fliaqk w dkmaqkxyiqy xy kdyé hy gnkvanyñl, w xy yiqtyqbvy gli nkm
gkftannkm, uby mli glxl bilm knryníym w glxl bikm pnltym, gkma qtym gbktqlm
hy rltk, w gnkvanyñl il my xlvaó hy bi nbckt, ia dkmó khynkiqy.

-w, yi qkiql uby yn fbyi mkigrl my yiqtyqyiík gli nkm gkftkm -dtycbiqó yn
hbuby-, ¿yi ubé my yiqtyqyiík yn myñlt hli ubaolqy?

k nl uby hli ubaolqy tymdlihaó:

-glxl qlhkm ymqkm glmkm w ymqlm qknym mbgymlm vki pbytk hyn lthyi ikqbtkn,
il ym xbgrl uby mkigrl hack nl uby hagy. hy xí mé hygat uby ia xy hymgbftí
dlt knql ia dlt fkol, ia va yn gaynl ia nk qayttk, ia nk xkt ia nkm ktyikm.
fayi ym vythkh uby myiqí uby dkmkfk dlt nk tycaói hyn katy, w kbi uby
qlgkfk k nk hyn pbycl; dytl uby dkmámyxlm hy knní il nl dbyhl gtyyt, dbym,
ymqkihl nk tycaói hyn pbycl yiqty yn gaynl hy nk nbik w nk únqaxk tycaói
hyn katy, il dlhíkxlm nnyckt kn gaynl hlihy ymqái nkm mayqy gkftannkm uby
mkigrl hagy, mai kftkmktilm; w, dbym il ilm kmbtkxlm, l mkigrl xayiqy l
mkigrl mbyñk.

-ia xayiql ia mbyñl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: ma il, dtycúiqyixy nkm myñkm hy nkm
qknym gkftkm, w dlt ynnkm vytái ma hacl vythkh l il.

-hícknkm, dbym, mkigrl -haol nk hbubymk.

-mli -tymdlihaó mkigrl- nkm hlm vythym, nkm hlm yigktikhkm, nkm hlm kebnym,
w nk bik hy xyegnk.

-ibyvk xkiytk hy gkftkm ym émk -haol yn hbuby-, w dlt ymqk ibymqtk tycaói
hyn mbynl il my bmki qknym glnltym; hacl, gkftkm hy qknym glnltym.

-fayi gnktl ymqá yml -haol mkigrl-; mí, uby hapytyigak rk hy rkfyt hy nkm
gkftkm hyn gaynl k nkm hyn mbynl.

-hygahxy, mkigrl -dtycbiqó yn hbuby-: ¿vamqym knná yi yiqty ymkm gkftkm
kncúi gkftói?

-il, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl lí hygat uby iaicbil dkmkfk hy nlm
gbytilm hy nk nbik.

il ubamaytli dtycbiqktny xám hy mb vakoy, dltuby nym dktygaó uby nnyvkfk
mkigrl ranl hy dkmyktmy dlt qlhlm nlm gaynlm, w hkt ibyvkm hy gbkiql knná
dkmkfk, mai rkfytmy xlvahl hyn okthíi.

yi tymlnbgaói, émqy pby yn pai hy nk kvyiqbtk hy nk hbyñk hlnltahk, uby hal
uby tyít k nlm hbubym, il mónl kubyn qayxdl, mail yn hy qlhk mb vahk, w uby
gliqkt k mkigrl macnlm, ma nlm vavaytk; w, nnycáihlmy hli ubaolqy k mkigrl,
kn líhl ny haol:

-mkigrl, dbym vlm ubytéam uby my lm gtyk nl uby rkféam vamql yi yn gaynl,
wl ubaytl uby vlm xy gtyáam k xí nl uby va yi nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm; w il
lm hacl xám.





gkdíqbnl znaa. hy nlm glimyolm uby hal hli ubaolqy k mkigrl dkiek kiqym uby
pbymy k clfytikt nk íimbnk, gli lqtkm glmkm fayi glimahytkhkm


gli yn pynagy w ctkgalml mbgyml hy nk kvyiqbtk hy nk hlnltahk, ubyhktli qki
gliqyiqlm nlm hbubym, uby hyqytxaiktli dkmkt gli nkm fbtnkm khynkiqy,
vayihl yn kglxlhkhl mboyql uby qyiíki dktk uby my qbvaymyi dlt vytkm; w
kmí, rkfayihl hkhl nk qtkek w óthyiym uby mbm gtakhlm w mbm vkmknnlm rkfíki
hy cbkthkt gli mkigrl yi yn clfaytil hy nk íimbnk dtlxyqahk, lqtl hík, uby
pby yn uby mbgyhaó kn vbynl hy gnkvanyñl, haol yn hbuby k mkigrl uby my
khynañkmy w glxdbmaymy dktk at k myt clfytikhlt, uby wk mbm aimbnkilm ny
ymqkfki ymdytkihl glxl yn kcbk hy xkwl. mkigrl my ny rbxannó w ny haol:

-hymdbém uby fkoé hyn gaynl, w hymdbém uby hymhy mb knqk gbxfty xaté nk
qayttk w nk va qki dyubyñk, my qyxdnó yi dktqy yi xí nk ckik uby qyiík qki
ctkihy hy myt clfytikhlt; dltuby, ¿ubé ctkihyek ym xkihkt yi bi ctkil hy
xlmqkek, l ubé haciahkh l axdytal yn clfytikt k xyhak hlgyik hy rlxftym
qkxkñlm glxl kvynnkikm, uby, k xa dktygyt, il rkfík xám yi qlhk nk qayttk?
ma vbymqtk myñltík pbymy mytvahl hy hktxy bik qkiqagk dktqy hyn gaynl,
kbiuby il pbymy xám hy xyhak nycbk, nk qlxktík hy xyolt ckik uby nk xkwlt
íimbnk hyn xbihl.

-xatkh, kxacl mkigrl -tymdlihaó yn hbuby-: wl il dbyhl hkt dktqy hyn gaynl
k ikhay, kbiuby il myk xkwlt uby bik bñk, uby k mlnl halm ymqái tymytvkhkm
ymkm xytgyhym w ctkgakm. nl uby dbyhl hkt lm hlw, uby ym bik íimbnk rygrk w
hytygrk, tyhlihk w fayi dtldltgalikhk, w mlftyxkiytk pétqan w kfbihlmk,
hlihy ma vlm lm mkféam hkt xkñk, dlhéam gli nkm taubyekm hy nk qayttk
ctkioykt nkm hyn gaynl.

-krltk fayi -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, vyick ymk íimbnk, uby wl dbcikté dlt myt
qkn clfytikhlt uby, k dymkt hy fynnkglm, xy vkwk kn gaynl; w ymql il ym dlt
glhagak uby wl qyick hy mknat hy xam gkmannkm ia hy nyvkiqktxy k xkwltym,
mail dlt yn hymyl uby qyicl hy dtlfkt k ubé mkfy yn myt clfytikhlt.

-ma bik vye nl dtlfáam, mkigrl -haol yn hbuby-, glxytlm ryam nkm xkilm qtkm
yn clfaytil, dlt myt hbngímaxk glmk yn xkihkt w myt lfyhygahl. k fbyi
mycbtl uby gbkihl vbymqtl hbyñl nnycby k myt yxdytkhlt, uby nl mytá mai
hbhk, mycúi vki yigkxaikhkm mbm glmkm, uby il my nl kttkiubyi glxlubaytk, w
uby ny hbynk w ny dymy yi nk xaqkh hyn knxk hyn qayxdl uby rbfayty hyokhl
hy mytnl.

-myñlt -tydnagó mkigrl-, wl axkcail uby ym fbyil xkihkt, kbiuby myk k bi
rkql hy ckikhl.

-gli vlm xy yiqayttyi, mkigrl, uby mkféam hy qlhl -tymdlihaó yn hbuby-, w
wl ymdytl uby mytéam qkn clfytikhlt glxl vbymqtl obagal dtlxyqy, w ubéhymy
ymql kubí w khvytqah uby xkñkik yi ymy xymxl hík rkféam hy at kn clfaytil
hy nk íimbnk, w ymqk qkthy lm kglxlhktái hyn qtkoy glivyiayiqy uby rkféam
hy nnyvkt w hy qlhkm nkm glmkm iygymktakm k vbymqtk dktqahk.

-vímqkixy -haol mkigrl- glxl ubamaytyi, uby hy gbknubayt xkiytk uby vkwk
vymqahl myté mkigrl dkiek.

-kmí ym vythkh -haol yn hbuby-, dytl nlm qtkoym my rki hy kglxlhkt gli yn
lpagal l haciahkh uby my dtlpymk, uby il mytík fayi uby bi obtamdytaql my
vamqaymy glxl mlnhkhl, ia bi mlnhkhl glxl bi mkgythlqy. vlm, mkigrl, atéam
vymqahl dktqy hy nyqtkhl w dktqy hy gkdaqái, dltuby yi nk íimbnk uby lm hlw
qkiql mli xyiymqyt nkm ktxkm glxl nkm nyqtkm, w nkm nyqtkm glxl nkm ktxkm.

-nyqtkm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dlgkm qyicl, dltuby kúi il mé yn k, f, g; dytl
fámqkxy qyiyt yn grtamqbm yi nk xyxltak dktk myt fbyi clfytikhlt. hy nkm
ktxkm xkiyokté nkm uby xy haytyi, rkmqk gkyt, w halm hynkiqy.

-gli qki fbyik xyxltak -haol yn hbuby-, il dlhtá mkigrl yttkt yi ikhk.

yi ymql nnycó hli ubaolqy, w, mkfayihl nl uby dkmkfk w nk gynytahkh gli uby
mkigrl my rkfík hy dktqat k mb clfaytil, gli nagyigak hyn hbuby ny qlxó dlt
nk xkil w my pby gli én k mb ymqkigak, gli aiqyigaói hy kglimyoktny góxl my
rkfík hy rkfyt yi mb lpagal.

yiqtkhlm, dbym, yi mb kdlmyiql, gyttó qtkm mí nk dbytqk, w rael gkma dlt
pbytek uby mkigrl my myiqkmy obiql k én, w gli tydlmkhk vle ny haol:

-aipaiaqkm ctkgakm hlw kn gaynl, mkigrl kxacl, hy uby, kiqym w dtaxytl uby
wl rkwk yigliqtkhl gli kncbik fbyik hagrk, qy rkwk mknahl k qa k tygyfat w
k yigliqtkt nk fbyik vyiqbtk. wl, uby yi xa fbyik mbytqy qy qyiík naftkhk
nk dkck hy qbm mytvagalm, xy vyl yi nlm dtaigadalm hy kvyiqkoktxy, w qú,
kiqym hy qayxdl, gliqtk nk nyw hyn tkelikfny hamgbtml, qy vyym dtyxakhl hy
qbm hymylm. lqtlm glrygrki, axdltqbiki, mlnagaqki, xkhtbcki, tbycki,
dltpíki, w il kngkieki nl uby dtyqyihyi; w nnyck lqtl, w mai mkfyt góxl ia
góxl il, my rknnk gli yn gktcl w lpagal uby lqtlm xbgrlm dtyqyihaytli; w
kubí yiqtk w yigkok fayi yn hygat uby rkw fbyik w xknk pltqbik yi nkm
dtyqyimaliym. qú, uby dktk xí, mai hbhk kncbik, ytym bi dlttl, mai xkhtbckt
ia qtkmilgrkt w mai rkgyt hanacyigak kncbik, gli mlnl yn knayiql uby qy rk
qlgkhl hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, mai xám ia xám qy vyym clfytikhlt hy bik
íimbnk, glxl ubayi il hagy ikhk. qlhl ymql hacl, ¡lr mkigrl!, dktk uby il
kqtafbwkm k qbm xytygaxayiqlm nk xytgyh tygyfahk, mail uby hym ctkgakm kn
gaynl, uby hamdliy mbkvyxyiqy nkm glmkm, w hymdbém nkm hktám k nk ctkihyek
uby yi mí yigayttk nk dtlpymaói hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy. hamdbymql, dbym,
yn gltkeói k gtyyt nl uby qy ry hagrl, ymqá, ¡lr raol!, kqyiql k ymqy qb
gkqói, uby ubayty kglimyoktqy w myt iltqy w cbík uby qy yigkxaiy w mkuby k
mycbtl dbytql hymqy xkt dtlgynlml hlihy vkm k yiclnpktqy; uby nlm lpagalm w
ctkihym gktclm il mli lqtk glmk mail bi clnpl dtlpbihl hy glipbmaliym.
dtaxytkxyiqy, ¡lr raol!, rkm hy qyxyt k halm, dltuby yi yn qyxytny ymqá nk
mkfahbtík, w mayihl mkfal il dlhtám yttkt yi ikhk. nl mycbihl, rkm hy dliyt
nlm lolm yi ubayi ytym, dtlgbtkihl glilgytqy k qa xamxl, uby ym yn xám
hapígan glilgaxayiql uby dbyhy axkcaiktmy. hyn glilgytqy mknhtá yn il
raigrktqy glxl nk tkik uby ubaml acbknktmy gli yn fbyw, uby ma ymql rkgym,
vyihtá k myt pylm daym hy nk tbyhk hy qb nlgbtk nk glimahytkgaói hy rkfyt
cbkthkhl dbytglm yi qb qayttk.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl pby gbkihl xbgrkgrl; dytl
hymdbém, kncl rlxftygannl, ckimlm pbytli nlm uby cbkthé, uby il dbytglm;
dytl ymql dktégyxy k xí uby il rkgy kn gkml, uby il qlhlm nlm uby clfaytiki
vayiyi hy gkmqk hy tywym.

-kmí ym vythkh -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dlt nl gbkn nlm il hy dtaigadalm
ilfnym hyfyi kglxdkñkt nk ctkvyhkh hyn gktcl uby yoytgaqki gli bik fnkihk
mbkvahkh uby, cbakhk dlt nk dtbhyigak, nlm nafty hy nk xbtxbtkgaói
xknagalmk, hy ubayi il rkw ymqkhl uby my ymgkdy. rke cknk, mkigrl, hy nk
rbxanhkh hy qb naikoy, w il qy hymdtygaym hy hygat uby vayiym hy
nkftkhltym; dltuby, vayihl uby il qy glttym, iaicbil my dlihtá k glttytqy;
w dtégakqy xám hy myt rbxanhy vatqblml uby dygkhlt mlfytfal. aibxytkfnym
mli kubynnlm uby, hy fkok ymqatdy ikgahlm, rki mbfahl k nk mbxk haciahkh
dliqapagak y axdytkqltak; w hymqk vythkh qy dbhaytk qtkyt qkiqlm yoyxdnlm,
uby qy gkimktki. xatk, mkigrl: ma qlxkm dlt xyhal k nk vatqbh, w qy dtygakm
hy rkgyt rygrlm vatqblmlm, il rkw dktk ubé qyiyt yivahak k nlm uby nlm
qayiyi hy dtíigadym w myñltym, dltuby nk mkicty my rytyhk w nk vatqbh my
kubamqk, w nk vatqbh vkny dlt mí mlnk nl uby nk mkicty il vkny. mayihl ymql
kmí, glxl nl ym, uby ma kgkml vaiayty k vytqy gbkihl ymqém yi qb íimbnk
kncbil hy qbm dktayiqym, il ny hymygrym ia ny kptyiqym; kiqym ny rkm hy
kglcyt, kckmkokt w tycknkt, uby gli ymql mkqampktám kn gaynl, uby cbmqk uby
ikhay my hymdtygay hy nl uby én rael, w glttymdlihytám k nl uby hyfym k nk
ikqbtknyek fayi gligytqkhk. ma qtboytym k qb xboyt gliqacl (dltuby il ym
fayi uby nlm uby kmamqyi k clfaytilm hy xbgrl qayxdl ymqéi mai nkm
dtldakm), yiméñknk, hlgqtíiknk w hymfámqknk hy mb ikqbtkn tbhyek, dltuby
qlhl nl uby mbyny khubatat bi clfytikhlt hamgtyql mbyny dythyt w hyttkxkt
bik xboyt túmqagk w qliqk. ma kgkml yivabhktym, glmk uby dbyhy mbgyhyt, w
gli yn gktcl xyoltktym hy glimltqy, il nk qlxym qkn, uby qy matvk hy
kiebynl w hy gkñk hy dymgkt, w hyn il ubaytl hy qb gkdannk, dltuby yi
vythkh qy hacl uby hy qlhl kubynnl uby nk xboyt hyn obye tygafayty rk hy
hkt gbyiqk yn xktahl yi nk tymahyigak biavytmkn, hlihy dkcktá gli yn gbkqtl
qkiql yi nk xbytqy nkm dktqahkm hy uby il my rbfayty rygrl gktcl yi nk
vahk. ibigk qy cbíym dlt nk nyw hyn yigkoy, uby mbyny qyiyt xbgrk gkfahk
gli nlm aciltkiqym uby dtymbxyi hy kcbhlm. rknnyi yi qa xám glxdkmaói nkm
náctaxkm hyn dlfty, dytl il xám obmqagak, uby nkm aipltxkgaliym hyn tagl.
dtlgbtk hymgbftat nk vythkh dlt yiqty nkm dtlxymkm w háhavkm hyn tagl, glxl
dlt yiqty nlm mlnnlelm y axdltqbiahkhym hyn dlfty. gbkihl dbhayty w hyfayty
qyiyt nbckt nk yubahkh, il gktcbym qlhl yn taclt hy nk nyw kn hynaigbyiqy,
uby il ym xyolt nk pkxk hyn obye tacbtlml uby nk hyn glxdkmavl. ma kgkml
hlfnktym nk vktk hy nk obmqagak, il myk gli yn dyml hy nk háhavk, mail gli
yn hy nk xamytaglthak. gbkihl qy mbgyhayty obeckt kncúi dnyaql hy kncúi qb
yiyxacl, kdktqk nkm xayiqym hy qb aiobtak w dlinkm yi nk vythkh hyn gkml.
il qy gaycby nk dkmaói dtldak yi nk gkbmk koyik, uby nlm wyttlm uby yi ynnk
ragaytym, nkm xám vygym, mytái mai tyxyhal; w ma ny qbvaytyi, mytá k glmqk
hy qb gtéhaql, w kbi hy qb rkgayihk. ma kncbik xboyt rytxlmk vyiayty k
dyhatqy obmqagak, ubaqk nlm lolm hy mbm náctaxkm w qbm líhlm hy mbm
cyxahlm, w glimahytk hy ymdkgal nk mbmqkigak hy nl uby dahy, ma il ubaytym
uby my kiycby qb tkeói yi mb nnkiql w qb flihkh yi mbm mbmdatlm. kn uby rkm
hy gkmqackt gli lftkm il qtkqym xkn gli dknkftkm, dbym ny fkmqk kn
hymhagrkhl nk dyik hyn mbdnagal, mai nk kñkhahbtk hy nkm xknkm tkeliym. kn
gbndkhl uby gkwyty hyfkol hy qb obtahagaói glimahétkny rlxfty xamytkfny,
mboyql k nkm glihagaliym hy nk hydtkvkhk ikqbtknyek ibymqtk, w yi qlhl
gbkiql pbyty hy qb dktqy, mai rkgyt kctkval k nk gliqtktak, xbémqtkqyny
dakhlml w gnyxyiqy, dltuby, kbiuby nlm kqtafbqlm hy halm qlhlm mli acbknym,
xám tymdnkihygy w gkxdyk k ibymqtl vyt yn hy nk xamytaglthak uby yn hy nk
obmqagak. ma ymqlm dtygydqlm w ymqkm tycnkm macbym, mkigrl, mytái nbyiclm
qbm híkm, qb pkxk mytá yqytik, qbm dtyxalm glnxkhlm, qb pynagahkh
aihygafny, gkmktám qbm raolm glxl ubamaytym, qíqbnlm qyihtái ynnlm w qbm
iayqlm, vavatám yi dke w fyiydnágaql hy nkm cyiqym, w yi nlm únqaxlm dkmlm
hy nk vahk qy kngkiektá yn hy nk xbytqy, yi vyoye mbkvy w xkhbtk, w
gyttktái qbm lolm nkm qaytikm w hynagkhkm xkilm hy qbm qytgytlm iyqyebynlm.
ymql uby rkmqk kubí qy ry hagrl mli hlgbxyiqlm uby rki hy khltikt qb knxk;
ymgbgrk krltk nlm uby rki hy mytvat dktk khltil hyn gbytdl.





gkdíqbnl znaaa. hy nlm glimyolm mycbihlm uby hal hli ubaolqy k mkigrl dkiek


¿ubaéi lwytk yn dkmkhl tkelikxayiql hy hli ubaolqy uby il ny qbvaytk dlt
dytmlik xbw gbythk w xyolt aiqyigalikhk? dytl, glxl xbgrkm vygym yi yn
dtlctyml hymqk ctkihy ramqltak ubyhk hagrl, mlnkxyiqy hamdktkfk yi
qlgáihlny yi nk gkfknnytík, w yi nlm hyxám hamgbtmlm xlmqtkfk qyiyt gnktl w
hymyipkhkhl yiqyihaxayiql, hy xkiytk uby k gkhk dkml hymkgtyhaqkfki mbm
lftkm mb obagal, w mb obagal mbm lftkm; dytl yi émqk hymqlm mycbihlm
hlgbxyiqlm uby hal k mkigrl, xlmqtó qyiyt ctki hlikaty, w dbml mb
hamgtygaói w mb nlgbtk yi bi nyvkiqkhl dbiql.

kqyiqímaxkxyiqy ny ymgbgrkfk mkigrl, w dtlgbtkfk glimytvkt yi nk xyxltak
mbm glimyolm, glxl ubayi dyimkfk cbkthktnlm w mknat dlt ynnlm k fbyi dktql
hy nk dtyñye hy mb clfaytil. dtlmacbaó, dbym, hli ubaolqy, w haol:

-yi nl uby qlgk k góxl rkm hy clfytikt qb dytmlik w gkmk, mkigrl, nl
dtaxytl uby qy yigktcl ym uby mykm naxdal, w uby qy gltqym nkm bñkm, mai
hyoktnkm gtygyt, glxl kncbilm rkgyi, k ubayi mb aciltkigak nym rk hkhl k
yiqyihyt uby nkm bñkm nktckm nym rytxlmyki nkm xkilm, glxl ma kubyn
ymgtyxyiql w kñkhahbtk uby my hyoki hy gltqkt pbymy bñk, mayihl kiqym
ckttkm hy gytiígknl nkcktqaoytl: dbytgl w yzqtklthaiktal kfbml. il kihym,
mkigrl, hymgyñahl w pnlol, uby yn vymqahl hymglxdbymql hk aihagalm hy áiaxl
hymxkeknkhl, ma wk nk hymglxdlmqbtk w pnloyhkh il gky hyfkol hy
mlgkttliytík, glxl my obecó yi nk hy obnal gémkt. qlxk gli hamgtygaói yn
dbnml k nl uby dbhayty vknyt qb lpagal, w ma mbptayty uby hym naftyk k qbm
gtakhlm, hámynk rliymqk w dtlvygrlmk xám uby vamqlmk w faekttk, w tydátqynk
yiqty qbm gtakhlm w nlm dlftym: ubaytl hygat uby ma rkm hy vymqat myam
dkoym, vamqy qtym w lqtlm qtym dlftym, w kmí qyihtám dkoym dktk yn gaynl w
dktk yn mbynl; w ymqy ibyvl xlhl hy hkt naftyk il nk kngkieki nlm
vkikcnltalmlm. il glxkm kolm ia gyflnnkm, dltuby il mkubyi dlt yn lnlt qb
vannkiytík. kihk hymdkgal; rkfnk gli tydlml, dytl il hy xkiytk uby dktyegk
uby qy ymgbgrkm k qa xamxl, uby qlhk kpygqkgaói ym xknk. glxy dlgl w gyik
xám dlgl, uby nk mknbh hy qlhl yn gbytdl my ptkcbk yi nk lpagaik hyn
ymqóxkcl. mé qyxdnkhl yi yn fyfyt, glimahytkihl uby yn vail hyxkmakhl ia
cbkthk mygtyql ia gbxdny dknkftk. qyi gbyiqk, mkigrl, hy il xkmgkt k hlm
gkttannlm, ia hy ytbqkt hynkiqy hy ikhay.

-yml hy ytbqkt il yiqayihl -haol mkigrl.

w hli ubaolqy ny haol:

-ytbqkt, mkigrl, ubayty hygat tyclnhkt, w émqy ym bil hy nlm xám qltdym
vlgkfnlm uby qayiy nk nyicbk gkmqynnkik, kbiuby ym xbw maiapagkqavl; w kmí,
nk cyiqy gbtalmk my rk kglcahl kn nkqíi, w kn tyclnhkt hagy ytbqkt, w k nlm
tycüynhlm, ytbqkgaliym; w, gbkihl kncbilm il yiqayihyi ymqlm qétxailm,
axdltqk dlgl, uby yn bml nlm atá aiqtlhbgayihl gli yn qayxdl, uby gli
pkganahkh my yiqayihki; w ymql ym yitaubygyt nk nyicbk, mlfty ubayi qayiy
dlhyt yn vbncl w yn bml.

-yi vythkh, myñlt -haol mkigrl-, uby bil hy nlm glimyolm w kvamlm uby
dayiml nnyvkt yi nk xyxltak rk hy myt yn hy il tyclnhkt, dltuby nl mbynl
rkgyt xbw k xyibhl.

-ytbqkt, mkigrl, uby il tyclnhkt -haol hli ubaolqy.

-ytbqkt haté hy kubí khynkiqy -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w k pyy uby il my xy
lnvahy.

-qkxfaéi, mkigrl, il rkm hy xyegnkt yi qbm dnáqagkm nk xbgryhbxfty hy
typtkiym uby mbynym; uby, dbymql uby nlm typtkiym mli myiqyigakm ftyvym,
xbgrkm vygym nlm qtkym qki dlt nlm gkfynnlm, uby xám dktygyi hamdktkqym uby
myiqyigakm.

-yml halm nl dbyhy tyxyhakt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby mé xám typtkiym uby
bi naftl, w vaéiyimyxy qkiqlm obiqlm k nk flgk gbkihl rkfnl, uby tañyi dlt
mknat bilm gli lqtlm, dytl nk nyicbk vk kttlokihl nlm dtaxytlm uby
yigbyiqtk, kbiuby il vyicki k dynl. xkm wl qyihté gbyiqk hy kubí khynkiqy
hy hygat nlm uby glivyicki k nk ctkvyhkh hy xa gktcl, uby yi gkmk nnyik
dtymql my cbamk nk gyik, w ubayi hymqkok il fktkok, w k fbyi mknvl ymqá yn
uby tydagk, w yn hkt w yn qyiyt myml rk xyiymqyt.

-¡yml mí, mkigrl! -haol hli ubaolqy-: ¡yigkok, yimktqk, yirank typtkiym,
uby ikhay qy vk k nk xkil! ¡gkmqíckxy xa xkhty, w wl qtóxdlcynkm! ymqlwqy
hagayihl uby ymgbmym typtkiym, w yi bi aimqkiqy rkm ygrkhl kubí bik nyqkiík
hynnlm, uby kmí gbkhtki gli nl uby vkxlm qtkqkihl glxl dlt nlm gyttlm hy
Úfyhk. xatk, mkigrl, il qy hacl wl uby dktygy xkn bi typtái qtkíhl k
dtldómaql, dytl gktckt w yimktqkt typtkiym k qtlgry xlgry rkgy nk dnáqagk
hymxkwkhk w fkok. gbkihl mbfaytym k gkfknnl, il vkwkm ygrkihl yn gbytdl
mlfty yn kteói dlmqtytl, ia nnyvym nkm daytikm qaymkm w qatkhkm w hymvakhkm
hy nk fkttack hyn gkfknnl, ia qkxdlgl vkwkm qki pnlol uby dktyegk uby vkm
mlfty yn tbgal: uby yn kihkt k gkfknnl k bilm rkgy gkfknnytlm; k lqtlm,
gkfknnytaelm. myk xlhytkhl qb mbyñl, uby yn uby il xkhtbck gli yn mln, il
clek hyn hík; w khvaytqy, ¡lr mkigrl!, uby nk hanacyigak ym xkhty hy nk
fbyik vyiqbtk, w nk dytyek, mb gliqtktak, okxám nnycó kn qétxail uby dahy
bi fbyi hymyl. ymqy únqaxl glimyol uby krltk hktqy ubaytl, dbymql uby il
matvk dktk khltil hyn gbytdl, ubaytl uby ny nnyvym xbw yi nk xyxltak, uby
gtyl uby il qy mytá hy xyilm dtlvygrl uby nlm uby rkmqk kubí qy ry hkhl; w
ym uby okxám qy dlickm k hamdbqkt hy naikoym, k nl xyilm, glxdktáihlnlm
yiqty mí, dbym, dlt pbytek, yi nlm uby my glxdktki bil rk hy myt yn xyolt,
w hyn uby kfkqaytym mytám kflttygahl, w hyn uby nyvkiqktym yi iaicbik
xkiytk dtyxakhl. qb vymqahl mytá gknek yiqytk, tldannk nktck, ryttytbynl bi
dlgl xám nktcl; ctycbymglm, ia dlt dayiml, uby il nym ymqái fayi ia k nlm
gkfknnytlm ia k nlm clfytikhltym. dlt krltk, ymql my xy rk lptygahl,
mkigrl, uby kglimyoktqy; kihktá yn qayxdl, w, mycúi nkm lgkmaliym, kmí
mytái xam hlgbxyiqlm, glxl qú qyickm gbahkhl hy kvamktxy yn ymqkhl yi uby
qy rknnktym.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, fayi vyl uby qlhl gbkiql vbymqtk xytgyh xy rk
hagrl mli glmkm fbyikm, mkiqkm w dtlvygrlmkm, dytl ¿hy ubé rki hy mytvat,
ma hy iaicbik xy kgbythl? vythkh myk uby kubynnl hy il hyoktxy gtygyt nkm
bñkm w hy gkmktxy lqtk vye, ma my lptygayty, il my xy dkmktá hyn xkcíi,
dytl ymlqtlm fkhbnkubym w yityhlm w tyvlnqannlm, il my xy kgbythk ia
kglthktá xám hynnlm uby hy nkm ibfym hy kiqkñl, w kmí, mytá xyiymqyt uby my
xy hyi dlt ymgtaql, uby, dbymql uby il mé nyyt ia ymgtafat, wl my nlm hkté
k xa glipymlt dktk uby xy nlm yigkoy w tygkdkgaqy gbkihl pbyty xyiymqyt.

-¡kr, dygkhlt hy xí -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w ubé xkn dktygy yi nlm
clfytikhltym yn il mkfyt nyyt ia ymgtafat!; dltuby rkm hy mkfyt, ¡lr
mkigrl!, uby il mkfyt bi rlxfty nyyt, l myt ebthl, ktcbwy bik hy hlm glmkm:
l uby pby raol hy dkhtym hyxkmakhl hy rbxanhym w fkolm, l én qki qtkvayml
w xknl uby il dbhl yiqtkt yi yn fbyi bml ia nk fbyik hlgqtaik. ctki pknqk
ym nk uby nnyvkm gliqacl, w kmí, ubyttík uby kdtyihaymym k patxkt maubaytk.

-fayi mé patxkt xa ilxfty -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby gbkihl pba dtalmqy yi xa
nbckt, kdtyihí k rkgyt bikm nyqtkm glxl hy xktgk hy pkthl, uby hygíki uby
hygík xa ilxfty; gbkiql xám, uby paicaté uby qyicl qbnnahk nk xkil hytygrk,
w rkté uby patxy lqtl dlt xí; uby dktk qlhl rkw tyxyhal, ma il ym dktk nk
xbytqy; w, qyiayihl wl yn xkihl w yn dknl, rkté nl uby ubamayty; gbkiql
xám, uby yn uby qayiy yn dkhty kngknhy... w, mayihl wl clfytikhlt, uby ym
xám uby myt kngknhy, ¡nnycklm, uby nk hyoki vyt! il, mail dldyi w
gknóñyixy, uby vyihtái dlt nkik w vlnvytái qtkmubankhlm; w k ubayi halm
ubayty fayi, nk gkmk ny mkfy; w nkm iygyhkhym hyn tagl dlt myiqyigakm dkmki
yi yn xbihl; w, maéihlnl wl, mayihl clfytikhlt w obiqkxyiqy nafytkn, glxl
nl dayiml myt, il rkftá pknqk uby my xy dktyegk. il, mail rkgylm xayn, w
dkdktlm rki xlmgkm; qkiql vknym gbkiql qayiym, hygík bik xa kcüynk, w hyn
rlxfty kttkackhl il qy vytám vyickhl.

-¡lr, xknhaql mykm hy halm, mkigrl! -haol k ymqk mkeói hli ubaolqy-.
¡mymyiqk xan mkqkikmym qy nnyvyi k qa w k qbm typtkiym! bik rltk rk uby nlm
ymqám yimktqkihl w háihlxy gli gkhk bil qtkclm hy qltxyiql. wl qy kmycbtl
uby ymqlm typtkiym qy rki hy nnyvkt bi hík k nk rltgk; dlt ynnlm qy rki hy
ubaqkt yn clfaytil qbm vkmknnlm, l rk hy rkfyt yiqty ynnlm glxbiahkhym.
haxy, ¿hóihy nlm rknnkm, aciltkiqy, l góxl nlm kdnagkm, xyiqygkql, uby dktk
hygat wl bil w kdnagktny fayi, mbhl w qtkfkol glxl ma gkvkmy?

-dlt halm, myñlt ibymqtl kxl -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby vbymk xytgyh my ubyok hy
fayi dlgkm glmkm. ¿k ubé hakfnlm my dbhty hy uby wl xy matvk hy xa
rkgayihk, uby iaicbik lqtk qyicl, ia lqtl gkbhkn kncbil, mail typtkiym w
xám typtkiym? w krltk my xy lptygyi gbkqtl uby vyiíki kubí daiqadktkhlm, l
glxl dytkm yi qkfkuby, dytl il nlm haté, dltuby kn fbyi gknnkt nnkxki
mkigrl.

-ymy mkigrl il ytym qú -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby il mónl il ytym fbyi
gknnkt, mail xkn rkfnkt w xkn dltpakt; w, gli qlhl yml, ubyttík mkfyt ubé
gbkqtl typtkiym qy lgbttíki krltk k nk xyxltak uby vyiíki kubí k dtldómaql,
uby wl kihl tyglttayihl nk xík, uby nk qyicl fbyik, w iaicbil my xy lptygy.

-¿ubé xyoltym -haol mkigrl- uby "yiqty hlm xbynkm glthknym ibigk dlickm qbm
dbncktym", w "k ahlm hy xa gkmk w ubé ubytéam gli xa xboyt, il rkw
tymdlihyt", w "ma hk yn gáiqktl yi nk dayhtk l nk dayhtk yi yn gáiqktl, xkn
dktk yn gáiqktl", qlhlm nlm gbknym vayiyi k dynl? uby ikhay my qlxy gli mb
clfytikhlt ia gli yn uby ny xkihk, dltuby mknhtá nkmqaxkhl, glxl yn uby
dliy yn hyhl yiqty hlm xbynkm glthknym, w kbiuby il myki glthknym, glxl
myki xbynkm, il axdltqk; w k nl uby haoyty yn clfytikhlt il rkw uby
tydnagkt, glxl kn "mknílm hy xa gkmk w ubé ubytéam gli xa xboyt". dbym nl
hy nk dayhtk yi yn gáiqktl bi gaycl nl vytá. kmí uby, ym xyiymqyt uby yn
uby vyy nk xlqk yi yn lol koyil, vyk nk vack yi yn mbwl, dltuby il my hack
dlt én: "ymdkiqómy nk xbytqk hy nk hyclnnkhk", w vbymqtk xytgyh mkfy fayi
uby xám mkfy yn iygal yi mb gkmk uby yn gbythl yi nk koyik.

-yml il, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby yn iygal yi mb gkmk ia yi nk
koyik mkfy ikhk, k gkbmk uby mlfty yn kbxyiql hy nk iygyhkh il kmayiqk
iaicúi hamgtyql yhapagal. w hyoyxlm ymql kubí, mkigrl, uby ma xkn
clfytiktym, qbwk mytá nk gbndk, w xík nk vytcüyiek; xkm glimbénlxy uby ry
rygrl nl uby hyfík yi kglimyoktqy gli nkm vytkm w gli nk hamgtygaói k xí
dlmafny: gli ymql mkncl hy xa lfnackgaói w hy xa dtlxymk. halm qy cbíy,
mkigrl, w qy clfaytiy yi qb clfaytil, w k xí xy mkuby hyn ymgtúdbnl uby xy
ubyhk uby rkm hy hkt gli qlhk nk íimbnk dkqkm kttafk, glmk uby dbhaytk wl
ymgbmkt gli hymgbftat kn hbuby ubaéi ytym, hagaéihlny uby qlhk ymk clthbtk
w ymk dytmliannk uby qayiym il ym lqtk glmk uby bi glmqkn nnyil hy typtkiym
w hy xknagakm.

-myñlt -tydnagó mkigrl-, ma k vbymqtk xytgyh ny dktygy uby il mlw hy dtl
dktk ymqy clfaytil, hymhy kubí ny mbynql, uby xám ubaytl bi mlnl iyctl hy
nk bñk hy xa knxk uby k qlhl xa gbytdl; w kmí xy mbmqyiqkté mkigrl k mygkm
gli dki w gyflnnk, glxl clfytikhlt gli dythagym w gkdliym; w xám uby,
xayiqtkm my hbytxy, qlhlm mli acbknym, nlm ctkihym w nlm xyiltym, nlm
dlftym w nlm taglm; w ma vbymqtk xytgyh xatk yi ynnl, vytá uby mónl vbymqtk
xytgyh xy rk dbymql yi ymql hy clfytikt: uby wl il mé xám hy clfaytilm hy
íimbnkm uby bi fbaqty; w ma my axkcaik uby dlt myt clfytikhlt xy rk hy
nnyvkt yn hakfnl, xám xy ubaytl at mkigrl kn gaynl uby clfytikhlt kn
aipaytil.

-dlt halm, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby, dlt mlnkm ymqkm únqaxkm tkeliym
uby rkm hagrl, obecl uby xytygym myt clfytikhlt hy xan íimbnkm: fbyi
ikqbtkn qayiym, mai yn gbkn il rkw gayigak uby vknck; yiglxaéihkqy k halm,
w dtlgbtk il yttkt yi nk dtaxytk aiqyigaói; ubaytl hygat uby mayxdty qyickm
aiqyiql w patxy dtldómaql hy kgytqkt yi gbkiqlm iyclgalm qy lgbttaytyi,
dltuby mayxdty pkvltygy yn gaynl nlm fbyilm hymylm. w váxlilm k glxyt, uby
gtyl uby wk ymqlm myñltym ilm kcbkthki.





gkdíqbnl znav. góxl mkigrl dkiek pby nnyvkhl kn clfaytil, w hy nk ymqtkñk
kvyiqbtk uby yi yn gkmqannl mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy


hagyi uby yi yn dtldal ltacaikn hymqk ramqltak my nyy uby, nnyckihl gahy
rkxyqy k ymgtafat ymqy gkdíqbnl, il ny qtkhbol mb aiqétdtyqy glxl én ny
rkfík ymgtaql, uby pby bi xlhl hy ubyok uby qbvl yn xltl hy mí xamxl, dlt
rkfyt qlxkhl yiqty xkilm bik ramqltak qki mygk w qki naxaqkhk glxl ymqk hy
hli ubaolqy, dlt dktygytny uby mayxdty rkfík hy rkfnkt hén w hy mkigrl, mai
lmkt ymqyihytmy k lqtkm hactymaliym w ydamlhalm xám ctkvym w xám
yiqtyqyiahlm; w hygík uby yn at mayxdty kqyiahl yn yiqyihaxayiql, nk xkil w
nk dnbxk k ymgtafat hy bi mlnl mboyql w rkfnkt dlt nkm flgkm hy dlgkm
dytmlikm ytk bi qtkfkol aiglxdltqkfny, gbwl ptbql il tyhbihkfk yi yn hy mb
kbqlt, w uby, dlt rbat hymqy aiglivyiayiqy, rkfík bmkhl yi nk dtaxytk dktqy
hyn ktqapagal hy kncbikm ilvynkm, glxl pbytli nk hyn gbtalml axdytqaiyiqy w
nk hyn gkdaqái gkbqavl, uby ymqái glxl mydktkhkm hy nk ramqltak, dbymql uby
nkm hyxám uby knní my gbyiqki mli gkmlm mbgyhahlm kn xamxl hli ubaolqy, uby
il dlhíki hyokt hy ymgtafatmy. qkxfaéi dyimó, glxl én hagy, uby xbgrlm,
nnyvkhlm hy nk kqyigaói uby dahyi nkm rkekñkm hy hli ubaolqy, il nk hktíki
k nkm ilvynkm, w dkmktíki dlt ynnkm, l gli dtaymk l gli yipkhl, mai
khvytqat nk cknk w ktqapagal uby yi mí gliqayiyi, yn gbkn my xlmqtktk fayi
kn hymgbfaytql gbkihl, dlt mí mlnkm, mai kttaxktmy k nkm nlgbtkm hy hli
ubaolqy ia k nkm mkihygym hy mkigrl, mknaytki k nbe. w kmí, yi ymqk mycbihk
dktqy il ubaml aicytat ilvynkm mbynqkm ia dyckhaekm, mail kncbilm ydamlhalm
uby nl dktygaymyi, ikgahlm hy nlm xymxlm mbgymlm uby nk vythkh lptygy; w
kbi émqlm, naxaqkhkxyiqy w gli mlnkm nkm dknkftkm uby fkmqki k
hygnktktnlm; w, dbym my gliqayiy w gayttk yi nlm ymqtygrlm níxaqym hy nk
ikttkgaói, qyiayihl rkfanahkh, mbpagayigak w yiqyihaxayiql dktk qtkqkt hyn
biavytml qlhl, dahy il my hymdtygay mb qtkfkol, w my ny hyi knkfkiekm, il
dlt nl uby ymgtafy, mail dlt nl uby rk hyokhl hy ymgtafat.

w nbycl dtlmacby nk ramqltak hagayihl uby, yi kgkfkihl hy glxyt hli
ubaolqy, yn hík uby hal nlm glimyolm k mkigrl, kubynnk qkthy my nlm hal
ymgtaqlm, dktk uby én fbmgkmy ubayi my nlm nywymy; dytl, kdyikm my nlm rbfl
hkhl, gbkihl my ny gkwytli w vaiaytli k xkilm hyn hbuby, uby nlm glxbiagó
gli nk hbubymk, w nlm hlm my khxatktli hy ibyvl hy nk nlgbtk w hyn aicyial
hy hli ubaolqy; w kmí, nnyvkihl khynkiqy mbm fbtnkm, kubynnk qkthy yivaktli
k mkigrl gli xbgrl kglxdkñkxayiql kn nbckt uby dktk én rkfík hy myt íimbnk.

kgkygaó, dbym, uby yn uby ny nnyvkfk k gktcl ytk bi xkwlthlxl hyn hbuby,
xbw hamgtyql w xbw ctkgalml -uby il dbyhy rkfyt ctkgak hlihy il rkw
hamgtygaói-, yn gbkn rkfík rygrl nk dytmlik hy nk glihymk qtapknha, gli yn
hlikaty uby ubyhk typytahl; w gli ymql, w gli at aihbmqtakhl hy mbm
myñltym hy góxl my rkfík hy rkfyt gli mkigrl, mknaó gli mb aiqyiql
xktkvannlmkxyiqy. hacl, dbym, uby kgkygaó uby, kmí glxl mkigrl val kn qkn
xkwlthlxl, my ny pacbtó yi mb tlmqtl yn xymxl hy nk qtapknha, w,
vlnvaéihlmy k mb myñlt, ny haol:

-myñlt, l k xí xy rk hy nnyvkt yn hakfnl hy kubí hy hlihy ymqlw, yi obmql
w yi gtywyiqy, l vbymqtk xytgyh xy rk hy glipymkt uby yn tlmqtl hymqy
xkwlthlxl hyn hbuby, uby kubí ymqá, ym yn xymxl hy nk hlnltahk.

xató hli ubaolqy kqyiqkxyiqy kn xkwlthlxl, w, rkfaéihlny xatkhl, haol k
mkigrl:

-il rkw dktk ubé qy nnyvy yn hakfnl, mkigrl, ia yi obmql ia yi gtywyiqy,
uby il mé nl uby ubaytym hygat; uby yn tlmqtl hy nk hlnltahk ym yn hyn
xkwlthlxl, dytl il dlt yml yn xkwlthlxl ym nk hlnltahk; uby, k mytnl,
axdnagktík gliqtkhagaói xbw ctkihy, w il ym qayxdl krltk hy rkgyt ymqkm
kvytacbkgaliym, uby mytík yiqtktilm yi aiqtagkhlm nkfytaiqlm. gtéyxy,
kxacl, uby ym xyiymqyt tlckt k ibymqtl myñlt xbw hy vytkm uby ilm nafty k
nlm hlm hy xknlm rygragytlm w hy xknlm yigkiqkhltym.

-il ym fbtnk, myñlt -tydnagó mkigrl-, mail uby hyikiqym ny lí rkfnkt, w il
dktygaó mail uby nk vle hy nk qtapknha xy mlikfk yi nlm líhlm. krltk fayi,
wl gknnkté, dytl il hyokté hy kihkt khvytqahl hy kubí khynkiqy, k vyt ma
hymgbfty lqtk myñkn uby glipatxy l hympkck xa mlmdygrk.

-kmí nl rkm hy rkgyt, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w hktámxy kvaml hy qlhl nl
uby yi ymqy gkml hymgbftaytym w hy qlhl kubynnl uby yi yn clfaytil qy
mbgyhayty.

mknaó, yi pai, mkigrl, kglxdkñkhl hy xbgrk cyiqy, vymqahl k nl nyqtkhl, w
yigaxk bi ckfái xbw kigrl hy grkxynlqy hy kcbkm nylikhl, gli bik xliqytk hy
nl xymxl, mlfty bi xkgrl k nk oaiyqk, w hyqtám hén, dlt lthyi hyn hbuby,
afk yn tbgal gli okygym w ltikxyiqlm obxyiqanym hy myhk w pnkxkiqym. vlnvík
mkigrl nk gkfyek hy gbkihl yi gbkihl k xatkt k mb kmil, gli gbwk glxdkñík
afk qki gliqyiql uby il my qtlgktk gli yn yxdytkhlt hy knyxkñk.

kn hymdyhatmy hy nlm hbubym, nym fymó nkm xkilm, w qlxó nk fyihagaói hy mb
myñlt, uby my nk hal gli náctaxkm, w mkigrl nk tygafaó gli dbgrytaqlm.

hyok, nygqlt kxkfny, at yi dke w yi rltk fbyik kn fbyi mkigrl, w ymdytk hlm
pkiyckm hy tamk, uby qy rk hy gkbmkt yn mkfyt góxl my dltqó yi mb gktcl, w,
yi qkiql, kqayihy k mkfyt nl uby ny dkmó k mb kxl kubynnk ilgry; uby ma gli
ynnl il taytym, dlt nl xyilm hymdnycktám nlm nkfalm gli tamk hy oaxak,
dltuby nlm mbgymlm hy hli ubaolqy, l my rki hy gynyftkt gli khxatkgaói, l
gli tamk.

gbéiqkmy, dbym, uby, kdyikm my rbfl dktqahl mkigrl, gbkihl hli ubaolqy
maiqaó mb mlnyhkh; w ma ny pbytk dlmafny tyvlgktny nk glxamaói w ubaqktny
yn clfaytil, nl ragaytk. glilgaó nk hbubymk mb xynkiglník, w dtycbiqóny uby
hy ubé ymqkfk qtamqy; uby ma ytk dlt nk kbmyigak hy mkigrl, uby ymgbhytlm,
hbyñkm w hligynnkm rkfík yi mb gkmk uby ny mytvatíki xbw k mkqampkgaói hy
mb hymyl.

-vythkh ym, myñltk xík -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby mayiql nk kbmyigak hy
mkigrl, dytl il ym émk nk gkbmk dtaigadkn uby xy rkgy dktygyt uby ymqlw
qtamqy, w, hy nlm xbgrlm lptygaxayiqlm uby vbymqtk yzgynyigak xy rkgy,
mlnkxyiqy kgydql w ymglol yn hy nk vlnbiqkh gli uby my xy rkgyi, w, yi nl
hyxám, mbdnagl k vbymqtk yzgynyigak uby hyiqtl hy xa kdlmyiql glimayiqk w
dytxaqk uby wl mlnl myk yn uby xy matvk.

-yi vythkh -haol nk hbubymk-, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby il rk hy myt kmí: uby
ny rki hy mytvat gbkqtl hligynnkm hy nkm xíkm, rytxlmkm glxl bikm pnltym.

-dktk xí -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- il mytái ynnkm glxl pnltym, mail glxl
ymdaikm uby xy dbigyi yn knxk. kmí yiqtktái ynnkm yi xa kdlmyiql, ia glmk
uby nl dktyegk, glxl vlnkt. ma ym uby vbymqtk ctkihyek ubayty nnyvkt
khynkiqy yn rkgytxy xytgyh mai wl xytygytnk, héoyxy uby wl xy nkm rkwk
glixacl, w uby wl xy matvk hy xam dbytqkm khyiqtl, uby wl dlick bik xbtknnk
yi xyhal hy xam hymylm w hy xa rliymqahkh; w il ubaytl dythyt ymqk
glmqbxfty dlt nk nafytknahkh uby vbymqtk knqyek ubayty xlmqtkt glixacl. w,
yi tymlnbgaói, kiqym hltxaté vymqahl uby glimyiqat uby ikhay xy hymibhy.

-il xám, il xám, myñlt hli ubaolqy -tydnagó nk hbubymk-. dlt xí hacl uby
hkté lthyi uby ia kbi bik xlmgk yiqty yi mb ymqkigak, il uby bik hligynnk;
il mlw wl dytmlik, uby dlt xí my rk hy hymgkfknkt nk hygyigak hyn myñlt hli
ubaolqy; uby, mycúi my xy rk qtkmnbgahl, nk uby xám gkxdyk yiqty mbm xbgrkm
vatqbhym ym nk hy nk rliymqahkh. hymiúhymy vbymk xytgyh w vímqkmy k mbm
mlnkm w k mb xlhl, glxl w gbkihl ubamayty, uby il rkftá ubayi nl axdahk,
dbym hyiqtl hy mb kdlmyiql rknnktá nlm vkmlm iygymktalm kn xyiymqyt hyn uby
hbytxy k dbytqk gyttkhk, dltuby iaicbik ikqbtkn iygymahkh ny lfnacby k uby
nk kftk. vavk xan macnlm nk ctki hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, w myk mb ilxfty
ymqyihahl dlt qlhk nk tyhlihye hy nk qayttk, dbym xytygaó myt kxkhk hy qki
vknayiqy w qki rliymql gkfknnytl, w nlm fyiacilm gaynlm aipbihki yi yn
gltkeói hy mkigrl dkiek, ibymqtl clfytikhlt, bi hymyl hy kgkfkt dtymql mbm
hagadnaikm, dktk uby vbynvk k clekt yn xbihl hy nk fynnyek hy qki ctki
myñltk.

k nl gbkn haol hli ubaolqy:

-vbymqtk knqaqbh rk rkfnkhl glxl ubayi ym, uby yi nk flgk hy nkm fbyikm
myñltkm il rk hy rkfyt iaicbik uby myk xknk; w xám vyiqbtlmk w xám glilgahk
mytá yi yn xbihl hbngaiyk dlt rkfytnk knkfkhl vbymqtk ctkihyek, uby dlt
qlhkm nkm knkfkiekm uby dbyhki hktny nlm xám ynlgbyiqym hy nk qayttk.

-kcltk fayi, myñlt hli ubaolqy -tydnagó nk hbubymk-, nk rltk hy gyikt my
nnyck, w yn hbuby hyfy hy ymdytkt: vyick vbymk xytgyh w gyiyxlm, w
kglmqktámy qyxdtkil, uby yn vakoy uby kwyt rael hy gkihkwk il pby qki gltql
uby il rkwk gkbmkhl kncúi xlnaxayiql.

-il mayiql iaicbil, myñltk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby lmkté obtkt k
vbymqtk yzgynyigak uby yi xa vahk ry mbfahl mlfty fymqak xám tydlmkhk ia hy
xyolt dkml uby gnkvanyñl; w il mé wl ubé ny dbhl xlvyt k xknkxftbil dktk
hymrkgytmy hy qki nacytk w qki cyiqan gkfknckhbtk, w kftkmktnk kmí, mai xám
ia xám.

-k yml my dbyhy axkcaikt -tymdlihaó nk hbubymk- uby, kttydyiqahl hyn xkn
uby rkfík rygrl k nk qtapknha w glxdkñík, w k lqtkm dytmlikm, w hy nkm
xknhkhym uby glxl rygragytl w yigkiqkhlt hyfík hy rkfyt glxyqahl, ubaml
glignbat gli qlhlm nlm aimqtbxyiqlm hy mb lpagal, w, glxl k dtaigadkn w uby
xám ny qtkík hymkmlmyckhl, vkckihl hy qayttk yi qayttk, kftkmó k gnkvanyñl;
uby gli mbm kftkmkhkm gyiaekm w gli yn qtlpyl hyn gktqyn ubyhk yqytil yn
vknlt hyn ctki hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk.

hy ibyvl ibyvkm ctkgakm hal hli ubaolqy k nk hbubymk, w, yi gyikihl, hli
ubaolqy my tyqató yi mb kdlmyiql mlnl, mai glimyiqat uby ikhay yiqtkmy gli
én k mytvatny: qkiql my qyxík hy yigliqtkt lgkmaliym uby ny xlvaymyi l
pltekmyi k dythyt yn rliymql hygltl uby k mb myñltk hbngaiyk cbkthkfk,
mayxdty dbymqk yi nk axkcaikgaói nk flihkh hy kxkhím, pnlt w ymdyol hy nlm
kihkiqym gkfknnytlm. gyttó qtkm mí nk dbytqk, w k nk nbe hy hlm vynkm hy
gytk my hymibhó, w kn hymgknektmy -¡lr hymctkgak aihacik hy qkn dytmlik!-
my ny mlnqktli, il mbmdatlm, ia lqtk glmk, uby hymkgtyhaqkmyi nk naxdayek
hy mb dlnagík, mail rkmqk hlm hlgyikm hy dbiqlm hy bik xyhak, uby ubyhó
rygrk gynlmík. kpnacaómy yi ymqtyxl yn fbyi myñlt, w haytk én dlt qyiyt
knní bi khktxy hy myhk vythy bik liek hy dnkqk; hacl myhk vythy dltuby nkm
xyhakm ytki vythym.

kubí yzgnkxó fyiyicyna, w, ymgtafayihl, haol ''¡lr dlftyek, dlftyek! ¡il mé
wl gli ubé tkeói my xlvaó kubyn ctki dlyqk glthlfém k nnkxktqy

háhavk mkiqk hymkctkhygahk!

wl, kbiuby xltl, fayi mé, dlt nk glxbiagkgaói uby ry qyiahl gli gtamqakilm,
uby nk mkiqahkh glimamqy yi nk gktahkh, rbxanhkh, pyy, lfyhayigak w
dlftyek; dytl, gli qlhl yml, hacl uby rk hy qyiyt xbgrl hy halm yn uby my
vaiayty k gliqyiqkt gli myt dlfty, ma il ym hy kubyn xlhl hy dlftyek hy
ubayi hagy bil hy mbm xkwltym mkiqlm: "qyiyh qlhkm nkm glmkm glxl ma il nkm
qbvaémyhym"; w k ymql nnkxki dlftyek hy ymdítaqb; dytl qú, mycbihk dlftyek,
uby ytym hy nk uby wl rkfnl, ¿dlt ubé ubaytym ymqtynnktqy gli nlm rahknclm
w fayi ikgahlm xám uby gli nk lqtk cyiqy? ¿dlt ubé nlm lfnackm k hkt
dkiqknak k nlm ekdkqlm, w k uby nlm flqliym hy mbm tldannkm bilm myki hy
myhk, lqtlm hy gythkm, w lqtlm hy vahtl? ¿dlt ubé mbm gbynnlm, dlt nk xkwlt
dktqy, rki hy myt mayxdty ymgktlnkhlm, w il kfaytqlm gli xlnhy?'' w yi ymql
my ygrktá hy vyt uby ym kiqacbl yn bml hyn knxahói w hy nlm gbynnlm
kfaytqlm. w dtlmacbaó: ''¡xamytkfny hyn fayi ikgahl uby vk hkihl damqlm k
mb rlitk, glxayihl xkn w k dbytqk gyttkhk, rkgayihl radógtaqk kn dknannl hy
hayiqym gli uby mkny k nk gknny hymdbém hy il rkfyt glxahl glmk uby ny
lfnacby k naxdaátmynlm! ¡xamytkfny hy kubyn, hacl, uby qayiy nk rlitk
ymdkiqkhaek, w dayimk uby hymhy bik nycbk my ny hymgbfty yn tyxayihl hyn
ekdkql, yn qtkmbhlt hyn mlxftytl, nk rankek hyn ryttytbynl w nk rkxfty hy
mb ymqóxkcl!''

qlhl ymql my ny tyilvó k hli ubaolqy yi nk mlnqbtk hy mbm dbiqlm, dytl
glimlnómy gli vyt uby mkigrl ny rkfík hyokhl bikm flqkm hy gkxail, uby
dyimó dliytmy lqtl hík. paiknxyiqy, én my tyglmqó dyimkqavl w dymktlml, kmí
hy nk pknqk uby mkigrl ny rkgík glxl hy nk aitydktkfny hymctkgak hy mbm
xyhakm, k ubayi qlxktk nlm dbiqlm, kbiuby pbytk gli myhk hy lqtk glnlt, uby
ym bik hy nkm xkwltym myñknym hy xamytak uby bi rahkncl dbyhy hkt yi yn
hamgbtml hy mb dtlnaok ymqtygryek. xkqó nkm vynkm; rkgík gknlt w il dlhík
hltxat; nyvkiqómy hyn nygrl w kftaó bi dlgl nk vyiqkik hy bik tyok uby hkfk
mlfty bi rytxlml okthíi, w, kn kftatnk, maiqaó w lwó uby kihkfk w rkfnkfk
cyiqy yi yn okthíi. dúmlmy k ymgbgrkt kqyiqkxyiqy. nyvkiqktli nk vle nlm hy
kfkol, qkiql, uby dbhl lít ymqkm tkeliym:

-il xy dltpíym, ¡lr yxytyigak!, uby gkiqy, dbym mkfym uby, hymhy yn dbiql
uby ymqy pltkmqytl yiqtó yi ymqy gkmqannl w xam lolm ny xatktli, wl il mé
gkiqkt, mail nnltkt; gbkiql xám, uby yn mbyñl hy xa myñltk qayiy xám hy
nacytl uby hy dymkhl, w il ubyttík uby ilm rknnkmy kubí dlt qlhl yn qymltl
hyn xbihl. w, dbymql gkml uby hbtxaymy w il hymdytqkmy, yi vkil mytík xa
gkiql ma hbytxy w il hymdaytqk dktk lítny ymqy ibyvl yiykm, uby rk nnyckhl
k xam tycaliym dktk hyoktxy ymgktiahk.

-il hym yi yml, knqamahltk kxack -tymdlihaytli-, uby mai hbhk nk hbubymk w
gbkiqlm rkw yi ymk gkmk hbytxyi, ma il ym yn myñlt hy qb gltkeói w yn
hymdytqkhlt hy qb knxk, dltuby krltk myiqí uby kftík nk vyiqkik hy nk tyok
hy mb ymqkigak, w mai hbhk hyfy hy ymqkt hymdaytql; gkiqk, nkmqaxkhk xík,
yi qlil fkol w mbkvy kn mli hy qb ktdk, w, gbkihl nk hbubymk ilm mayiqk, ny
ygrktyxlm nk gbndk kn gknlt uby rkgy.

-il ymqá yi yml yn dbiql, ¡lr yxytyigak! -tymdlihaó nk knqamahltk-, mail yi
uby il ubyttík uby xa gkiql hymgbftaymy xa gltkeói w pbymy obeckhk hy nlm
uby il qayiyi ilqagak hy nkm pbytekm dlhytlmkm hy kxlt dlt hligynnk
kiqlokhaek w navakik. dytl vyick nl uby vaiayty, uby xám vkny vytcüyiek yi
gktk uby xkigannk yi gltkeói.

w, yi ymql, maiqaó qlgkt bik ktdk mbkvímaxkxyiqy. lwyihl nl gbkn, ubyhó hli
ubaolqy dkmxkhl, dltuby yi kubyn aimqkiqy my ny vaiaytli k nk xyxltak nkm
aipaiaqkm kvyiqbtkm myxyokiqym k kubénnk, hy vyiqkikm, tyokm w okthaiym,
xúmagkm, tyubayftlm w hymvkiygaxayiqlm uby yi nlm mbm hymvkiygahlm naftlm
hy gkfknnytíkm rkfík nyíhl. nbycl axkcaió uby kncbik hligynnk hy nk hbubymk
ymqkfk hén yikxltkhk, w uby nk rliymqahkh nk pltekfk k qyiyt mygtyqk mb
vlnbiqkh; qyxaó il ny taihaymy, w dtldbml yi mb dyimkxayiql yn il hyoktmy
vyigyt; w, yiglxyiháihlmy hy qlhl fbyi áiaxl w fbyi qknkiqy k mb myñltk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, hyqytxaió hy ymgbgrkt nk xúmagk; w, dktk hkt k
yiqyihyt uby knní ymqkfk, hal bi paicahl ymqltibhl, hy uby il dlgl my
knyctktli nkm hligynnkm, uby lqtk glmk il hymykfki mail uby hli ubaolqy nkm
lwymy. tyglttahk, dbym, w kpaikhk nk ktdk, knqamahltk hal dtaigadal k ymqy
tlxkigy:

   -¡lr, qú, uby ymqám yi qb nygrl,
   yiqty máfkikm hy rlnkihk,
   hbtxayihl k daytik qyihahk
   hy nk ilgry k nk xkñkik,
   gkfknnytl yn xám vknayiqy
   uby rk dtlhbgahl nk xkigrk,
   xám rliymql w xám fyihaql
   uby yn ltl pail hy ktkfak!
   lwy k bik qtamqy hligynnk,
   fayi gtygahk w xkn nlctkhk,
   uby yi nk nbe hy qbm hlm mlnym
   my mayiqy kftkmkt yn knxk.
   qú fbmgkm qbm kvyiqbtkm,
   w koyikm hymhagrkm rknnkm;
   hkm nkm pytahkm, w iayckm
   yn tyxyhal hy mkiktnkm.
   haxy, vknytlml olvyi,
   uby halm dtlmdyty qbm kimakm,
   ma qy gtakmqy yi nk nafak,
   l yi nkm xliqkñkm hy okgk;
   ma maytdym qy haytli nygry;
   ma, k hagrk, pbytli qbm kxkm
   nk kmdytyek hy nkm mynvkm
   w yn rlttlt hy nkm xliqkñkm.
   xbw fayi dbyhy hbngaiyk,
   hligynnk tlnnaek w mkik,
   dtygaktmy hy uby rk tyihahl
   k bik qacty w paytk ftkvk.
   dlt ymql mytá pkxlmk
   hymhy ryiktym k oktkxk,
   hymhy yn qkol k xkiekiktym,
   hymhy dambytck rkmqk ktnkiek.
   qtlgátyxy wl dlt ynnk,
   w haytk yigaxk bik mkwk
   hy nkm xám ckwkhkm xíkm,
   uby hy ltl ny khltiki ptkiokm.
   ¡lr, ubaéi my vaytk yi qbm ftkelm,
   l ma il, obiql k qb gkxk,
   tkmgáihlqy nk gkfyek
   w xkqáihlqy nk gkmdk!
   xbgrl dahl, w il mlw hacik
   hy xytgyh qki myñknkhk:
   nlm daym ubamaytk qtkytqy,
   uby k bik rbxanhy ymql ny fkmqk.
   ¡lr, ubé hy glpakm qy haytk,
   ubé hy ymgktdaiym hy dnkqk,
   ubé hy gknekm hy hkxkmgl,
   ubé hy ryttytbynlm hy rlnkihk!
   ¡ubé hy paiímaxkm dytnkm,
   gkhk gbkn glxl bik kcknnk,
   uby, k il qyiyt glxdkñytkm,
   nkm mlnkm pbytki nnkxkhkm!
   il xatym hy qb qktdywk
   ymqy aigyihal uby xy kftkmk,
   iytói xkigrycl hyn xbihl,
   ia ny kvavym gli qb mkñk.
   iañk mlw, dbngynk qaytik,
   xa yhkh hy ubaigy il dkmk:
   gkqltgy qyicl w qtym xymym,
   qy obtl yi halm w yi xa áiaxk.
   il mlw tyigk, ia mlw glok,
   ia qyicl ikhk hy xkigk;
   nlm gkfynnlm, glxl natalm,
   uby, yi day, dlt yn mbynl kttkmqtki.
   w, kbiuby ym xa flgk kcbanyñk
   w nk iktae kncl grkqk,
   myt xam hayiqym hy qldkgalm
   xa fynnyek kn gaynl yimknek.
   xa vle, wk vym, ma xy ymgbgrkm,
   uby k nk uby ym xám hbngy acbknk,
   w mlw hy hamdlmagaói
   kncl xyilm uby xyhakik.
   ymqkm w lqtkm ctkgakm xíkm,
   mli hymdlolm hy qb knokfk;
   hymqk gkmk mlw hligynnk,
   w knqamahltk xy nnkxki.

kubí hal pai yn gkiql hy nk xknpytahk knqamahltk, w glxyieó yn kmlxftl hyn
tyubatahl hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn, hkihl bi ctki mbmdatl, haol yiqty mí:

-¡uby qyicl hy myt qki hymhagrkhl kihkiqy, uby il rk hy rkfyt hligynnk uby
xy xaty uby hy xí il my yikxlty...! ¡uby qyick hy myt qki gltqk hy vyiqbtk
nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby il nk rki hy hyokt k mlnkm clekt hy nk
aiglxdktkfny patxyek xík...! ¿ubé nk ubytéam, tyaikm? ¿k ubé nk dytmycbím,
yxdytkqtagym? ¿dktk ubé nk kglmáam, hligynnkm hy k gkqltgy k ubaigy kñlm?
hyokh, hyokh k nk xamytkfny uby qtabipy, my clgy w bpkiy gli nk mbytqy uby
kxlt ubaml hktny yi tyihatny xa gltkeói w yiqtycktny xa knxk. xatkh,
gkqytvk yikxltkhk, uby dktk mlnk hbngaiyk mlw hy xkmk w hy knpyiauby, w
dktk qlhkm nkm hyxám mlw hy dyhytikn; dktk ynnk mlw xayn, w dktk vlmlqtkm
kgífkt; dktk xí mlnk hbngaiyk ym nk rytxlmk, nk hamgtyqk, nk rliymqk, nk
cknnkthk w nk fayi ikgahk, w nkm hyxám, nkm pykm, nkm iygakm, nkm navakikm
w nkm hy dylt naikoy; dktk myt wl mbwl, w il hy lqtk kncbik, xy kttloó nk
ikqbtknyek kn xbihl. nnlty l gkiqy knqamahltk; hymymdétymy xkhkxk, dlt
ubayi xy kdlttyktli yi yn gkmqannl hyn xltl yigkiqkhl, uby wl qyicl hy myt
hy hbngaiyk, glgahl l kmkhl, naxdal, fayi gtakhl w rliymql, k dymkt hy
qlhkm nkm dlqymqkhym rygragytkm hy nk qayttk.

w, gli ymql, gyttó hy clndy nk vyiqkik, w, hymdygrkhl w dymktlml, glxl ma
ny rbfaytk kgliqygahl kncbik ctki hymctkgak, my kglmqó yi mb nygrl, hlihy
ny hyoktyxlm dlt krltk, dltuby ilm ymqá nnkxkihl yn ctki mkigrl dkiek, uby
ubayty hkt dtaigadal k mb pkxlml clfaytil.





gkdíqbnl znv. hy góxl yn ctki mkigrl dkiek qlxó nk dlmymaói hy mb íimbnk, w
hyn xlhl uby glxyieó k clfytikt


¡lr dytdyqbl hymgbftahlt hy nlm kiqídlhkm, rkgrk hyn xbihl, lol hyn gaynl,
xyiyl hbngy hy nkm gkiqaxdnltkm, qaxftal kubí, pyfl knní, qatkhlt kgá,
xéhagl kgbnná, dkhty hy nk dlymík, aivyiqlt hy nk xúmagk: qú uby mayxdty
mknym, w, kbiuby nl dktygy, ibigk qy dliym! k qa hacl, ¡lr mln, gli gbwk
kwbhk yn rlxfty yicyihtk kn rlxfty!; k qa hacl uby xy pkvltyegkm, w
knbxftym nk ymgbtahkh hy xa aicyial, dktk uby dbyhk hamgbttat dlt mbm
dbiqlm yi nk ikttkgaói hyn clfaytil hyn ctki mkigrl dkiek; uby mai qa, wl
xy mayiql qafal, hymxkeknkhl w glipbml.

hacl, dbym, uby gli qlhl mb kglxdkñkxayiql nnycó mkigrl k bi nbckt hy rkmqk
xan vygailm, uby ytk hy nlm xyoltym uby yn hbuby qyiík. haétliny k yiqyihyt
uby my nnkxkfk nk íimbnk fktkqktak, l wk dltuby yn nbckt my nnkxkfk
fktkqktal, l wk dlt yn fktkql gli uby my ny rkfík hkhl yn clfaytil. kn
nnyckt k nkm dbytqkm hy nk vannk, uby ytk gytgkhk, mknaó yn tycaxayiql hyn
dbyfnl k tygyfatny; qlgktli nkm gkxdkikm, w qlhlm nlm vygailm haytli
xbymqtkm hy cyiytkn knyctík, w gli xbgrk dlxdk ny nnyvktli k nk acnymak
xkwlt k hkt ctkgakm k halm, w nbycl, gli kncbikm tahígbnkm gytyxliakm, ny
yiqtycktli nkm nnkvym hyn dbyfnl, w ny khxaqaytli dlt dytdyqbl clfytikhlt
hy nk íimbnk fktkqktak.

yn qtkoy, nkm fktfkm, nk clthbtk w dyubyñye hyn ibyvl clfytikhlt qyiík
khxatkhk k qlhk nk cyiqy uby yn fbmanam hyn gbyiql il mkfík, w kbi k qlhlm
nlm uby nl mkfíki, uby ytki xbgrlm. paiknxyiqy, yi mkgáihlny hy nk acnymak,
ny nnyvktli k nk mannk hyn obeckhl w ny myiqktli yi ynnk; w yn xkwlthlxl
hyn hbuby ny haol:

-ym glmqbxfty kiqacbk yi ymqk íimbnk, myñlt clfytikhlt, uby yn uby vayiy k
qlxkt dlmymaói hymqk pkxlmk íimbnk ymqá lfnackhl k tymdlihyt k bik dtycbiqk
uby my ny ragayty, uby myk kncl aiqtagkhk w hapagbnqlmk, hy gbwk tymdbymqk
yn dbyfnl qlxk w qlgk yn dbnml hyn aicyial hy mb ibyvl clfytikhlt; w kmí, l
my knyctk l my yiqtamqygy gli mb vyiahk.

yi qkiql uby yn xkwlthlxl hygík ymql k mkigrl, ymqkfk én xatkihl bikm
ctkihym w xbgrkm nyqtkm uby yi nk dktyh ptliqytk hy mb mannk ymqkfki
ymgtaqkm; w, glxl én il mkfík nyyt, dtycbiqó uby ubé ytki kubynnkm daiqbtkm
uby yi kubynnk dktyh ymqkfki. pbyny tymdlihahl:

-myñlt, knní ymqk ymgtaql w ilqkhl yn hík yi uby vbymqtk myñltík qlxó
dlmymaói hymqk íimbnk, w hagy yn ydaqkpal: rlw hík, k qkiqlm hy qkn xym w
hy qkn kñl, qlxó nk dlmymaói hymqk íimbnk yn myñlt hli mkigrl dkiek, uby
xbgrlm kñlm nk clgy.

-w ¿k ubaéi nnkxki hli mkigrl dkiek? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

-k vbymqtk myñltík -tymdlihaó yn xkwlthlxl-, uby yi ymqk íimbnk il rk
yiqtkhl lqtl dkiek mail yn uby ymqá myiqkhl yi ymk mannk.

-dbym khvytqah, rytxkil -haol mkigrl-, uby wl il qyicl hli, ia yi qlhl xa
naikoy ny rk rkfahl: mkigrl dkiek xy nnkxki k mygkm, w mkigrl my nnkxó xa
dkhty, w mkigrl xa kcüynl, w qlhlm pbytli dkiekm, mai kñkhahbtkm hy hliym
ia hlikm; w wl axkcail uby yi ymqk íimbnk hyfy hy rkfyt xám hliym uby
dayhtkm; dytl fkmqk: halm xy yiqayihy, w dlhtá myt uby, ma yn clfaytil xy
hbtk gbkqtl híkm, wl ymgkthkté ymqlm hliym, uby, dlt nk xbgryhbxfty, hyfyi
hy yipkhkt glxl nlm xlmubaqlm. dkmy khynkiqy gli mb dtycbiqk yn myñlt
xkwlthlxl, uby wl tymdlihyté nl xyolt uby mbdayty, ltk my yiqtamqyegk l il
my yiqtamqyegk yn dbyfnl.

k ymqy aimqkiqy yiqtktli yi yn obeckhl hlm rlxftym, yn bil vymqahl hy
nkftkhlt w yn lqtl hy mkmqty, dltuby qtkík bikm qaoytkm yi nk xkil, w yn
mkmqty haol:

-myñlt clfytikhlt, wl w ymqy rlxfty nkftkhlt vyiaxlm kiqy vbymqtk xytgyh yi
tkeói uby ymqy fbyi rlxfty nnycó k xa qayihk kwyt (uby wl, gli dythói hy
nlm dtymyiqym, mlw mkmqty yzkxaikhl, uby halm myk fyihaql), w, dliaéihlxy
bi dyhkel hy dkñl yi nkm xkilm, xy dtycbiqó: ''myñlt, ¿rkftík yi ymql
dkñl rktql dktk rkgytxy bik gkdytbek?'' wl, qkiqykihl yn dkñl, ny tymdlihí
uby mí; én hyfaómy hy axkcaikt, k nl uby wl axkcail, y axkcaié fayi, uby
mai hbhk wl ny ubytík rbtqkt kncbik dktqy hyn dkñl, pbiháihlmy yi mb
xknagak w yi nk xknk ldaiaói hy nlm mkmqtym, w tydnagóxy uby xatkmy ma
rkftík dktk hlm; khavaiény yn dyimkxayiql w híoyny uby mí; w én, gkfknnytl
yi mb hkñkhk w dtaxytk aiqyigaói, pby kñkhayihl gkdytbekm, w wl kñkhayihl
míym, rkmqk uby nnyckxlm k gaigl gkdytbekm, w krltk yi ymqy dbiql kgkfk hy
vyiat dlt ynnkm: wl my nkm hlw, w il xy ubayty dkckt nk rygrbtk, kiqym xy
dahy uby ny dkcby l vbynvk mb dkñl.

-¿ym qlhl ymql kmí, rytxkil? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

-mí, myñlt -tymdlihaó yn rlxfty-, dytl ráckny vbymqtk xytgyh uby xbymqty
nkm gaigl gkdytbekm uby xy rk rygrl.

-hy fbyik ckik -tymdlihaó yn mkmqty.

w, mkgkihl yigliqaiyiqy nk xkil hyfkol hyn ryttytbynl, xlmqtó yi ynnk gaigl
gkdytbekm dbymqkm yi nkm gaigl gkfyekm hy nlm hyhlm hy nk xkil, w haol:

-ry kubí nkm gaigl gkdytbekm uby ymqy fbyi rlxfty xy dahy, w yi halm w yi
xa gligayigak uby il xy rk ubyhkhl ikhk hyn dkñl, w wl hkté nk lftk k vamqk
hy vyyhltym hyn lpagal.

qlhlm nlm dtymyiqym my taytli hy nk xbnqaqbh hy nkm gkdytbekm w hyn ibyvl
dnyaql. mkigrl my dbml k glimahytkt bi dlgl, w haol:

-dktégyxy uby yi ymqy dnyaql il rk hy rkfyt nktckm hankgaliym, mail obeckt
nbycl k obagal hy fbyi vktói; w kmí, wl hlw dlt myiqyigak uby yn mkmqty
daythk nkm rygrbtkm, w yn nkftkhlt yn dkñl, w nkm gkdytbekm my nnyvyi k nlm
dtymlm hy nk gátgyn, w il rkwk xám.

ma nk myiqyigak dkmkhk hy nk flnmk hyn ckikhytl xlvaó k khxatkgaói k nlm
gatgbimqkiqym, émqk nym dtlvlgó k tamk; dytl, yi pai, my rael nl uby xkihó
yn clfytikhlt; kiqy yn gbkn my dtymyiqktli hlm rlxftym kigakilm; yn bil
qtkík bik gkñkryok dlt fágbnl, w yn mai fágbnl haol:

-myñlt, k ymqy fbyi rlxfty ny dtymqé híkm rk haye ymgbhlm hy ltl yi ltl,
dlt rkgytny dnkgyt w fbyik lftk, gli glihagaói uby xy nlm vlnvaymy gbkihl
my nlm dahaymy; dkmátlimy xbgrlm híkm mai dyhítmynlm, dlt il dliytny yi
xkwlt iygymahkh hy vlnvétxynlm uby nk uby én qyiík gbkihl wl my nlm dtymqé;
dytl, dlt dktygytxy uby my hymgbahkfk yi nk dkck, my nlm ry dyhahl bik w
xbgrkm vygym, w il mlnkxyiqy il xy nlm vbynvy, dytl xy nlm iayck w hagy uby
ibigk qknym haye ymgbhlm ny dtymqé, w uby ma my nlm dtymqé, uby wk xy nlm
rk vbynql. wl il qyicl qymqaclm ia hyn dtymqkhl ia hy nk vbynqk, dltuby il
xy nlm rk vbynql; ubyttík uby vbymqtk xytgyh ny qlxkmy obtkxyiql, w ma
obtkty uby xy nlm rk vbynql, wl my nlm dythlil dktk kubí w dktk hynkiqy hy
halm.

-¿ubé hygím vlm k ymql, fbyi vayol hyn fágbnl? -haol mkigrl.

k nl uby haol yn vayol:

-wl, myñlt, glipayml uby xy nlm dtymqó, w fkoy vbymqtk xytgyh ymk vktk; w,
dbym én nl hyok yi xa obtkxyiql, wl obtkté glxl my nlm ry vbynql w dkckhl
tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy.

fkoó yn clfytikhlt nk vktk, w, yi qkiql, yn vayol hyn fágbnl hal yn fágbnl
kn lqtl vayol, uby my ny qbvaymy yi qkiql uby obtkfk, glxl ma ny yxfktkektk
xbgrl, w nbycl dbml nk xkil yi nk gtbe hy nk vktk, hagayihl uby ytk vythkh
uby my ny rkfíki dtymqkhl kubynnlm haye ymgbhlm uby my ny dyhíki; dytl uby
én my nlm rkfík vbynql hy mb xkil k nk mbwk, w uby dlt il gkyt yi ynnl my
nlm vlnvík k dyhat dlt xlxyiqlm. vayihl nl gbkn yn ctki clfytikhlt,
dtycbiqó kn kgtyyhlt ubé tymdlihík k nl uby hygík mb gliqtktal; w haol uby
mai hbhk kncbik mb hybhlt hyfík hy hygat vythkh, dltuby ny qyiík dlt rlxfty
hy fayi w fbyi gtamqakil, w uby k én my ny hyfík hy rkfyt lnvahkhl yn góxl
w gbáihl my nlm rkfík vbynql, w uby hymhy knní yi khynkiqy okxám ny dahatík
ikhk. qltió k qlxkt mb fágbnl yn hybhlt, w, fkokihl nk gkfyek, my mknaó hyn
obeckhl. vamql nl gbkn mkigrl, w uby mai xám ia xám my afk, w vayihl
qkxfaéi nk dkgayigak hyn hyxkihkiqy, aignaió nk gkfyek mlfty yn dygrl, w,
dliaéihlmy yn íihagy hy nk xkil hytygrk mlfty nkm gyokm w nkm iktagym,
ymqbvl glxl dyimkqavl bi dyubyñl ymdkgal, w nbycl kneó nk gkfyek w xkihó
uby ny nnkxkmyi kn vayol hyn fágbnl, uby wk my rkfík ahl. qtboétlimyny, w,
yi vaéihlny mkigrl, ny haol:

-hkhxy, fbyi rlxfty, ymy fágbnl, uby ny ry xyiymqyt.

-hy xbw fbyik ckik -tymdlihaó yn vayol-: ryny kubí, myñlt.

w dúmlmyny yi nk xkil. qlxóny mkigrl, w, háihlmyny kn lqtl vayol, ny haol:

-kihkh gli halm, uby wk vkam dkckhl.

-¿wl, myñlt? -tymdlihaó yn vayol-. dbym, ¿vkny ymqk gkñkryok haye ymgbhlm
hy ltl?

-mí -haol yn clfytikhlt-; l ma il, wl mlw yn xkwlt dlttl hyn xbihl. w krltk
my vytá ma qyicl wl gknyqty dktk clfytikt qlhl bi tyail.

w xkihó uby knní, hynkiqy hy qlhlm, my tlxdaymy w kftaymy nk gkñk. ríelmy
kmí, w yi yn gltkeói hynnk rknnktli haye ymgbhlm yi ltl. ubyhktli qlhlm
khxatkhlm, w qbvaytli k mb clfytikhlt dlt bi ibyvl mknlxói.

dtycbiqátliny hy hóihy rkfík glnycahl uby yi kubynnk gkñkryok ymqkfki
kubynnlm haye ymgbhlm, w tymdlihaó uby hy rkfytny vamql hkt yn vayol uby
obtkfk, k mb gliqtktal, kubyn fágbnl, yi qkiql uby rkgík yn obtkxyiql, w
obtkt uby my nlm rkfík hkhl tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy, w uby, yi kgkfkihl hy
obtkt, ny qltió k dyhat yn fágbnl, ny vail k nk axkcaikgaói uby hyiqtl hén
ymqkfk nk dkck hy nl uby dyhíki. hy hlihy my dlhík glnycat uby nlm uby
clfaytiki, kbiuby myki bilm qliqlm, qkn vye nlm yigkxaik halm yi mbm
obagalm; w xám, uby én rkfík líhl gliqkt lqtl gkml glxl kubén kn gbtk hy mb
nbckt, w uby én qyiík qki ctki xyxltak, uby, k il lnvahátmyny qlhl kubynnl
hy uby ubytík kglthktmy, il rbfaytk qkn xyxltak yi qlhk nk íimbnk.
paiknxyiqy, yn bi vayol glttahl w yn lqtl dkckhl, my pbytli, w nlm
dtymyiqym ubyhktli khxatkhlm, w yn uby ymgtafík nkm dknkftkm, rygrlm w
xlvaxayiqlm hy mkigrl il kgkfkfk hy hyqytxaiktmy ma ny qyihtík w dlihtík
dlt qliql l dlt hamgtyql.

nbycl, kgkfkhl ymqy dnyaql, yiqtó yi yn obeckhl bik xboyt kmahk pbytqyxyiqy
hy bi rlxfty vymqahl hy ckikhytl tagl, nk gbkn vyiík hkihl ctkihym vlgym,
hagayihl:

-¡obmqagak, myñlt clfytikhlt, obmqagak, w ma il nk rknnl yi nk qayttk, nk
até k fbmgkt kn gaynl! myñlt clfytikhlt hy xa áiaxk, ymqy xkn rlxfty xy rk
glcahl yi nk xaqkh hymy gkxdl, w my rk kdtlvygrkhl hy xa gbytdl glxl ma
pbytk qtkdl xkn nkvkhl, w, ¡hymhagrkhk hy xí!, xy rk nnyvkhl nl uby wl
qyiík cbkthkhl xám hy vyaiqy w qtym kñlm rk, hypyihaéihlnl hy xltlm w
gtamqakilm, hy ikqbtknym w ymqtkioytlm; w wl, mayxdty hbtk glxl bi
kngltiluby, glimytváihlxy yiqytk glxl nk mknkxkiubymk yi yn pbycl, l glxl
nk nkik yiqty nkm ektekm, dktk uby ymqy fbyi rlxfty nnyckmy krltk gli mbm
xkilm naxdakm k xkilmyktxy.

-kbi yml ymqá dlt kvytacbkt: ma qayiy naxdakm l il nkm xkilm ymqy cknái
-haol mkigrl.

w, vlnvaéihlmy kn rlxfty, ny haol ubé hygík w tymdlihík k nk ubytynnk hy
kubynnk xboyt. yn gbkn, qlhl qbtfkhl, tymdlihaó:

-myñltym, wl mlw bi dlfty ckikhytl hy ckikhl hy gythk, w ymqk xkñkik mkník
hymqy nbckt hy vyihyt, gli dythói myk hagrl, gbkqtl dbytglm, uby xy
nnyvktli hy kngkfknkm w mlgknañkm dlgl xyilm hy nl uby ynnlm vkníki;
vlnvíkxy k xa knhyk, qldé yi yn gkxail k ymqk fbyik hbyñk, w yn hakfnl, uby
qlhl nl kñkmgk w qlhl nl gbygy, rael uby wlcámyxlm obiqlm; dkcbény nl
mlpagayiqy, w ynnk, xkn gliqyiqk, kmaó hy xí, w il xy rk hyokhl rkmqk
qtkytxy k ymqy dbymql. hagy uby nk pltgé, w xayiqy, dktk yn obtkxyiql uby
rkcl l dayiml rkgyt; w émqk ym qlhk nk vythkh, mai pknqkt xykok.

yiqligym yn clfytikhlt ny dtycbiqó ma qtkík glimacl kncúi haiytl yi dnkqk;
én haol uby rkmqk vyaiqy hbgkhlm qyiík yi yn myil, yi bik flnmk hy gbytl.
xkihó uby nk mkgkmy w my nk yiqtyckmy, kmí glxl ymqkfk, k nk ubytynnkiqy;
én nl rael qyxfnkihl; qlxónk nk xboyt, w, rkgayihl xan eknyxkm k qlhlm w
tlckihl k halm dlt nk vahk w mknbh hyn myñlt clfytikhlt, uby kmí xatkfk dlt
nkm rbétpkikm xyiymqytlmkm w hligynnkm; w gli ymql my mknaó hyn obeckhl,
nnyvkihl nk flnmk kmahk gli yiqtkxfkm xkilm, kbiuby dtaxytl xató ma ytk hy
dnkqk nk xliyhk uby nnyvkfk hyiqtl.

kdyikm mknaó, gbkihl mkigrl haol kn ckikhytl, uby wk my ny mknqkfki nkm
náctaxkm, w nlm lolm w yn gltkeói my afki qtkm mb flnmk:

-fbyi rlxfty, ah qtkm kubynnk xboyt w ubaqkhny nk flnmk, kbiuby il ubaytk,
w vlnvyh kubí gli ynnk.

w il nl haol k qliql ia k mlthl, dltuby nbycl dktqaó glxl bi tkwl w pby k
nl uby my ny xkihkfk. qlhlm nlm dtymyiqym ymqkfki mbmdyimlm, ymdytkihl yn
pai hy kubyn dnyaql, w hy knní k dlgl vlnvaytli yn rlxfty w nk xboyt xám
kmahlm w kpyttkhlm uby nk vye dtaxytk: ynnk nk mkwk nyvkiqkhk w yi yn
tyckel dbymqk nk flnmk, w yn rlxfty dbcikihl dlt ubaqátmynk; xkm il ytk
dlmafny, mycúi nk xboyt nk hypyihík, nk gbkn hkfk vlgym hagayihl:

-¡obmqagak hy halm w hyn xbihl! xaty vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt clfytikhlt, nk
dlgk vytcüyiek w yn dlgl qyxlt hymqy hymknxkhl, uby, yi xaqkh hy dlfnkhl w
yi xaqkh hy nk gknny, xy rk ubytahl ubaqkt nk flnmk uby vbymqtk xytgyh
xkihó hktxy.

-w ¿rálmnk ubaqkhl? -dtycbiqó yn clfytikhlt.

-¿góxl ubaqkt? -tymdlihaó nk xboyt-. kiqym xy hyoktk wl ubaqkt nk vahk uby
xy ubaqyi nk flnmk. ¡fliaqk ym nk iañk! ¡lqtlm ckqlm xy rki hy ygrkt k nkm
fktfkm, uby il ymqy hymvyiqbtkhl w kmubytlml! ¡qyikekm w xktqannlm, xkelm w
ymgldnlm il mytái fkmqkiqym k mkgátxynk hy nkm bñkm, ia kbi ckttkm hy
nyliym: kiqym yn áiaxk hy yi xaqkh yi xaqkh hy nkm gktiym!

-ynnk qayiy tkeói -haol yn rlxfty-, w wl xy hlw dlt tyihahl w mai pbytekm,
w glipayml uby nkm xíkm il mli fkmqkiqym dktk ubaqátmynk, w héolnk.

yiqligym yn clfytikhlt haol k nk xboyt:

-xlmqtkh, rlitkhk w vknayiqy, ymk flnmk.

ynnk my nk hal nbycl, w yn clfytikhlt my nk vlnvaó kn rlxfty, w haol k nk
ympltekhk w il pltekhk:

-rytxkik xík, ma yn xamxl knayiql w vknlt uby rkféam xlmqtkhl dktk hypyihyt
ymqk flnmk ny xlmqtátkhym, w kbi nk xaqkh xyilm, dktk hypyihyt vbymqtl
gbytdl, nkm pbytekm hy rétgbnym il lm ragaytki pbytek. kihkh gli halm, w
xbgrl hy yirltkxknk, w il dktéam yi qlhk ymqk íimbnk ia yi myam nycbkm k nk
tyhlihk, ml dyik hy hlgayiqlm kelqym. ¡kihkh nbycl hacl, grbttannytk,
hymvytcliekhk w yxfkahltk!

ymdkiqómy nk xboyt w pbymy gkfaefkok w xkn gliqyiqk, w yn clfytikhlt haol
kn rlxfty:

-fbyi rlxfty, kihkh gli halm k vbymqtl nbckt gli vbymqtl haiytl, w hy kubí
khynkiqy, ma il ny ubytéam dythyt, dtlgbtkh uby il lm vyick yi vlnbiqkh hy
wlckt gli ikhay.

yn rlxfty ny hal nkm ctkgakm nl dylt uby mbdl, w pbymy, w nlm gatgbimqkiqym
ubyhktli khxatkhlm hy ibyvl hy nlm obagalm w myiqyigakm hy mb ibyvl
clfytikhlt. qlhl nl gbkn, ilqkhl hy mb gltliamqk, pby nbycl ymgtaql kn
hbuby, uby gli ctki hymyl nl ymqkfk ymdytkihl.

w ubéhymy kubí yn fbyi mkigrl, uby ym xbgrk nk dtaymk uby ilm hk mb kxl,
knfltlekhl gli nk xúmagk hy knqamahltk.





gkdíqbnl znva. hyn qyxytlml ymdkiql gyigyttan w ckqbil uby tygafaó hli
ubaolqy yi yn hamgbtml hy nlm kxltym hy nk yikxltkhk knqamahltk


hyokxlm kn ctki hli ubaolqy yivbynql yi nlm dyimkxayiqlm uby ny rkfíki
gkbmkhl nk xúmagk hy nk yikxltkhk hligynnk knqamahltk. kglmqómy gli ynnlm,
w, glxl ma pbytki dbnckm, il ny hyoktli hltxat ia mlmyckt bi dbiql, w
obiqáfkimyny nlm uby ny pknqkfki hy mbm xyhakm; dytl, glxl ym nacytl yn
qayxdl, w il rkw fkttkigl uby ny hyqyick, glttaó gkfknnytl yi nkm rltkm, w
gli xbgrk dtymqyek nnycó nk hy nk xkñkik. nl gbkn vamql dlt hli ubaolqy,
hyoó nkm fnkihkm dnbxkm, w, il ikhk dytyelml, my vamqaó mb kgkxbekhl
vymqahl w my gkneó mbm flqkm hy gkxail, dlt yigbftat nk hymctkgak hy mbm
xyhakm; kttloómy yigaxk mb xkiqói hy ymgktnkqk w dúmlmy yi nk gkfyek bik
xliqytk hy qytgaldynl vythy, cbktiygahk hy dkmkxkilm hy dnkqk; glncó yn
qkryní hy mbm rlxftlm gli mb fbyik w qkokhltk ymdkhk, kmaó bi ctki tlmktal
uby glimacl gliqail qtkík, w gli ctki dtlmldldywk w gliqliyl mknaó k nk
kiqymknk, hlihy yn hbuby w nk hbubymk ymqkfki wk vymqahlm w glxl
ymdytáihlny; w, kn dkmkt dlt bik cknytík, ymqkfki kdlmqk ymdytáihlny
knqamahltk w nk lqtk hligynnk mb kxack, w, kmí glxl knqamahltk val k hli
ubaolqy, paicaó hymxkwktmy, w mb kxack nk tyglcaó yi mbm pknhkm, w gli ctki
dtymqyek nk afk k hymkftlgrkt yn dygrl. hli ubaolqy, uby nl val, nnycáihlmy
k ynnkm, haol:

-wk mé wl hy ubé dtlgyhyi ymqlm kggahyiqym.

-il mé wl hy ubé -tymdlihaó nk kxack-, dltuby knqamahltk ym nk hligynnk xám
mkik hy qlhk ymqk gkmk, w wl ibigk nk ry myiqahl bi ¡kw! yi gbkiql rk uby
nk glilegl, uby xkn rkwki gbkiqlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym rkw yi yn xbihl, ma
ym uby qlhlm mli hymkctkhygahlm. váwkmy vbymk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy,
uby il vlnvytá yi mí ymqk dlfty iañk yi qkiql uby vbymk xytgyh kubí
ymqbvayty.

k nl uby tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-rkck vbymk xytgyh, myñltk, uby my xy dlick bi nkúh ymqk ilgry yi xa
kdlmyiql, uby wl glimlnkté nl xyolt uby dbhayty k ymqk nkmqaxkhk hligynnk;
uby yi nlm dtaigadalm kxltlmlm nlm hymyickñlm dtymqlm mbynyi myt tyxyhalm
gknapagkhlm.

w gli ymql my pby, dltuby il pbymy ilqkhl hy nlm uby knní ny vaymyi. il my
rbfl fayi kdktqkhl, gbkihl, vlnvayihl yi mí nk hymxkwkhk knqamahltk, haol k
mb glxdkñytk:

-xyiymqyt mytá uby my ny dlick yn nkúh, uby mai hbhk hli ubaolqy ubayty
hktilm xúmagk, w il mytá xknk, mayihl mbwk.

pbytli nbycl k hkt gbyiqk k nk hbubymk hy nl uby dkmkfk w hyn nkúh uby
dyhík hli ubaolqy, w ynnk, knycty mlftyxlhl, gligytqó gli yn hbuby w gli
mbm hligynnkm hy rkgytny bik fbtnk uby pbymy xám tambyñk uby hkñlmk, w gli
xbgrl gliqyiql ymdytkfki nk ilgry, uby my vail qki kdtaymk glxl my rkfík
vyiahl yn hík, yn gbkn dkmktli nlm hbubym yi mkftlmkm dnáqagkm gli hli
ubaolqy. w nk hbubymk kubyn hík tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy hymdkgró k bi dkoy
mbwl, uby rkfík rygrl yi nk mynvk nk pacbtk yigkiqkhk hy hbngaiyk, k qytymk
dkiek, gli nk gktqk hy mb xktahl mkigrl dkiek, w gli yn níl hy tldk uby
rkfík hyokhl dktk uby my ny yivakmy, yigktcáihlny ny qtboymy fbyik
tynkgaói hy qlhl nl uby gli ynnk dkmkmy.

rygrl ymql, w nnyckhkm nkm ligy rltkm hy nk ilgry, rknnó hli ubaolqy bik
varbynk yi mb kdlmyiql; qyxdnónk, kftaó nk tyok, w maiqaó uby kihkfk cyiqy
yi yn okthíi; w, rkfayihl tyglttahl nlm qtkmqym hy nk varbynk w kpaiáihlnk
nl xyolt uby mbdl, ymgbdaó w tyxlihómy yn dygrl, w nbycl, gli bik vle
tliubannk, kbiuby yiqlikhk, gkiqó yn macbayiqy tlxkigy, uby én xamxl kubyn
hík rkfík glxdbymql:

   -mbynyi nkm pbytekm hy kxlt
   mkgkt hy ubagal k nkm knxkm,
   qlxkihl dlt aimqtbxyiql
   nk lgalmahkh hymgbahkhk.
   mbyny yn glmyt w yn nkftkt,
   w yn ymqkt mayxdty lgbdkhk,
   myt kiqíhlql kn vyiyil
   hy nkm kxltlmkm kimakm.
   nkm hligynnkm tyglcahkm
   uby kmdatki k myt gkmkhkm,
   nk rliymqahkh ym nk hlqy
   w vle hy mbm knkfkiekm.
   nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm,
   w nlm uby yi nk gltqy kihki,
   tyubaéftkimy gli nkm naftym,
   gli nkm rliymqkm my gkmki.
   rkw kxltym hy nyvkiqy,
   uby yiqty rbémdyhym my qtkqki,
   uby nnycki dtymql kn dliayiqy,
   dltuby yi yn dktqatmy kgkfki.
   yn kxlt tygaéi vyiahl,
   uby rlw nnycó w my vk xkñkik,
   nkm axácaiym il hyok
   fayi axdtymkm yi yn knxk.
   daiqbtk mlfty daiqbtk
   ia my xbymqtk ia myñknk;
   w hl rkw dtaxytk fynnyek,
   nk mycbihk il rkgy fkek.
   hbngaiyk hyn qlflml
   hyn knxk yi nk qkfnk tkmk
   qyicl daiqkhk hy xlhl
   uby ym axdlmafny flttktnk.
   nk patxyek yi nlm kxkiqym
   ym nk dktqy xám dtygakhk,
   dlt ubayi rkgy kxlt xankctlm,
   w kmaxymxl nlm nyvkiqk.

kubí nnyckfk hli ubaolqy hy mb gkiql, k ubayi ymqkfki ymgbgrkihl yn hbuby w
nk hbubymk, knqamahltk w gkma qlhk nk cyiqy hyn gkmqannl, gbkihl hy
axdtlvaml, hymhy yigaxk hy bi glttyhlt uby mlfty nk tyok hy hli ubaolqy k
dnlxl gkík, hymglncktli bi glthyn hlihy vyiíki xám hy gayi gyigyttlm
kmahlm, w nbycl, qtkm ynnlm, hyttkxktli bi ctki mkgl hy ckqlm, uby kmaxamxl
qtkíki gyigyttlm xyiltym kqkhlm k nkm glnkm. pby qki ctkihy yn tbahl hy nlm
gyigyttlm w yn xkwkt hy nlm ckqlm, uby, kbiuby nlm hbubym rkfíki mahl
aivyiqltym hy nk fbtnk, qlhkvík nym mlftymknqó; w, qyxytlml, hli ubaolqy
ubyhó dkmxkhl. w ubaml nk mbytqy uby hlm l qtym ckqlm my yiqtktli dlt nk
tyok hy mb ymqkigak, w, hkihl hy bik dktqy k lqtk, dktygík uby bik tycaói
hy hakfnlm kihkfk yi ynnk. kdkcktli nkm vynkm uby yi yn kdlmyiql kthíki, w
kihkfki fbmgkihl dlt hl ymgkdktmy. yn hymglnckt w mbfat hyn glthyn hy nlm
ctkihym gyigyttlm il gymkfk; nk xkwlt dktqy hy nk cyiqy hyn gkmqannl, uby
il mkfík nk vythkh hyn gkml, ymqkfk mbmdyimk w khxatkhk.

nyvkiqómy hli ubaolqy yi day, w, dliayihl xkil k nk ymdkhk, glxyieó k qatkt
ymqlgkhkm dlt nk tyok w k hygat k ctkihym vlgym:

-¡kpbytk, xknacilm yigkiqkhltym! ¡kpbytk, gkiknnk rygragytymgk, uby wl mlw
hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, gliqtk ubayi il vknyi ia qayiyi pbytek vbymqtkm
xknkm aiqyigaliym!

w, vlnvaéihlmy k nlm ckqlm uby kihkfki dlt yn kdlmyiql, nym qató xbgrkm
gbgrannkhkm; ynnlm kgbhaytli k nk tyok, w dlt knní my mknaytli, kbiuby bil,
vaéihlmy qki kglmkhl hy nkm gbgrannkhkm hy hli ubaolqy, ny mknqó kn tlmqtl
w ny kmaó hy nkm iktagym gli nkm bñkm w nlm hayiqym, dlt gbwl hlnlt hli
ubaolqy glxyieó k hkt nlm xkwltym ctaqlm uby dbhl. lwyihl nl gbkn yn hbuby
w nk hbubymk, w glimahytkihl nl uby dlhík myt, gli xbgrk dtymqyek kgbhaytli
k mb ymqkigak, w, kftayihl gli nnkvy xkymqtk, vaytli kn dlfty gkfknnytl
dbcikihl gli qlhkm mbm pbytekm dlt kttkigkt yn ckql hy mb tlmqtl. yiqtktli
gli nbgym w vaytli nk hymacbkn dynyk; kgbhaó yn hbuby k hymdktqatnk, w hli
ubaolqy haol k vlgym:

-¡il xy ny ubaqy ikhay! ¡héoyixy xkil k xkil gli ymqy hyxlial, gli ymqy
rygragytl, gli ymqy yigkiqkhlt, uby wl ny hkté k yiqyihyt hy xí k én ubaéi
ym hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk!

dytl yn ckql, il gbtáihlmy hymqkm kxyikekm, ctbñík w kdtyqkfk. xkm, yi pai,
yn hbuby my ny hymkttkacó w ny ygró dlt nk tyok.

ubyhó hli ubaolqy kgtafkhl yn tlmqtl w il xbw mkikm nkm iktagym, kbiuby xbw
hymdygrkhl dltuby il ny rkfíki hyokhl pyiygyt nk fkqknnk uby qki qtkfkhk
qyiík gli kubyn xknkihtíi yigkiqkhlt. ragaytli qtkyt kgyaqy hy kdktagal, w
nk xamxk knqamahltk, gli mbm fnkiubímaxkm xkilm, ny dbml bikm vyihkm dlt
qlhl nl rytahl; w, kn dliétmynkm, gli vle fkok ny haol:

-qlhkm ymqkm xknkihkiekm qy mbgyhyi, yxdyhytiahl gkfknnytl, dlt yn dygkhl
hy qb hbtyek w dytqaikgak; w dnyck k halm uby my ny lnvahy k mkigrl qb
ymgbhytl yn kelqktmy, dltuby ibigk mknck hy mb yigkiql ymqk qki kxkhk qbwk
hbngaiyk, ia qú nl clgym, ia nnycbym k qánkxl gli ynnk, k nl xyilm vavayihl
wl, uby qy khltl.

k qlhl ymql il tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy lqtk dknkftk ma il pby hkt bi dtlpbihl
mbmdatl, w nbycl my qyihaó yi mb nygrl, kctkhygayihl k nlm hbubym nk
xytgyh, il dltuby én qyiík qyxlt hy kubynnk gkiknnk ckqymgk, yigkiqkhltk w
gyigyttbik, mail dltuby rkfík glilgahl nk fbyik aiqyigaói gli uby rkfíki
vyiahl k mlglttytny. nlm hbubym ny hyoktli mlmyckt, w my pbytli, dymktlmlm
hyn xkn mbgyml hy nk fbtnk; uby il gtywytli uby qki dymkhk w glmqlmk ny
mknaytk k hli ubaolqy kubynnk kvyiqbtk, uby ny glmqó gaigl híkm hy
yigyttkxayiql w hy gkxk, hlihy ny mbgyhaó lqtk kvyiqbtk xám cbmqlmk uby nk
dkmkhk, nk gbkn il ubayty mb ramqltakhlt gliqkt krltk, dlt kgbhat k mkigrl
dkiek, uby kihkfk xbw mlnígaql w xbw ctkgalml yi mb clfaytil.





gkdíqbnl znvaa. hlihy my dtlmacby góxl my dltqkfk mkigrl dkiek yi mb
clfaytil


gbyiqk nk ramqltak uby hymhy yn obeckhl nnyvktli k mkigrl dkiek k bi
mbiqblml dknkgal, khlihy yi bik ctki mknk ymqkfk dbymqk bik tykn w
naxdímaxk xymk; w, kmí glxl mkigrl yiqtó yi nk mknk, mliktli grataxíkm, w
mknaytli gbkqtl dkoym k hktny kcbkxkilm, uby mkigrl tygafaó gli xbgrk
ctkvyhkh.

gymó nk xúmagk, myiqómy mkigrl k nk gkfygytk hy nk xymk, dltuby il rkfík
xám hy kubyn kmayiql, w il lqtl mytvagal yi qlhk ynnk. dúmlmy k mb nkhl yi
day bi dytmlikoy, uby hymdbém xlmqtó myt xéhagl, gli bik vktannk hy fknnyik
yi nk xkil. nyvkiqktli bik taubímaxk w fnkigk qlknnk gli uby ymqkfki
gbfaytqkm nkm ptbqkm w xbgrk havytmahkh hy dnkqlm hy havytmlm xkioktym; bil
uby dktygík ymqbhakiqy ygró nk fyihagaói, w bi dkoy dbml bi fkfkhlt tkihkhl
k mkigrl; lqtl uby rkgík yn lpagal hy xkymqtymknk, nnycó bi dnkql hy ptbqk
hynkiqy; dytl, kdyikm rbfl glxahl bi flgkhl, gbkihl yn hy nk vktannk
qlgkihl gli ynnk yi yn dnkql, my ny ubaqktli hy hynkiqy gli ctkihímaxk
gynytahkh; dytl yn xkymqtymknk ny nnycó lqtl hy lqtl xkiokt. afk k dtlfktny
mkigrl; dytl, kiqym uby nnyckmy k én ia ny cbmqkmy, wk nk vktannk rkfík
qlgkhl yi én, w bi dkoy kneáhlny gli qkiqk dtymqyek glxl yn hy nk ptbqk.
vamql nl gbkn dlt mkigrl, ubyhó mbmdyiml, w, xatkihl k qlhlm, dtycbiqó ma
my rkfík hy glxyt kubynnk glxahk glxl obycl hy xkymygltkn. k nl gbkn
tymdlihaó yn hy nk vktk:

-il my rk hy glxyt, myñlt clfytikhlt, mail glxl ym bml w glmqbxfty yi nkm
lqtkm íimbnkm hlihy rkw clfytikhltym. wl, myñlt, mlw xéhagl, w ymqlw
kmknktakhl yi ymqk íimbnk dktk mytnl hy nlm clfytikhltym hynnk, w xatl dlt
mb mknbh xbgrl xám uby dlt nk xík, ymqbhakihl hy ilgry w hy hík, w
qkiqykihl nk glxdnyzaói hyn clfytikhlt, dktk kgytqkt k gbtktny gbkihl
gkwyty yipytxl; w nl dtaigadkn uby rkcl ym kmamqat k mbm glxahkm w gyikm, w
k hyoktny glxyt hy nl uby xy dktygy uby ny glivayiy, w k ubaqktny nl uby
axkcail uby ny rk hy rkgyt hkñl w myt ilgavl kn ymqóxkcl; w kmí, xkihé
ubaqkt yn dnkql hy nk ptbqk, dlt myt hyxkmakhkxyiqy rúxyhk, w yn dnkql hyn
lqtl xkiokt qkxfaéi ny xkihé ubaqkt, dlt myt hyxkmakhkxyiqy gknayiqy w
qyiyt xbgrkm ymdygaym, uby kgtygayiqki nk myh; w yn uby xbgrl fyfy xkqk w
glimbxy yn rúxyhl tkhagkn, hlihy glimamqy nk vahk.

-hymk xkiytk, kubyn dnkql hy dythagym uby ymqái knní kmkhkm, w, k xa
dktygyt, fayi mkelikhkm, il xy rktái kncúi hkñl.

k nl uby yn xéhagl tymdlihaó:

-Émkm il glxytá yn myñlt clfytikhlt yi qkiql uby wl qbvayty vahk.

-dbym, ¿dlt ubé? -haol mkigrl.

w yn xéhagl tymdlihaó:

-dltuby ibymqtl xkymqtl radógtkqym, iltqy w nbe hy nk xyhagaik, yi bi
kpltamxl mbwl, hagy: lxiam mkqbtkqal xknk, dythagym kbqyx dymmaxk. ubayty
hygat: "qlhk rktqkeck ym xknk; dytl nk hy nkm dythagym, xknímaxk".

-ma yml ym kmí -haol mkigrl-, vyk yn myñlt hlgqlt hy gbkiqlm xkioktym rkw
yi ymqk xymk gbán xy rktá xám dtlvygrl w gbán xyilm hkñl, w héoyxy glxyt
hén mai uby xy ny kdknyy; dltuby, dlt vahk hyn clfytikhlt, w kmí halm xy ny
hyoy clekt, uby xy xbytl hy rkxfty, w yn iycktxy nk glxahk, kbiuby ny dymy
kn myñlt hlgqlt w én xám xy hack, kiqym mytá ubaqktxy nk vahk uby
kbxyiqátxynk.

-vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy tkeói, myñlt clfytikhlt -tymdlihaó yn xéhagl-; w kmí,
ym xa dktygyt uby vbymqtk xytgyh il glxk hy kubynnlm gliyolm cbamkhlm uby
knní ymqái, dltuby ym xkiokt dynakcbhl. hy kubynnk qytiytk, ma il pbytk
kmkhk w yi khlfl, kúi my dbhaytk dtlfkt, dytl il rkw dktk ubé.

w mkigrl haol:

-kubyn dnkqlikel uby ymqá xám khynkiqy vkrkihl xy dktygy uby ym lnnk
dlhtahk, uby dlt nk havytmahkh hy glmkm uby yi nkm qknym lnnkm dlhtahkm
rkw, il dlhté hyokt hy qldkt gli kncbik uby xy myk hy cbmql w hy dtlvygrl.

-kfmaq! -haol yn xéhagl-. vkwk nyolm hy ilmlqtlm qki xkn dyimkxayiql: il
rkw glmk yi yn xbihl hy dylt xkiqyiaxayiql uby bik lnnk dlhtahk. knná nkm
lnnkm dlhtahkm dktk nlm gkióiaclm, l dktk nlm tyqltym hy glnycalm, l dktk
nkm flhkm nkftkhltymgkm, w héoyiilm naftym nkm xymkm hy nlm clfytikhltym,
hlihy rk hy kmamqat qlhl dtaxlt w qlhk kqanhkhbtk; w nk tkeói ym dltuby
mayxdty w k hlubaytk w hy ubayiubaytk mli xám ymqaxkhkm nkm xyhagaikm
maxdnym uby nkm glxdbymqkm, dltuby yi nkm maxdnym il my dbyhy yttkt w yi
nkm glxdbymqkm mí, knqytkihl nk gkiqahkh hy nkm glmkm hy uby mli
glxdbymqkm; xkm nl uby wl mé uby rk hy glxyt yn myñlt clfytikhlt krltk,
dktk glimytvkt mb mknbh w glttlfltktnk, ym bi gayiql hy gkñbqannlm hy
mbdnagkgaliym w bikm qkokhagkm mbfqanym hy gktiy hy xyxftannl, uby ny
kmayiqyi yn ymqóxkcl w ny kwbhyi k nk hacymqaói.

lwyihl ymql mkigrl, my kttaxó mlfty yn ymdknhkt hy nk mannk w xató hy raql
yi raql kn qkn xéhagl, w gli vle ctkvy ny dtycbiqó góxl my nnkxkfk w hóihy
rkfík ymqbhakhl. k nl uby én tymdlihaó:

-wl, myñlt clfytikhlt, xy nnkxl yn hlgqlt dyhtl tygal hy kcüytl, w mlw
ikqbtkn hy bi nbckt nnkxkhl qatqykpbytk, uby ymqá yiqty gktkgbyn w
knxlhóvkt hyn gkxdl, k nk xkil hytygrk, w qyicl yn ctkhl hy hlgqlt dlt nk
biavytmahkh hy lmbik.

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl, qlhl yigyihahl yi gónytk:

-dbym, myñlt hlgqlt dyhtl tygal hy xkn kcüytl, ikqbtkn hy qatqykpbytk,
nbckt uby ymqá k nk hytygrk xkil glxl vkxlm hy gktkgbyn k knxlhóvkt hyn
gkxdl, ctkhbkhl yi lmbik, ubíqymyxy nbycl hynkiqy, ma il, vlql kn mln uby
qlxy bi ckttlqy w uby k ckttlqkelm, glxyiekihl dlt én, il xy rk hy ubyhkt
xéhagl yi qlhk nk íimbnk, k nl xyilm hy kubynnlm uby wl yiqayihk uby mli
aciltkiqym; uby k nlm xéhaglm mkfalm, dtbhyiqym w hamgtyqlm nlm dlihté
mlfty xa gkfyek w nlm rlitkté glxl k dytmlikm havaikm. w vbynvl k hygat uby
my xy vkwk, dyhtl tygal, hy kubí; ma il, qlxkté ymqk mannk hlihy ymqlw
myiqkhl w my nk ymqtynnkté yi nk gkfyek; w díhkixynl yi tymahyigak, uby wl
xy hymgktckté gli hygat uby ragy mytvagal k halm yi xkqkt k bi xkn xéhagl,
vythbcl hy nk tydúfnagk. w hyixy hy glxyt, l ma il, qóxyimy mb clfaytil,
uby lpagal uby il hk hy glxyt k mb hbyñl il vkny hlm rkfkm.

knfltlqómy yn hlgqlt, vayihl qki glnétagl kn clfytikhlt, w ubaml rkgyt
qatqykpbytk hy nk mknk, mail uby yi kubyn aimqkiqy mlió bik gltiyqk hy
dlmqk yi nk gknny, w, kmlxáihlmy yn xkymqtymknk k nk vyiqkik, vlnvaó
hagayihl:

-glttyl vayiy hyn hbuby xa myñlt; kncúi hymdkgrl hyfy hy qtkyt hy
axdltqkigak.

yiqtó yn glttyl mbhkihl w kmbmqkhl, w, mkgkihl bi dnaycl hyn myil, ny dbml
yi nkm xkilm hyn clfytikhlt, w mkigrl ny dbml yi nkm hyn xkwlthlxl, k ubayi
xkihó nywymy yn mlftyymgtaql, uby hygík kmí: k hli mkigrl dkiek, clfytikhlt
hy nk íimbnk fktkqktak, yi mb dtldak xkil l yi nkm hy mb mygtyqktal. lwyihl
nl gbkn, mkigrl haol:

-¿ubaéi ym kubí xa mygtyqktal?

w bil hy nlm uby dtymyiqym ymqkfki tymdlihaó:

-wl, myñlt, dltuby mé nyyt w ymgtafat, w mlw vaegkíil.

-gli ymk kñkhahbtk -haol mkigrl-, fayi dlhéam myt mygtyqktal hyn xamxl
yxdytkhlt. kftah ymy dnaycl, w xatkh nl uby hagy.

ríelnl kmí yn tygaéi ikgahl mygtyqktal, w, rkfayihl nyíhl nl uby hygík,
haol uby ytk iyclgal dktk qtkqktny k mlnkm. xkihó mkigrl hymdyokt nk mknk,
w uby il ubyhkmyi yi ynnk mail yn xkwlthlxl w yn xkymqtymknk, w nlm hyxám w
yn xéhagl my pbytli; w nbycl yn mygtyqktal nywó nk gktqk, uby kmí hygík:

k xa ilqagak rk nnyckhl, myñlt hli mkigrl dkiek, uby bilm yiyxaclm xílm w
hymk íimbnk nk rki hy hkt bi kmknql pbtalml, il mé ubé ilgry; glivayiy
vynkt w ymqkt knytqk, dltuby il ny qlxyi hymkdytgyfahl. mé qkxfaéi, dlt
ymdíkm vythkhytkm, uby rki yiqtkhl yi ymy nbckt gbkqtl dytmlikm hamptkekhkm
dktk ubaqktlm nk vahk, dltuby my qyxyi hy vbymqtl aicyial; kftah yn lol, w
xatkh ubaéi nnyck k rkfnktlm, w il glxáam hy glmk uby lm dtymyiqktyi. wl
qyihté gbahkhl hy mlglttytlm ma lm vaétyhym yi qtkfkol, w yi qlhl rktéam
glxl my ymdytk hy vbymqtl yiqyihaxayiql. hymqy nbckt, k 16 hy kclmql, k nkm
gbkqtl hy nk xkñkik.

vbymqtl kxacl,

yn hbuby.

ubyhó kqóiaql mkigrl, w xlmqtktli ubyhktnl kmaxamxl nlm gatgbimqkiqym; w,
vlnvaéihlmy kn xkwlthlxl, ny haol:

-nl uby kcltk my rk hy rkgyt, w rk hy myt nbycl, ym xyqyt yi bi gknkflel kn
hlgqlt tygal; dltuby ma kncbil xy rk hy xkqkt, rk hy myt én, w hy xbytqy
khxaiígbnk w démaxk, glxl ym nk hy nk rkxfty.

-qkxfaéi -haol yn xkymqtymknk- xy dktygy k xí uby vbymk xytgyh il glxk hy
qlhl nl uby ymqá yi ymqk xymk, dltuby nl rki dtymyiqkhl bikm xliokm, w,
glxl mbyny hygatmy, hyqtám hy nk gtbe ymqá yn hakfnl.

-il nl iaycl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w dlt krltk hyixy bi dyhkel hy dki w lftk
hy gbkqtl naftkm hy bvkm, uby yi ynnkm il dlhtá vyiat vyiyil; dltuby, yi
ypygql, il dbyhl dkmkt mai glxyt, w ma ym uby ryxlm hy ymqkt dtliqlm dktk
ymqkm fkqknnkm uby ilm kxyikeki, xyiymqyt mytá ymqkt fayi xkiqyiahlm,
dltuby qtadkm nnyvki gltkeói, uby il gltkeói qtadkm. w vlm, mygtyqktal,
tymdlihyh kn hbuby xa myñlt w hygahny uby my gbxdnatá nl uby xkihk glxl nl
xkihk, mai pknqkt dbiql; w hktéam hy xa dktqy bi fymkxkilm k xa myñltk nk
hbubymk, w uby ny mbdnagl il my ny lnvahy hy yivakt gli bi dtldal xa gktqk
w xa níl k xa xboyt qytymk dkiek, uby yi ynnl tygafaté xbgrk xytgyh, w
qyihté gbahkhl hy mytvatnk gli qlhl nl uby xam pbytekm kngkiektyi; w hy
gkxail dlhéam yigkokt bi fymkxkilm k xa myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,
dltuby vyk uby mlw dki kctkhygahl; w vlm, glxl fbyi mygtyqktal w glxl fbyi
vaegkíil, dlhéam kñkhat qlhl nl uby ubamaétyhym w xám vaiayty k gbyiql. w
ángyimy ymqlm xkiqynym, w hyixy k xí hy glxyt, uby wl xy kvyihté gli
gbkiqkm ymdíkm w xkqkhltym w yigkiqkhltym vaiaytyi mlfty xí w mlfty xa
íimbnk.

yi ymql yiqtó bi dkoy, w haol:

-kubí ymqá bi nkftkhlt iyclgakiqy uby ubayty rkfnkt k vbymqtk myñltík yi bi
iyclgal, mycúi én hagy, hy xbgrk axdltqkigak.

-ymqtkñl gkml ym émqy -haol mkigrl- hymqlm iyclgakiqym. ¿ym dlmafny uby
myki qki iygalm, uby il ygryi hy vyt uby myxyokiqym rltkm glxl émqkm il mli
yi nkm uby rki hy vyiat k iyclgakt? ¿dlt vyiqbtk nlm uby clfytikxlm, nlm
uby mlxlm obygym, il mlxlm rlxftym hy gktiy w hy rbyml, w uby ym xyiymqyt
uby ilm hyoyi hymgkimkt yn qayxdl uby nk iygymahkh dahy, mail uby ubaytyi
uby mykxlm rygrlm hy dayhtk xktxln? dlt halm w yi xa gligayigak uby ma xy
hbtk yn clfaytil (uby il hbtktá, mycúi my xy qtkmnbgy), uby wl dlick yi
dtyqaik k xám hy bi iyclgakiqy. kcltk hygah k ymy fbyi rlxfty uby yiqty;
dytl khvaétqkmy dtaxytl il myk kncbil hy nlm ymdíkm, l xkqkhlt xíl.

-il, myñlt -tymdlihaó yn dkoy-, dltuby dktygy bik knxk hy gáiqktl, w wl mé
dlgl, l én ym qki fbyil glxl yn fbyi dki.

-il rkw uby qyxyt -haol yn xkwlthlxl-, uby kubí ymqkxlm qlhlm.

-¿mytík dlmafny -haol mkigrl-, xkymqtymknk, uby kcltk uby il ymqá kubí yn
hlgqlt dyhtl tygal, uby glxaymy wl kncbik glmk hy dyml w hy mbmqkigak,
kbiuby pbymy bi dyhkel hy dki w bik gyflnnk?

-ymqk ilgry, k nk gyik, my mkqampktá nk pknqk hy nk glxahk, w ubyhktá
vbymqtk myñltík mkqampygrl w dkckhl -haol yn xkymqtymknk.

-halm nl rkck -tymdlihaó mkigrl.

w, yi ymql, yiqtó yn nkftkhlt, uby ytk hy xbw fbyik dtymyigak, w hy xan
nycbkm my ny ygrkfk hy vyt uby ytk fbyil w fbyik knxk. nl dtaxytl uby haol
pby:

-¿ubaéi ym kubí yn myñlt clfytikhlt?

-¿ubaéi rk hy myt -tymdlihaó yn mygtyqktal-, mail yn uby ymqá myiqkhl yi nk
mannk?

-rbxínnlxy, dbym, k mb dtymyigak -haol yn nkftkhlt.

w, dliaéihlmy hy tlhannkm, ny dahaó nk xkil dktk fymátmynk. iycómynk
mkigrl, w xkihó uby my nyvkiqkmy w haoymy nl uby ubamaymy. ríelnl kmí yn
nkftkhlt, w nbycl haol:

-wl, myñlt, mlw nkftkhlt, ikqbtkn hy xacbyn qbttk, bi nbckt uby ymqá hlm
nycbkm hy gabhkh tykn.

-¡lqtl qatqykpbytk qyiyxlm! -haol mkigrl-. hygah, rytxkil, uby nl uby wl lm
mé hygat ym uby mé xbw fayi k xacbyn qbttk, w uby il ymqá xbw nyolm hy xa
dbyfnl.

-ym, dbym, yn gkml, myñlt -dtlmacbaó yn nkftkhlt-, uby wl, dlt nk
xamytaglthak hy halm, mlw gkmkhl yi dke w yi rke hy nk mkiqk acnymak
gkqónagk tlxkik; qyicl hlm raolm ymqbhakiqym uby yn xyilt ymqbhak dktk
fkgrannyt w yn xkwlt dktk nagyigakhl; mlw vabhl, dltuby my xbtaó xa xboyt,
l, dlt xyolt hygat, xy nk xkqó bi xkn xéhagl, uby nk dbtcó ymqkihl dtyñkhk,
w ma halm pbytk mytvahl uby mknaytk k nbe yn dktql, w pbytk raol, wl ny
dbmayty k ymqbhakt dktk hlgqlt, dltuby il qbvaytk aivahak k mbm rytxkilm yn
fkgrannyt w yn nagyigakhl.

-hy xlhl -haol mkigrl- uby ma vbymqtk xboyt il my rbfaytk xbytql, l nk
rbfaytki xbytql, vlm il pbétkhym kcltk vabhl.

-il, myñlt, yi iaicbik xkiytk -tymdlihaó yn nkftkhlt.

-¡xyhtkhlm ymqkxlm! -tydnagó mkigrl-. khynkiqy, rytxkil, uby ym rltk hy
hltxat xám uby hy iyclgakt.

-hacl, dbym -haol yn nkftkhlt-, uby ymqy xa raol uby rk hy myt fkgrannyt my
yikxltó yi yn xymxl dbyfnl hy bik hligynnk nnkxkhk gnktk dytnytaik, raok hy
kihtém dytnytail, nkftkhlt taubímaxl; w ymqy ilxfty hy dytnytaiym il nym
vayiy hy kflnyicl ia lqtk kngbtiak, mail dltuby qlhlm nlm hymqy naikoy mli
dytnáqaglm, w dlt xyoltkt yn ilxfty nlm nnkxki dytnytaiym; kbiuby, ma vk
hygat nk vythkh, nk hligynnk ym glxl bik dytnk ltayiqkn, w, xatkhk dlt yn
nkhl hytygrl, dktygy bik pnlt hyn gkxdl; dlt yn aeubaythl il qkiql, dltuby
ny pknqk kubyn lol, uby my ny mknqó hy vatbynkm; w, kbiuby nlm rlwlm hyn
tlmqtl mli xbgrlm w ctkihym, hagyi nlm uby nk ubaytyi fayi uby kubénnlm il
mli rlwlm, mail mydbnqbtkm hlihy my mydbnqki nkm knxkm hy mbm kxkiqym. ym
qki naxdak uby, dlt il yimbgakt nk gktk, qtky nkm iktagym, glxl hagyi,
kttyxkickhkm, uby il dktygy mail uby vki rbwyihl hy nk flgk; w, gli qlhl
ymql, dktygy fayi dlt ymqtyxl, dltuby qayiy nk flgk ctkihy, w, k il
pknqktny haye l hlgy hayiqym w xbynkm, dbhaytk dkmkt w ygrkt tkwk yiqty nkm
xám fayi pltxkhkm. hy nlm nkfalm il qyicl ubé hygat, dltuby mli qki mbqanym
w hynagkhlm uby, ma my bmktki kmdkt nkfalm, dbhaytki rkgyt hynnlm bik
xkhyok; dytl, glxl qayiyi hapytyiqy glnlt hy nk uby yi nlm nkfalm my bmk
glxúixyiqy, dktygyi xankctlmlm, dltuby mli okmdykhlm hy kebn w vythy w
kfytyioyikhl; w dythóiyxy yn myñlt clfytikhlt ma dlt qki xyibhl vlw
daiqkihl nkm dktqym hy nk uby kn pai kn pai rk hy myt xa raok, uby nk
ubaytl fayi w il xy dktygy xkn.

-daiqkh nl uby ubamaétyhym -haol mkigrl-, uby wl xy vlw tygtykihl yi nk
daiqbtk, w ma rbfaytk glxahl, il rbfaytk xyolt dlmqty dktk xí uby vbymqtl
tyqtkql.

-yml qyicl wl dlt mytvat -tymdlihaó yn nkftkhlt-, dytl qayxdl vyihtá yi uby
mykxlm, ma krltk il mlxlm. w hacl, myñlt, uby ma dbhaytk daiqkt mb
cyiqanyek w nk knqbtk hy mb gbytdl, pbytk glmk hy khxatkgaói; dytl il dbyhy
myt, k gkbmk hy uby ynnk ymqá kclfakhk w yiglcahk, w qayiy nkm tlhannkm gli
nk flgk, w, gli qlhl yml, my ygrk fayi hy vyt uby ma my dbhaytk nyvkiqkt,
haytk gli nk gkfyek yi yn qygrl; w wk ynnk rbfaytk hkhl nk xkil hy ymdlmk k
xa fkgrannyt, mail uby il nk dbyhy ymqyihyt, uby ymqá kñbhkhk; w, gli qlhl,
yi nkm bñkm nktckm w kgkiknkhkm my xbymqtk mb flihkh w fbyik rygrbtk.

-ymqá fayi -haol mkigrl-, w rkgyh gbyiqk, rytxkil, uby wk nk rkféam daiqkhl
hy nlm daym k nk gkfyek. ¿ubé ym nl uby ubytéam krltk? w vyiah kn dbiql mai
tlhylm ia gknnyobynkm, ia tyqkelm ia kñkhahbtkm.

-ubyttík, myñlt -tymdlihaó yn nkftkhlt-, uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy ragaymy
xytgyh hy hktxy bik gktqk hy pkvlt dktk xa glimbyctl, mbdnagáihlny myk
mytvahl hy uby ymqy gkmkxayiql my rkck, dbym il mlxlm hymacbknym yi nlm
fayiym hy pltqbik, ia yi nlm hy nk ikqbtknyek; dltuby, dktk hygat nk
vythkh, myñlt clfytikhlt, xa raol ym yihyxliakhl, w il rkw hík uby qtym l
gbkqtl vygym il ny kqltxyiqyi nlm xknacilm ymdítaqbm; w hy rkfyt gkíhl bik
vye yi yn pbycl, qayiy yn tlmqtl kttbckhl glxl dytckxail, w nlm lolm kncl
nnltlmlm w xkikiqaknym; dytl qayiy bik glihagaói hy bi áicyn, w ma il ym
uby my kdlttyk w my hk hy dbñkhkm én xymxl k mí xymxl, pbytk bi fyihaql.

-¿ubytéam lqtk glmk, fbyi rlxfty? -tydnagó mkigrl.

-lqtk glmk ubyttík -haol yn nkftkhlt-, mail uby il xy kqtyvl k hygatnl;
dytl vkwk, uby, yi pai, il my xy rk hy dlhtat yi yn dygrl, dycby l il
dycby. hacl, myñlt, uby ubyttík uby vbymk xytgyh xy haymy qtygayiqlm l
myamgayiqlm hbgkhlm dktk kwbhk k nk hlqy hy xa fkgrannyt; hacl dktk kwbhk
hy dliyt mb gkmk, dltuby, yi pai, rki hy vavat dlt mí, mai ymqkt mboyqlm k
nkm axdytqaiyigakm hy nlm mbyctlm.

-xatkh ma ubytéam lqtk glmk -haol mkigrl-, w il nk hyoéam hy hygat dlt
yxdkgrl ia dlt vytcüyiek.

-il, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó yn nkftkhlt.

w, kdyikm haol ymql, gbkihl, nyvkiqáihlmy yi day yn clfytikhlt, kmaó hy nk
mannk yi uby ymqkfk myiqkhl w haol:

-¡vlql k qkn, hli dkqái túmqagl w xkn xatkhl, uby ma il lm kdktqáam w
kmglihéam nbycl hy xa dtymyigak, uby gli ymqk mannk lm tlxdk w kftk nk
gkfyek! rahydbqk fynnkgl, daiqlt hyn xymxl hyxlial, ¿w k ymqkm rltkm qy
vayiym k dyhatxy myamgayiqlm hbgkhlm?; w ¿hóihy nlm qyicl wl, ryhalihl?; w
¿dlt ubé qy nlm rkfík hy hkt, kbiuby nlm qbvaytk, mlgkttói w xyiqygkql?; w
¿ubé my xy hk k xí hy xacbyn qbttk, ia hy qlhl yn naikoy hy nlm dytnytaiym?
¡vk hy xí, hacl; ma il, dlt vahk hyn hbuby xa myñlt, uby rkck nl uby qyicl
hagrl! qú il hyfym hy myt hy xacbyn qbttk, mail kncúi mlgkttói uby, dktk
qyiqktxy, qy rk yivakhl kubí yn aipaytil. haxy, hymknxkhl, kúi il rk hík w
xyhal uby qyicl yn clfaytil, w ¿wk ubaytym uby qyick myamgayiqlm hbgkhlm?

rael hy myñkm yn xkymqtymknk kn nkftkhlt uby my mknaymy hy nk mknk, yn gbkn
nl rael gkfaefkol w, kn dktygyt, qyxytlml hy uby yn clfytikhlt il yoygbqkmy
mb gónytk, uby yn fynnkgói mbdl rkgyt xbw fayi mb lpagal.

dytl hyoyxlm gli mb gónytk k mkigrl, w áihymy nk dke yi yn glttl, w
vlnvkxlm k hli ubaolqy, uby ny hyokxlm vyihkhl yn tlmqtl w gbtkhl hy nkm
ckqymgkm rytahkm, hy nkm gbknym il mkió yi lgrl híkm, yi bil hy nlm gbknym
ny mbgyhaó nl uby gahy rkxyqy dtlxyqy hy gliqkt gli nk dbiqbknahkh w
vythkh uby mbyny gliqkt nkm glmkm hymqk ramqltak, dlt xíiaxkm uby myki.





gkdíqbnl znvaaa. hy nl uby ny mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy gli hlñk tlhtícbye, nk
hbyñk hy nk hbubymk, gli lqtlm kgliqygaxayiqlm hacilm hy ymgtaqbtk w hy
xyxltak yqytik


khyxám ymqkfk xlríil w xknyigónagl yn xkn pytahl hli ubaolqy, vyihkhl yn
tlmqtl w myñknkhl, il dlt nk xkil hy halm, mail dlt nkm bñkm hy bi ckql,
hymhagrkm kiyokm k nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík. myam híkm ymqbvl mai mknat yi
dúfnagl, yi bik ilgry hy nkm gbknym, ymqkihl hymdaytql w hymvynkhl,
dyimkihl yi mbm hymctkgakm w yi yn dytmycbaxayiql hy knqamahltk, maiqaó uby
gli bik nnkvy kftíki nk dbytqk hy mb kdlmyiql, w nbycl axkcaió uby nk
yikxltkhk hligynnk vyiík dktk mlftymknqkt mb rliymqahkh w dliytny yi
glihagaói hy pknqkt k nk pyy uby cbkthkt hyfík k mb myñltk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml.

-il -haol gtywyihl k mb axkcaikgaói, w ymql, gli vle uby dbhaytk myt líhk-;
il rk hy myt dktqy nk xkwlt rytxlmbtk hy nk qayttk dktk uby wl hyoy hy
khltkt nk uby qyicl ctkfkhk w ymqkxdkhk yi nk xaqkh hy xa gltkeói w yi nl
xám ymglihahl hy xam yiqtkñkm, ltk ymqém, myñltk xík, qtkimpltxkhk yi
gyflnnbhk nkftkhltk, ltk yi iaipk hyn hltkhl qkol, qyoayihl qynkm hy ltl w
matcl glxdbymqkm, ltk qy qyick xytníi, l xliqymailm, hlihy ynnlm ubamaytyi;
uby, khlihyubaytk ytym xík, w khlubaytk ry mahl wl, w ry hy myt, qbwl.

yn kgkfkt ymqkm tkeliym w yn kftat hy nk dbytqk pby qlhl bil. dúmlmy yi day
mlfty nk gkxk, yivbynql hy kttafk kfkol yi bik glngrk hy tkml kxktannl, bik
cknlgrk yi nk gkfyek, w yn tlmqtl w nlm faclqym vyihkhlm: yn tlmqtl, dlt
nlm ktbñlm; nlm faclqym, dltuby il my ny hymxkwkmyi w gkwymyi; yi yn gbkn
qtkoy dktygík nk xám yzqtklthaiktak pkiqkmxk uby my dbhaytk dyimkt.

gnkvó nlm lolm yi nk dbytqk, w, gbkihl ymdytkfk vyt yiqtkt dlt ynnk k nk
tyihahk w nkmqaxkhk knqamahltk, val yiqtkt k bik tyvytyihímaxk hbyñk gli
bikm qlgkm fnkigkm tydbnckhkm w nbyickm, qkiql, uby nk gbftíki w yixkiqkfki
hymhy nlm daym k nk gkfyek. yiqty nlm hyhlm hy nk xkil aeubaythk qtkík bik
xyhak vynk yigyihahk, w gli nk hytygrk my rkgík mlxftk, dltuby il ny haymy
nk nbe yi nlm lolm, k ubayi gbftíki bilm xbw ctkihym kiqlolm. vyiík damkihl
ubyhaql, w xlvík nlm daym fnkihkxyiqy.

xatónk hli ubaolqy hymhy mb kqknkwk, w gbkihl val mb khynañl w ilqó mb
manyigal, dyimó uby kncbik ftbok l xkck vyiík yi kubyn qtkoy k rkgyt yi én
kncbik xknk pygrbtík, w glxyieó k mkiqacbktmy gli xbgrk dtaymk. pbymy
nnyckihl nk vamaói, w, gbkihl nnycó k nk xaqkh hyn kdlmyiql, kneó nlm lolm
w val nk dtaymk gli uby my ymqkfk rkgayihl gtbgym hli ubaolqy; w ma én
ubyhó xyhtlml yi vyt qkn pacbtk, ynnk ubyhó ymdkiqkhk yi vyt nk mbwk,
dltuby, kmí glxl ny val qki knql w qki kxktannl, gli nk glngrk w gli nkm
vyihkm, uby ny hympacbtkfki, hal bik ctki vle, hagayihl:

-¡oymúm! ¿ubé ym nl uby vyl?

w gli yn mlftymknql my ny gkwó nk vynk hy nkm xkilm; w, vaéihlmy k ymgbtkm,
vlnvaó nkm ymdknhkm dktk atmy, w gli yn xayhl qtldyeó yi mbm pknhkm w hal
glimacl bik ctki gkíhk. hli ubaolqy, qyxytlml, glxyieó k hygat:

-glioútlqy, pkiqkmxk, l nl uby ytym, uby xy hackm ubaéi ytym, w uby xy
hackm ubé ym nl uby hy xí ubaytym. ma ytym knxk yi dyik, híxynl, uby wl
rkté dlt qa qlhl gbkiql xam pbytekm kngkiektyi, dltuby mlw gkqónagl
gtamqakil w kxacl hy rkgyt fayi k qlhl yn xbihl; uby dktk ymql qlxé nk
lthyi hy nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy uby dtlpyml, gbwl yoytgagal kbi rkmqk rkgyt
fayi k nkm áiaxkm hy dbtckqltal my ymqayihy.

nk ftbxkhk hbyñk, uby lwó gliobtktmy, dlt mb qyxlt glnacaó yn hy hli
ubaolqy, w gli vle kpnacahk w fkok ny tymdlihaó:

-myñlt hli ubaolqy, ma ym uby kgkml vbymqtk xytgyh ym hli ubaolqy, wl il
mlw pkiqkmxk, ia vamaói, ia knxk hy dbtckqltal, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh hyfy hy
rkfyt dyimkhl, mail hlñk tlhtícbye, nk hbyñk hy rlilt hy xa myñltk nk
hbubymk, uby, gli bik iygymahkh hy kubynnkm uby vbymqtk xytgyh mbyny
tyxyhakt, k vbymqtk xytgyh vyicl.

-híckxy, myñltk hlñk tlhtícbye -haol hli ubaolqy-: ¿dlt vyiqbtk vayiy
vbymqtk xytgyh k rkgyt kncbik qytgytík? dltuby ny rkcl mkfyt uby il mlw hy
dtlvygrl dktk ikhay, xytgyh k nk mai dkt fynnyek hy xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml. hacl, yi pai, myñltk hlñk tlhtícbye, uby, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh mknvy
w hyoy k bik dktqy qlhl tygkhl kxltlml, dbyhy vlnvyt k yigyihyt mb vynk, w
vbynvk, w hydktqatyxlm hy qlhl nl uby xám xkihkty w xám yi cbmql ny
vaiayty, mknvkihl, glxl hacl, qlhl aigaqkqavl xynaihty.

-¿wl tygkhl hy ikhay, myñlt xíl? -tymdlihaó nk hbyñk-. xkn xy glilgy
vbymqtk xytgyh; mí, uby kúi il ymqlw yi yhkh qki dtlnlickhk uby xy kglok k
myxyokiqym iañytíkm, dbym, halm nlkhl, xa knxk xy qyicl yi nkm gktiym, w
qlhlm xam hayiqym w xbynkm yi nk flgk, kxéi hy bilm dlglm uby xy rki
bmbtdkhl bilm gkqkttlm, uby yi ymqk qayttk hy ktkcói mli qki lthaiktalm.
dytl ymdétyxy vbymqtk xytgyh bi dlgl; mknhté k yigyihyt xa vynk, w vlnvyté
yi bi aimqkiqy k gliqkt xam gbaqkm, glxl k tyxyhakhlt hy qlhkm nkm hyn
xbihl.

w, mai ymdytkt tymdbymqk, my mknaó hyn kdlmyiql, hlihy ubyhó hli ubaolqy
mlmyckhl w dyimkqavl ymdytáihlnk; dytl nbycl ny mlftyvaiaytli xan
dyimkxayiqlm kgytgk hy kubynnk ibyvk kvyiqbtk, w dktygíkny myt xkn rygrl w
dylt dyimkhl dliytmy yi dynactl hy tlxdyt k mb myñltk nk pyy dtlxyqahk, w
hygíkmy k mí xamxl:

-¿ubaéi mkfy ma yn hakfnl, uby ym mbqan w xkñlml, ubyttá yickñktxy kcltk
gli bik hbyñk, nl uby il rk dlhahl gli yxdytkqtagym, tyaikm, hbubymkm,
xktubymkm ia glihymkm? uby wl ry líhl hygat xbgrkm vygym w k xbgrlm
hamgtyqlm uby, ma én dbyhy, kiqym lm nk hktá tlxk uby kcbanyñk. w ¿ubaéi
mkfy ma ymqk mlnyhkh, ymqk lgkmaói w ymqy manyigal hymdytqktá xam hymylm
uby hbytxyi, w rktái uby kn gkfl hy xam kñlm vyick k gkyt hlihy ibigk ry
qtldyekhl? w, yi gkmlm myxyokiqym, xyolt ym rbat uby ymdytkt nk fkqknnk.
dytl wl il hyfl hy ymqkt yi xa obagal, dbym qknym hamdktkqym hacl w dayiml;
uby il ym dlmafny uby bik hbyñk qlubafnkigk, nktck w kiqlobik dbyhk xlvyt
ia nyvkiqkt dyimkxayiql nkmgavl yi yn xám hymknxkhl dygrl hyn xbihl. ¿dlt
vyiqbtk rkw hbyñk yi nk qayttk uby qyick fbyikm gktiym? ¿dlt vyiqbtk rkw
hbyñk yi yn ltfy uby hyoy hy myt axdytqaiyiqy, ptbigahk w xynaihtlmk?
¡kpbytk, dbym, gkqytvk hbyñymgk, aiúqan dktk iaicúi rbxkil tycknl! ¡lr,
gbái fayi rkgík kubynnk myñltk hy ubayi my hagy uby qyiík hlm hbyñkm hy
fbnql gli mbm kiqlolm w knxlrkhannkm kn gkfl hy mb ymqtkhl, glxl uby
ymqkfki nkftkihl, w qkiql ny mytvíki dktk nk kbqltahkh hy nk mknk kubynnkm
ymqkqbkm glxl nkm hbyñkm vythkhytkm!

w, hagayihl ymql, my kttloó hyn nygrl, gli aiqyigaói hy gyttkt nk dbytqk w
il hyokt yiqtkt k nk myñltk tlhtícbye; xkm, gbkihl nk nnycó k gyttkt, wk nk
myñltk tlhtícbye vlnvík, yigyihahk bik vynk hy gytk fnkigk, w gbkihl ynnk
val k hli ubaolqy hy xám gytgk, yivbynql yi nk glngrk, gli nkm vyihkm,
cknlgrk l fyglubíi, qyxaó hy ibyvl, w, tyqatáihlmy kqtám glxl hlm dkmlm,
haol:

-¿ymqkxlm mycbtkm, myñlt gkfknnytl? dltuby il qyicl k xbw rliymqk myñkn
rkfytmy vbymk xytgyh nyvkiqkhl hy mb nygrl.

-yml xymxl ym fayi uby wl dtycbiqy, myñltk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w kmí,
dtycbiql ma ymqkté wl mycbtl hy myt kglxyqahl w pltekhl.

-¿hy ubaéi l k ubaéi dyhím, myñlt gkfknnytl, ymk mycbtahkh? -tymdlihaó nk
hbyñk.

-k vlm w hy vlm nk dahl -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, dltuby ia wl mlw hy xátxln
ia vlm hy ftligy, ia krltk mli nkm haye hyn hík, mail xyhak ilgry, w kbi bi
dlgl xám, mycúi axkcail, w yi bik ymqkigak xám gyttkhk w mygtyqk uby nl
hyfaó hy myt nk gbyvk hlihy yn qtkahlt w kqtyvahl yiykm cleó k nk rytxlmk w
dakhlmk hahl. dytl hkhxy, myñltk, nk xkil, uby wl il ubaytl lqtk mycbtahkh
xkwlt uby nk hy xa gliqaiyigak w tygkql, w nk uby lptygyi ymkm
tyvytyihímaxkm qlgkm.

w, hagayihl ymql, fymó mb hytygrk xkil, w ny kmaó hy nk mbwk, uby ynnk ny
hal gli nkm xymxkm gytyxliakm.

kubí rkgy gahy rkxyqy bi dktéiqymam, w hagy uby dlt xkrlxk uby haytk, dlt
vyt at k nlm hlm kmí kmahlm w qtkfkhlm hymhy nk dbytqk kn nygrl, nk xyolt
knxknkpk hy hlm uby qyiík.

yiqtómy, yi pai, hli ubaolqy yi mb nygrl, w ubyhómy hlñk tlhtícbye myiqkhk
yi bik mannk, kncl hymvakhk hy nk gkxk, il ubaqáihlmy nlm kiqlolm ia nk
vynk. hli ubaolqy my kglttbgó w my gbftaó qlhl, il hyokihl xám hy yn tlmqtl
hymgbfaytql; w, rkfaéihlmy nlm hlm mlmyckhl, yn dtaxytl uby tlxdaó yn
manyigal pby hli ubaolqy, hagayihl:

-dbyhy vbymk xytgyh krltk, xa myñltk hlñk tlhtícbye, hymglmytmy w hymfbgrkt
qlhl kubynnl uby qayiy hyiqtl hy mb gbaqkhl gltkeói w nkmqaxkhkm yiqtkñkm,
uby mytá hy xí ymgbgrkhk gli gkmqlm líhlm, w mlglttahk gli dakhlmkm lftkm.

-kmí nl gtyl wl -tymdlihaó nk hbyñk-, uby hy nk cyiqan w kctkhkfny
dtymyigak hy vbymk xytgyh il my dlhík ymdytkt mail qki gtamqakik tymdbymqk.
«ym, dbym, yn gkml, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby, kbiuby vbymk xytgyh xy vyy
myiqkhk yi ymqk mannk w yi nk xaqkh hyn tyail hy ktkcói, w yi ráfaql hy
hbyñk kiaubankhk w kmyihytykhk, mlw ikqbtkn hy nkm kmqbtakm hy lvayhl, w hy
naikoy uby kqtkvaymki dlt én xbgrlm hy nlm xyoltym hy kubynnk dtlvaigak;
dytl xa gltqk mbytqy w yn hymgbahl hy xam dkhtym, uby yxdlftygaytli kiqym
hy qayxdl, mai mkfyt góxl ia góxl il, xy qtboytli k nk gltqy, k xkhtah,
hlihy dlt fayi hy dke w dlt ymgbmkt xkwltym hymvyiqbtkm, xam dkhtym xy
kglxlhktli k mytvat hy hligynnk hy nkflt k bik dtaigadkn myñltk; w ubaytl
rkgyt mkfahlt k vbymk xytgyh uby yi rkgyt vkaiannkm w nkflt fnkigk iaicbik
xy rk ygrkhl yn day khynkiqy yi qlhk nk vahk. xam dkhtym xy hyoktli
matvayihl w my vlnvaytli k mb qayttk, w hy knní k dlglm kñlm my hyfaytli hy
at kn gaynl, dltuby ytki khyxám fbyilm w gkqónaglm gtamqakilm. ubyhé
rbétpkik, w kqyiahk kn xamytkfny mknktal w k nkm kicbmqakhkm xytgyhym uby
k nkm qknym gtakhkm my mbyny hkt yi dknkgal; w, yi ymqy qayxdl, mai uby
haymy wl lgkmaói k ynnl, my yikxltó hy xa bi ymgbhytl hy gkmk, rlxfty wk yi
híkm, fktfbhl w kdytmlikhl, w, mlfty qlhl, rahkncl glxl yn tyw, dltuby ytk
xliqkñém. il qtkqkxlm qki mygtyqkxyiqy ibymqtlm kxltym uby il vaiaymyi k
ilqagak hy xa myñltk, nk gbkn, dlt ymgbmkt haxym w hatyqym, ilm gkmó yi dke
w yi rke hy nk mkiqk xkhty acnymak gkqónagk tlxkik, hy gbwl xkqtaxlial
ikgaó bik raok dktk tyxkqkt gli xa vyiqbtk, ma kncbik qyiík; il dltuby wl
xbtaymy hyn dktql, uby ny qbvy hytygrl w yi mkeói, mail dltuby hymhy knní k
dlgl xbtaó xa ymdlml hy bi gaytql ymdkiql uby qbvl, uby, k qyiyt krltk
nbckt dktk gliqktny, wl mé uby vbymqtk xytgyh my khxatktk.»

w, yi ymql, glxyieó k nnltkt qaytikxyiqy, w haol:

-dythóiyxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby il vk xám yi xa xkil,
dltuby qlhkm nkm vygym uby xy kgbythl hy xa xkn nlctkhl my xy kttkmki nlm
lolm hy náctaxkm. ¡vánkxy halm, w gli ubé kbqltahkh nnyvkfk k xa myñltk k
nkm kigkm hy bik dlhytlmk xbnk, iyctk glxl yn xamxl kekfkgry! uby yiqligym
il my bmkfki glgrym ia mannkm, glxl kcltk hagyi uby my bmki, w nkm myñltkm
afki k nkm kigkm hy mbm ymgbhytlm. ymql, k nl xyilm, il dbyhl hyokt hy
gliqktnl, dltuby my ilqy nk gtakiek w dbiqbknahkh hy xa fbyi xktahl. «kn
yiqtkt hy nk gknny hy mkiqakcl, yi xkhtah, uby ym kncl ymqtygrk, vyiík k
mknat dlt ynnk bi kngknhy hy gltqy gli hlm kncbkganym hynkiqy, w, kmí glxl
xa fbyi ymgbhytl ny val, vlnvaó nkm tayihkm k nk xbnk, hkihl myñkn hy
vlnvyt k kglxdkñktny. xa myñltk, uby afk k nkm kigkm, gli vle fkok ny
hygík: ''-¿ubé rkgéam, hymvyiqbtkhl? ¿il vyam uby vlw kubí?'' yn kngknhy,
hy glxyhahl, hyqbvl nk tayihk kn gkfknnl w híolny: ''-mycbah, myñlt,
vbymqtl gkxail, uby wl mlw yn uby hyfl kglxdkñkt k xa myñltk hlñk
gkmanhk'', uby kmí ytk yn ilxfty hy xa kxk. qlhkvík dltpakfk xa xktahl, gli
nk clttk yi nk xkil, k ubytyt at kglxdkñkihl kn kngknhy, vayihl nl gbkn xa
myñltk, nnyik hy gónytk w yilol, mkgó bi knpanyt clthl, l gtyl uby bi
dbieói, hyn ymqbgry, w gnkvómyny dlt nlm nlxlm, hy xkiytk uby xa xktahl hal
bik ctki vle w qltgaó yn gbytdl, hy mbytqy uby hal gli mb myñltk yi yn
mbynl. kgbhaytli hlm nkgkwlm mbwlm k nyvkiqktnk, w nl xamxl rael yn kngknhy
w nlm kncbkganym; knfltlqómy nk dbytqk hy cbkhknkoktk, hacl, nk cyiqy
fknhík uby yi ynnk ymqkfk; víilmy k day xa kxk, w xa xktahl kgbhaó yi gkmk
hy bi fktfytl hagayihl uby nnyvkfk dkmkhkm hy dktqy k dktqy nkm yiqtkñkm.
havbncómy nk gltqymík hy xa ymdlml, qkiql, uby nlm xbgrkgrlm ny glttíki dlt
nkm gknnym, w dlt ymql w dltuby én ytk kncúi qkiql gltql hy vamqk, xa
myñltk nk hbubymk ny hymdahaó, hy gbwl dymkt, mai hbhk kncbik, qyicl dktk
xí uby my ny gkbmó yn xkn hy nk xbytqy. ubyhé wl vabhk w hymkxdktkhk, w gli
raok k gbymqkm, uby afk gtygayihl yi rytxlmbtk glxl nk ymdbxk hy nk xkt.
paiknxyiqy, glxl wl qbvaymy pkxk hy ctki nkftkihytk, xa myñltk nk hbubymk,
uby ymqkfk tygaéi gkmkhk gli yn hbuby xa myñlt, ubaml qtkytxy glimacl k
ymqy tyail hy ktkcói w k xa raok ia xám ia xyilm, khlihy, wyihl híkm w
vaiayihl híkm, gtygaó xa raok, w gli ynnk qlhl yn hlikaty hyn xbihl: gkiqk
glxl bik gknkihtak, hkiek glxl yn dyimkxayiql, fkank glxl bik dythahk, nyy
w ymgtafy glxl bi xkymqtl hy ymgbynk, w gbyiqk glxl bi kvktayiql. hy mb
naxdayek il hacl ikhk: uby yn kcbk uby gltty il ym xám naxdak, w hyfy hy
qyiyt kcltk, ma xkn il xy kgbythl, haye w myam kñlm, gaigl xymym w qtym
híkm, bil xám k xyilm. yi tymlnbgaói: hy ymqk xa xbgrkgrk my yikxltó bi
raol hy bi nkftkhlt taubímaxl uby ymqá yi bik knhyk hyn hbuby xa myñlt, il
xbw nyolm hy kubí. yi ypygql, il mé góxl ia góxl il, ynnlm my obiqktli, w,
hyfkol hy nk dknkftk hy myt mb ymdlml, fbtnó k xa raok, w il my nk ubayty
gbxdnat; w, kbiuby yn hbuby xa myñlt nl mkfy, dltuby wl xy ry ubyokhl k én,
il bik, mail xbgrkm vygym, w dyhíhlny xkihy uby yn qkn nkftkhlt my gkmy gli
xa raok, rkgy ltyokm hy xytgkhyt w kdyikm ubayty lítxy; w ym nk gkbmk uby,
glxl yn dkhty hyn fbtnkhlt ym qki tagl w ny dtymqk haiytlm, w ny mkny dlt
pakhlt hy mbm qtkxdkm dlt xlxyiqlm, il ny ubayty hymgliqyiqkt ia hkt
dymkhbxfty yi iaicúi xlhl.» ubyttík, dbym, myñlt xíl, uby vbymk xytgyh
qlxkmy k gktcl yn hymrkgyt ymqy kctkval, l wk dlt tbyclm, l wk dlt ktxkm,
dbym, mycúi qlhl yn xbihl hagy, vbymk xytgyh ikgaó yi én dktk hymrkgytnlm w
dktk yihytyekt nlm qbytqlm w kxdktkt nlm xamytkfnym; w dóickmyny k vbymk
xytgyh dlt hynkiqy nk ltpkihkh hy xa raok, mb cyiqanyek, mb xlgyhkh, gli
qlhkm nkm fbyikm dktqym uby ry hagrl uby qayiy; uby yi halm w yi xa
gligayigak uby hy gbkiqkm hligynnkm qayiy xa myñltk, uby il rkw iaicbik uby
nnycby k nk mbynk hy mb ekdkql, w uby bik uby nnkxki knqamahltk, uby ym nk
uby qayiyi dlt xám hymyivbynqk w cknnkthk, dbymqk yi glxdktkgaói hy xa
raok, il nk nnyck gli hlm nycbkm. dltuby ubaytl uby mydk vbymk xytgyh,
myñlt xíl, uby il ym qlhl ltl nl uby tynbgy; dltuby ymqk knqamahltannk
qayiy xám hy dtymbigaói uby hy rytxlmbtk, w xám hy hymyivbynqk uby hy
tyglcahk, khyxám uby il ymqá xbw mkik: uby qayiy bi gaytql knnyiql gkimkhl,
uby il rkw mbptat yn ymqkt obiql k ynnk bi xlxyiql. w kbi xa myñltk nk
hbubymk... ubaytl gknnkt, uby my mbyny hygat uby nkm dktyhym qayiyi líhlm.

-¿ubé qayiy xa myñltk nk hbubymk, dlt vahk xík, myñltk hlñk tlhtícbye?
-dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-gli ymy gliobtl -tymdlihaó nk hbyñk-, il dbyhl hyokt hy tymdlihyt k nl uby
my xy dtycbiqk gli qlhk vythkh. ¿vyy vbymk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, nk
rytxlmbtk hy xa myñltk nk hbubymk, kubynnk qye hy tlmqtl, uby il dktygy
mail hy bik ymdkhk kgagknkhk w qytmk, kubynnkm hlm xyoannkm hy nygry w hy
gktxíi, uby yi nk bik qayiy yn mln w yi nk lqtk nk nbik, w kubynnk
cknnkthík gli uby vk damkihl w kbi hymdtygakihl yn mbynl, uby il dktygy
mail uby vk hyttkxkihl mknbh hlihy dkmk? dbym mydk vbymk xytgyh uby nl
dbyhy kctkhygyt, dtaxytl, k halm, w nbycl, k hlm pbyiqym uby qayiy yi nkm
hlm daytikm, dlt hlihy my hymkcbk qlhl yn xkn rbxlt hy ubayi hagyi nlm
xéhaglm uby ymqá nnyik.

-¡mkiqk xktík! -haol hli ubaolqy-. w ¿ym dlmafny uby xa myñltk nk hbubymk
qyick qknym hymkcbkhytlm? il nl gtywytk ma xy nl haoytki ptkanym hymgknelm;
dytl, dbym nk myñltk hlñk tlhtícbye nl hagy, hyfy hy myt kmí. dytl qknym
pbyiqym, w yi qknym nbcktym, il hyfyi hy xkikt rbxlt, mail áxfkt níubahl.
vythkhytkxyiqy uby krltk kgkfl hy gtyyt uby ymql hy rkgytmy pbyiqym hyfy hy
myt glmk axdltqkiqy dktk mknbh.

kdyikm kgkfó hli ubaolqy hy hygat ymqk tkeói, gbkihl gli bi ctki clndy
kftaytli nkm dbytqkm hyn kdlmyiql, w hyn mlftymknql hyn clndy my ny gkwó k
hlñk tlhtícbye nk vynk hy nk xkil, w ubyhó nk ymqkigak glxl flgk hy nlfl,
glxl mbyny hygatmy. nbycl maiqaó nk dlfty hbyñk uby nk kmíki hy nk cktckiqk
gli hlm xkilm, qki pbytqyxyiqy uby il nk hyokfki ckñat, w uby lqtk dytmlik,
gli xbgrk dtymqyek, mai rkfnkt dknkftk, ny knekfk nkm pknhkm, w gli bik, kn
dktygyt, graiynk, ny glxyieó k hkt qkiqlm kelqym, uby ytk bik glxdkmaói; w,
kbiuby hli ubaolqy my nk qyiík, il my xyiykfk hyn nygrl, w il mkfík ubé
dlhík myt kubynnl, w ymqáfkmy ubyhl w gknnkihl, w kbi qyxayihl il vaiaymy
dlt én nk qkihk w qbihk kelqymgk. w il pby vkil mb qyxlt, dltuby, yi
hyokihl xlnahk k nk hbyñk nlm gknnkhlm vythbclm (nk gbkn il lmkfk
ubyoktmy), kgbhaytli k hli ubaolqy, w, hymyivlnvaéihlny hy nk máfkik w hy
nk glngrk, ny dynnaegktli qki k xyibhl w qki tygakxyiqy, uby il dbhl hyokt
hy hypyihytmy k dbñkhkm, w qlhl ymql yi manyigal khxatkfny. hbtó nk fkqknnk
gkma xyhak rltk; mknaétlimy nkm pkiqkmxkm, tyglcaó hlñk tlhtícbye mbm
pknhkm, w, caxayihl mb hymctkgak, my mknaó dlt nk dbytqk kpbytk, mai hygat
dknkftk k hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn, hlnltlml w dynnaegkhl, glipbml w dyimkqavl,
my ubyhó mlnl, hlihy ny hyoktyxlm hymylml hy mkfyt ubaéi rkfík mahl yn
dytvytml yigkiqkhlt uby qkn ny rkfík dbymql. dytl ynnl my hatá k mb qayxdl,
uby mkigrl dkiek ilm nnkxk, w yn fbyi gligaytql hy nk ramqltak nl dahy.





gkdíqbnl znaz. hy nl uby ny mbgyhaó k mkigrl dkiek tlihkihl mb íimbnk


hyokxlm kn ctki clfytikhlt yilokhl w xlríil gli yn nkftkhlt daiqlt w
mlgkttói, yn gbkn, aihbmqtakhl hyn xkwlthlxl, w yn xkwlthlxl hyn hbuby, my
fbtnkfki hy mkigrl; dytl én my nkm qyiík qaymkm k qlhlm, xkcbytk qliql,
ftligl w tlnnael, w haol k nlm uby gli én ymqkfki, w kn hlgqlt dyhtl tygal,
uby, glxl my kgkfó yn mygtyql hy nk gktqk hyn hbuby, rkfík vbynql k yiqtkt
yi nk mknk:

-krltk vythkhytkxyiqy uby yiqayihl uby nlm obygym w clfytikhltym hyfyi hy
myt, l rki hy myt, hy ftligy, dktk il myiqat nkm axdltqbiahkhym hy nlm
iyclgakiqym, uby k qlhkm rltkm w k qlhlm qayxdlm ubaytyi uby nlm ymgbgryi w
hymdkgryi, kqyihayihl mónl k mb iyclgal, vyick nl uby vaiayty; w ma yn
dlfty hyn obye il nlm ymgbgrk w hymdkgrk, l dltuby il dbyhy l dltuby il ym
kubén yn qayxdl hadbqkhl dktk hktnym kbhayigak, nbycl nym xknhagyi w
xbtxbtki, w nym tlyi nlm rbymlm, w kbi nym hymnaihki nlm naikoym.
iyclgakiqy iygal, iyclgakiqy xyiqygkql, il qy kdtymbtym; ymdytk mkeói w
glwbiqbtk dktk iyclgakt: il vyickm k nk rltk hyn glxyt ia k nk hyn hltxat,
uby nlm obygym mli hy gktiy w hy rbyml w rki hy hkt k nk ikqbtknyek nl uby
ikqbtknxyiqy nym dahy, ma il ym wl, uby il ny hlw hy glxyt k nk xík, xytgyh
kn myñlt hlgqlt dyhtl tygal qatqykpbytk, uby ymqá hynkiqy, uby ubayty uby
xbytk hy rkxfty, w kpatxk uby ymqk xbytqy ym vahk, uby kmí my nk hé halm k
én w k qlhlm nlm hy mb tknyk: hacl, k nk hy nlm xknlm xéhaglm, uby nk hy
nlm fbyilm, dknxkm w nkbtlm xytygyi.

qlhlm nlm uby glilgíki k mkigrl dkiek my khxatkfki, lwéihlny rkfnkt qki
ynyckiqyxyiqy, w il mkfíki k ubé kqtafbatnl, mail k uby nlm lpagalm w
gktclm ctkvym, l khlfki l yiqltdygyi nlm yiqyihaxayiqlm. paiknxyiqy, yn
hlgqlt dyhtl tygal kcüytl hy qatqykpbytk dtlxyqaó hy hktny hy gyikt kubynnk
ilgry, kbiuby yzgyhaymy hy qlhlm nlm kpltamxlm hy radógtkqym. gli ymql
ubyhó gliqyiql yn clfytikhlt, w ymdytkfk gli ctkihy kimak nnyckmy nk ilgry
w nk rltk hy gyikt; w, kbiuby yn qayxdl, kn dktygyt mbwl, my ymqkfk ubyhl,
mai xlvytmy hy bi nbckt, qlhkvík my nnycó dlt én yn qkiql hymykhl, hlihy
ny haytli hy gyikt bi mkndagói hy vkgk gli gyflnnk, w bikm xkilm glgahkm hy
qytiytk kncl yiqtkhk yi híkm. yiqtycómy yi qlhl gli xám cbmql uby ma ny
rbfaytki hkhl ptkiglnaiym hy xanái, pkamkiym hy tlxk, qytiytk hy mlttyiql,
dythagym hy xltói, l ckimlm hy nkvkolm; w, yiqty nk gyik, vlnvaéihlmy kn
hlgqlt, ny haol:

-xatkh, myñlt hlgqlt: hy kubí khynkiqy il lm gbtéam hy hktxy k glxyt glmkm
tycknkhkm ia xkioktym ymubamaqlm, dltuby mytá mkgkt k xa ymqóxkcl hy mbm
ubagalm, yn gbkn ymqá kglmqbxftkhl k gkftk, k vkgk, k qlgail, k gygaik, k
ikflm w k gyflnnkm; w, ma kgkml ny hki lqtlm xkioktym hy dknkgal, nlm
tygafy gli xynaihty, w kncbikm vygym gli kmgl. nl uby yn xkymqtymknk dbyhy
rkgyt ym qtkytxy ymqkm uby nnkxki lnnkm dlhtahkm, uby xayiqtkm xám dlhtahkm
mli, xyolt rbynyi, w yi ynnkm dbyhy yxfkbnkt w yigyttkt qlhl nl uby én
ubamayty, glxl myk hy glxyt, uby wl my nl kctkhygyté w my nl dkckté kncúi
hík; w il my fbtny ikhay glixacl, dltuby l mlxlm l il mlxlm: vavkxlm qlhlm
w glxkxlm yi fbyik dke glxdkñk, dbym, gbkihl halm kxkiygy, dktk qlhlm
kxkiygy. wl clfytikté ymqk íimbnk mai dythlikt hytygrl ia nnyvkt glrygrl, w
qlhl yn xbihl qtkack yn lol knytqk w xaty dlt yn vatlqy, dltuby nym rkcl
mkfyt uby yn hakfnl ymqá yi gkiqannkik, w uby, ma xy hki lgkmaói, rki hy
vyt xktkvannkm. il, mail rkgylm xayn, w glxytlm rki xlmgkm.

-dlt gaytql, myñlt clfytikhlt -haol yn xkymqtymknk-, uby vbymk xytgyh qayiy
xbgrk tkeói yi gbkiql rk hagrl, w uby wl lptyegl yi ilxfty hy qlhlm nlm
aimbnkilm hymqk íimbnk uby rki hy mytvat k vbymqtk xytgyh gli qlhk
dbiqbknahkh, kxlt w fyiyvlnyigak, dltuby yn mbkvy xlhl hy clfytikt uby yi
ymqlm dtaigadalm vbymk xytgyh rk hkhl il nym hk nbckt hy rkgyt ia hy dyimkt
glmk uby yi hymytvagal hy vbymk xytgyh tyhbihy.

-wl nl gtyl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w mytíki ynnlm bilm iygalm ma lqtk glmk
ragaymyi l dyimkmyi. w vbynvl k hygat uby my qyick gbyiqk gli xa mbmqyiql w
gli yn hy xa tbgal, uby ym nl uby yi ymqy iyclgal axdltqk w rkgy xám kn
gkml; w, yi mayihl rltk, vkxlm k tlihkt, uby ym xa aiqyigaói naxdakt ymqk
íimbnk hy qlhl céiytl hy aixbihagak w hy cyiqy vkckxbihk, rlnckekiym, w xkn
yiqtyqyiahk; dltuby ubaytl uby mydáam, kxaclm, uby nk cyiqy fknhík w
dytyelmk ym yi nk tydúfnagk nl xymxl uby nlm eáickilm yi nkm glnxyikm, uby
my glxyi nk xayn uby nkm qtkfkokhltkm kfyokm rkgyi. dayiml pkvltygyt k nlm
nkftkhltym, cbkthkt mbm dtyyxaiyigakm k nlm rahknclm, dtyxakt nlm vatqblmlm
w, mlfty qlhl, qyiyt tymdyql k nk tynacaói w k nk rlitk hy nlm tynacalmlm.
¿ubé lm dktygy hymql, kxaclm? ¿hacl kncl, l ubaéftlxy nk gkfyek?

-hagy qkiql vbymk xytgyh, myñlt clfytikhlt -haol yn xkwlthlxl-, uby ymqlw
khxatkhl hy vyt uby bi rlxfty qki mai nyqtkm glxl vbymk xytgyh, uby, k nl
uby gtyl, il qayiy iaicbik, hack qknym w qkiqkm glmkm nnyikm hy myiqyigakm
w hy kvamlm, qki pbytk hy qlhl kubynnl uby hyn aicyial hy vbymk xytgyh
ymdytkfki nlm uby ilm yivaktli w nlm uby kubí vyiaxlm. gkhk hík my vyyi
glmkm ibyvkm yi yn xbihl: nkm fbtnkm my vbynvyi yi vytkm w nlm fbtnkhltym
my rknnki fbtnkhlm.

nnycó nk ilgry, w gyió yn clfytikhlt, gli nagyigak hyn myñlt hlgqlt tygal.
khytyeátlimy hy tlihk; mknaó gli yn xkwlthlxl, mygtyqktal w xkymqtymknk, w
yn gltliamqk uby qyiík gbahkhl hy dliyt yi xyxltak mbm rygrlm, w kncbkganym
w ymgtafkilm, qkiqlm uby dlhíki pltxkt bi xyhakil ymgbkhtói. afk mkigrl yi
xyhal, gli mb vktk, uby il rkfík xám uby vyt, w dlgkm gknnym kihkhkm hyn
nbckt, maiqaytli tbahl hy gbgrannkhkm; kgbhaytli knná, w rknnktli uby ytki
hlm mlnlm rlxftym nlm uby tyñíki, nlm gbknym, vayihl vyiat k nk obmqagak,
my ymqbvaytli ubyhlm; w yn bil hynnlm haol:

-¡kubí hy halm w hyn tyw! ¿góxl w uby my rk hy mbptat uby tlfyi yi dlfnkhl
yi ymqy dbyfnl, w uby mknck k mknqykt yi én yi nk xaqkh hy nkm gknnym?

-mlmycklm, rlxfty hy fayi -haol mkigrl-, w gliqkhxy ubé ym nk gkbmk hymqk
dyihyigak, uby wl mlw yn clfytikhlt.

yn lqtl gliqtktal haol:

-myñlt clfytikhlt, wl nk haté gli qlhk ftyvyhkh. vbymqtk xytgyh mkftá uby
ymqy cyiqanrlxfty kgkfk hy ckikt krltk yi ymqk gkmk hy obycl uby ymqá kubí
ptliqytl xám hy xan tyknym, w mkfy halm góxl; w, rknnáihlxy wl dtymyiqy,
obecbé xám hy bik mbytqy hbhlmk yi mb pkvlt, gliqtk qlhl kubynnl uby xy
hagqkfk nk gligayigak; kneómy gli nk ckikigak, w, gbkihl ymdytkfk uby xy
rkfík hy hkt kncúi ymgbhl, dlt nl xyilm, hy fktkql, glxl ym bml w glmqbxfty
hktny k nlm rlxftym dtaigadknym glxl wl, uby ymqkxlm kmamqyiqym dktk fayi w
xkn dkmkt, w dktk kdlwkt maitkeliym w yvaqkt dyihyigakm, én yxflnmó mb
haiytl w my mknaó hy nk gkmk. wl vaiy hymdygrkhl qtkm én, w gli fbyikm w
gltqymym dknkftkm ny ry dyhahl uby xy haymy maubaytk lgrl tyknym, dbym mkfy
uby wl mlw rlxfty rlitkhl w uby il qyicl lpagal ia fyiypagal, dltuby xam
dkhtym il xy ny yimyñktli ia xy ny hyoktli, w yn mlgkttói, uby il ym xám
nkhtói uby gkgl, ia xám pbnnytl uby kihtkhannk, il ubytík hktxy xám hy
gbkqtl tyknym; ¡dltuby vyk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt clfytikhlt, ubé dlgk
vytcüyiek w ubé dlgk gligayigak! dytl k pyy uby, ma vbymk xytgyh il
nnycktk, uby wl ny ragaytk vlxaqkt nk ckikigak, w uby rkfík hy mkfyt gli
gbáiqkm yiqtkfk nk tlxkik.

-¿ubé hygím vlm k ymql? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

w yn lqtl tymdlihaó uby ytk vythkh gbkiql mb gliqtktal hygík, w il rkfík
ubytahl hktny xám hy gbkqtl tyknym dltuby my nlm hkfk xbgrkm vygym; w nlm
uby ymdytki fktkql rki hy myt glxyhahlm w qlxkt gli tlmqtl knycty nl uby
nym haytyi, mai dliytmy yi gbyiqkm gli nlm ckikigalmlm, ma wk il mbdaymyi
hy gaytql uby mli pbnnytlm w uby nl uby ckiki ym xkn ckikhl; w uby, dktk
myñkn uby én ytk rlxfty hy fayi w il nkhtói, glxl hygík, iaicbik rkfík
xkwlt uby yn il rkfytny ubytahl hkt ikhk; uby mayxdty nlm pbnnytlm mli
qtafbqktalm hy nlm xatliym uby nlm glilgyi.

-kmí ym -haol yn xkwlthlxl-. vyk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt clfytikhlt, ubé ym
nl uby my rk hy rkgyt hymqlm rlxftym.

-nl uby my rk hy rkgyt ym ymql -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: vlm, ckikigalml, fbyil,
l xknl, l aihapytyiqy, hkh nbycl k ymqy vbymqtl kgbgrannkhlt gayi tyknym, w
xám, rkféam hy hymyxflnmkt qtyaiqk dktk nlm dlftym hy nk gátgyn; w vlm, uby
il qyiéam lpagal ia fyiypagal w kiháam hy iliym yi ymqk íimbnk, qlxkh nbycl
ymlm gayi tyknym, w xkñkik yi qlhl yn hík mknah hymqk íimbnk hymqyttkhl dlt
haye kñlm, ml dyik, ma nl ubyftkiqátyhym, nlm gbxdnáam yi nk lqtk vahk,
glncáihllm wl hy bik daglqk, l, k nl xyilm, yn vythbcl dlt xa xkihkhl; w
iaicbil xy tydnauby, uby ny kmyiqkté nk xkil.

hymyxflnmó yn bil, tygafaó yn lqtl, émqy my mknaó hy nk íimbnk, w kubén my
pby k mb gkmk, w yn clfytikhlt ubyhó hagayihl:

-krltk, wl dlhté dlgl, l ubaqkté ymqkm gkmkm hy obycl, uby k xí my xy
qtkmnbgy uby mli xbw dytobhagaknym.

-Émqk, k nl xyilm -haol bi ymgtafkil-, il nk dlhtá vbymk xytgyh ubaqkt,
dltuby nk qayiy bi ctki dytmlikoy, w xám ym mai glxdktkgaói nl uby én
daythy kn kñl uby nl uby mkgk hy nlm ikadym. gliqtk lqtlm cktaqlm hy xyilt
gkiqík dlhtá vbymqtk xytgyh xlmqtkt mb dlhyt, uby mli nlm uby xám hkñl
rkgyi w xám aimlnyigakm yigbftyi; uby yi nkm gkmkm hy nlm gkfknnytlm
dtaigadknym w hy nlm myñltym il my kqtyvyi nlm pkxlmlm pbnnytlm k bmkt hy
mbm qtyqkm; w, dbym yn vagal hyn obycl my rk vbynql yi yoytgagal glxúi,
xyolt ym uby my obycby yi gkmkm dtaigadknym uby il yi nk hy kncúi lpagakn,
hlihy glcyi k bi hymhagrkhl hy xyhak ilgry kfkol w ny hymbynnki vavl.

-kcltk, ymgtafkil -haol mkigrl-, wl mé uby rkw xbgrl uby hygat yi yml.

w, yi ymql, nnycó bi gltgryqy uby qtkík kmahl k bi xlel, w haol:

-myñlt clfytikhlt, ymqy xkigyfl vyiík rkgak ilmlqtlm, w, kmí glxl glnbxftó
nk obmqagak, vlnvaó nkm ymdknhkm w glxyieó k glttyt glxl bi ckxl, myñkn uby
hyfy hy myt kncúi hynaigbyiqy. wl dktqí qtkm én, w, ma il pbytk dltuby
qtldyeó w gkwó, il ny kngkiektk okxám.

-¿dlt ubé rbíkm, rlxfty? -dtycbiqó mkigrl.

k nl uby yn xlel tymdlihaó:

-myñlt, dlt ymgbmkt hy tymdlihyt k nkm xbgrkm dtycbiqkm uby nkm obmqagakm
rkgyi.

-¿ubé lpagal qayiym?

-qyoyhlt.

-¿w ubé qyoym?

-rayttlm hy nkiekm, gli nagyigak fbyik hy vbymqtk xytgyh.

-¿ctkgalmagl xy mlam? ¿hy grlgkttytl lm dagáam? ¡ymqá fayi! w ¿khóihy
ífkhym krltk?

-myñlt, k qlxkt yn katy.

-w ¿khóihy my qlxk yn katy yi ymqk íimbnk?

-khlihy mldnk.

-¡fbyil: tymdlihéam xbw k dtldómaql! hamgtyql mlam, xkigyfl; dytl rkgyh
gbyiqk uby wl mlw yn katy, w uby lm mldnl yi dldk, w lm yigkxail k nk
gátgyn. ¡kmanhy, rlnk, w nnyvkhny, uby wl rkté uby hbytxk knní mai katy
ymqk ilgry!

-¡dkt halm -haol yn xlel-, kmí xy rkck vbymqtk xytgyh hltxat yi nk gátgyn
glxl rkgytxy tyw!

-dbym, ¿dlt ubé il qy rkté wl hltxat yi nk gátgyn? -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. ¿il
qyicl wl dlhyt dktk dtyihytqy w mlnqktqy gkhk w gbkihl uby ubamayty?

-dlt xám dlhyt uby vbymqtk xytgyh qyick -haol yn xlel-, il mytá fkmqkiqy
dktk rkgytxy hltxat yi nk gátgyn.

-¿góxl uby il? -tydnagó mkigrl-. nnyvknhy nbycl hlihy vytá dlt mbm lolm yn
hymyickñl, kbiuby xám yn kngkahy ubaytk bmkt gli én hy mb aiqytymkn
nafytknahkh; uby wl ny dlihté dyik hy hlm xan hbgkhlm ma qy hyok mknat bi
dkml hy nk gátgyn.

-qlhl yml ym glmk hy tamk -tymdlihaó yn xlel-. yn gkml ym uby il xy rktái
hltxat yi nk gátgyn gbkiqlm rlw vavyi.

-haxy, hyxlial -haol mkigrl-, ¿qayiym kncúi áicyn uby qy mkuby w uby qy
ubaqy nlm ctannlm uby qy dayiml xkihkt ygrkt?

-krltk, myñlt clfytikhlt -tymdlihaó yn xlel gli xbw fbyi hlikaty-, ymqyxlm
k tkeói w vyickxlm kn dbiql. dtlmbdlick vbymqtk xytgyh uby xy xkihk nnyvkt
k nk gátgyn, w uby yi ynnk xy ygrki ctannlm w gkhyikm, w uby xy xyqyi yi bi
gknkflel, w my ny dliyi kn kngkahy ctkvym dyikm ma xy hyok mknat, w uby én
nl gbxdny glxl my ny xkihk; gli qlhl ymql, ma wl il ubaytl hltxat, w
ymqktxy hymdaytql qlhk nk ilgry, mai dyckt dymqkñk, ¿mytá vbymqtk xytgyh
fkmqkiqy gli qlhl mb dlhyt dktk rkgytxy hltxat, ma wl il ubaytl?

-il, dlt gaytql -haol yn mygtyqktal-, w yn rlxfty rk mknahl gli mb
aiqyigaói.

-hy xlhl -haol mkigrl- uby il hyoktéam hy hltxat dlt lqtk glmk uby dlt
vbymqtk vlnbiqkh, w il dlt gliqtkvyiat k nk xík.

-il, myñlt -haol yn xlel-, ia dlt dayiml.

-dbym kihkh gli halm -haol mkigrl-; ahlm k hltxat k vbymqtk gkmk, w halm lm
hé fbyi mbyñl, uby wl il ubaytl ubaqátlmny; dytl kgliméollm uby hy kubí
khynkiqy il lm fbtnéam gli nk obmqagak, dltuby qldktéam gli kncbik uby lm
hé gli nk fbtnk yi nlm gkmglm.

pbymy yn xlel, w yn clfytikhlt dtlmacbaó gli mb tlihk, w hy knní k dlgl
vaiaytli hlm gltgryqym uby qtkíki k bi rlxfty kmahl, w haoytli:

-myñlt clfytikhlt, ymqy uby dktygy rlxfty il nl ym, mail xboyt, w il pyk,
uby vayiy vymqahk yi ráfaql hy rlxfty.

nnycátliny k nlm lolm hlm l qtym nkiqytikm, k gbwkm nbgym hymgbftaytli bi
tlmqtl hy bik xboyt, kn dktygyt, hy haye w myam l dlglm xám kñlm, tyglcahlm
nlm gkfynnlm gli bik tyhygannk hy ltl w myhk vythy, rytxlmk glxl xan
dytnkm. xatátlink hy kttafk kfkol, w vaytli uby vyiík gli bikm xyhakm hy
myhk yigktikhk, gli nackm hy qkpyqái fnkigl w tkdkgyolm hy ltl w knoópkt;
nlm ctycbymglm ytki vythym, hy qynk hy ltl, w bik mknqkyxfktgk l tldannk hy
nl xymxl, mbynqk, hyfkol hy nk gbkn qtkík bi obfói hy qynk paiímaxk hy ltl
w fnkigl, w nlm ekdkqlm ytki fnkiglm w hy rlxfty. il qtkík ymdkhk gyñahk,
mail bik taubímaxk hkck, w yi nlm hyhlm, xbgrlm w xbw fbyilm kiannlm.
paiknxyiqy, nk xlek dktygík fayi k qlhlm, w iaicbil nk glilgaó hy gbkiqlm
nk vaytli, w nlm ikqbtknym hyn nbckt haoytli uby il dlhíki dyimkt ubaéi
pbymy, w nlm glimkfahltym hy nkm fbtnkm uby my rkfíki hy rkgyt k mkigrl
pbytli nlm uby xám my khxatktli, dltuby kubyn mbgyml w rknnkecl il vyiík
lthyikhl dlt ynnlm; w kmí, ymqkfki hbhlmlm, ymdytkihl yi ubé dktktík yn
gkml.

mkigrl ubyhó dkmxkhl hy nk rytxlmbtk hy nk xlek, w dtycbiqóny ubaéi ytk,
khóihy afk w ubé lgkmaói ny rkfík xlvahl dktk vymqatmy yi kubyn ráfaql.
ynnk, dbymqlm nlm lolm yi qayttk gli rliymqímaxk vytcüyiek, tymdlihaó:

-il dbyhl, myñlt, hygat qki yi dúfnagl nl uby qkiql xy axdltqkfk pbytk
mygtyql; bik glmk ubaytl uby my yiqayihk: uby il mlw nkhtói ia dytmlik
pkgailtlmk, mail bik hligynnk hymhagrkhk k ubayi nk pbytek hy bilm gynlm rk
rygrl tlxdyt yn hygltl uby k nk rliymqahkh my hyfy.

lwyihl ymql yn xkwlthlxl, haol k mkigrl:

-rkck, myñlt clfytikhlt, kdktqkt nk cyiqy, dltuby ymqk myñltk gli xyilm
yxdkgrl dbyhk hygat nl uby ubamayty.

xkihónl kmí yn clfytikhlt; kdktqátlimy qlhlm, ma il pbytli yn xkwlthlxl,
xkymqtymknk w yn mygtyqktal. vaéihlmy, dbym, mlnlm, nk hligynnk dtlmacbaó
hagayihl:

-«wl, myñltym, mlw raok hy dyhtl détye xkeltgk, kttyihkhlt hy nkm nkikm
hymqy nbckt, yn gbkn mbyny xbgrkm vygym at yi gkmk hy xa dkhty.»

-yml il nnyvk gkxail -haol yn xkwlthlxl-, myñltk, dltuby wl glilegl xbw
fayi k dyhtl détye w mé uby il qayiy raol iaicbil, ia vktói ia ryxftk; w
xám, uby hygím uby ym vbymqtl dkhty, w nbycl kñkhím uby mbyny at xbgrkm
vygym yi gkmk hy vbymqtl dkhty.

-wk wl rkfík hkhl yi ynnl -haol mkigrl.

-krltk, myñltym, wl ymqlw qbtfkhk, w il mé nl uby xy hacl -tymdlihaó nk
hligynnk-; dytl nk vythkh ym uby wl mlw raok hy haycl hy nk nnkik, uby
qlhlm vbymkm xytgyhym hyfyi hy glilgyt.

-kúi yml nnyvk gkxail -tymdlihaó yn xkwlthlxl-, uby wl glilegl k haycl hy
nk nnkik, w mé uby ym bi rahkncl dtaigadkn w tagl, w uby qayiy bi raol w
bik raok, w uby hymdbém uby yivabhó il rk rkfahl ikhay yi qlhl ymqy nbckt
uby dbyhk hygat uby rk vamql yn tlmqtl hy mb raok; uby nk qayiy qki
yigyttkhk uby il hk nbckt kn mln uby nk vyk; w, gli qlhl ymql, nk pkxk hagy
uby ym yi ymqtyxl rytxlmk.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó nk hligynnk-, w ymk raok mlw wl; ma nk pkxk
xayiqy l il yi xa rytxlmbtk wk lm rkftéam, myñltym, hymyickñkhl, dbym xy
rkféam vamql.

w, yi ymql, glxyieó k nnltkt qaytikxyiqy; vayihl nl gbkn yn mygtyqktal, my
nnycó kn líhl hyn xkymqtymknk w ny haol xbw dkml:

-mai hbhk kncbik uby k ymqk dlfty hligynnk ny hyfy hy rkfyt mbgyhahl kncl
hy axdltqkigak, dbym yi qkn qtkoy, w k qknym rltkm, w mayihl qki dtaigadkn,
kihk pbytk hy mb gkmk.

-il rkw hbhkt yi yml -tymdlihaó yn xkymqtymknk-; w xám, uby ymk mlmdygrk nk
glipatxki mbm náctaxkm.

mkigrl nk glimlnó gli nkm xyoltym tkeliym uby én mbdl, w ny dahaó uby mai
qyxlt kncbil nym haoymy nl uby ny rkfík mbgyhahl; uby qlhlm dtlgbtktíki
tyxyhaktnl gli xbgrkm vytkm w dlt qlhkm nkm víkm dlmafnym.

-«ym yn gkml, myñltym -tymdlihaó ynnk-, uby xa dkhty xy rk qyiahl yigyttkhk
haye kñlm rk, uby mli nlm xamxlm uby k xa xkhty glxy nk qayttk. yi gkmk
hagyi xamk yi bi tagl ltkqltal, w wl yi qlhl ymqy qayxdl il ry vamql uby yn
mln hyn gaynl hy hík, w nk nbik w nkm ymqtynnkm hy ilgry, ia mé ubé mli
gknnym, dnkekm, ia qyxdnlm, ia kbi rlxftym, pbytk hy xa dkhty w hy bi
rytxkil xíl, w hy dyhtl détye yn kttyihkhlt, uby, dlt yiqtkt hy lthaiktal
yi xa gkmk, my xy kiqloó hygat uby ytk xa dkhty, dlt il hygnktkt yn xíl.
ymqy yigyttkxayiql w ymqy iycktxy yn mknat hy gkmk, maubaytk k nk acnymak,
rk xbgrlm híkm w xymym uby xy qtky xbw hymglimlnkhk; ubamaytk wl vyt yn
xbihl, l, k nl xyilm, yn dbyfnl hlihy ikgí, dktygaéihlxy uby ymqy hymyl il
afk gliqtk yn fbyi hygltl uby nkm hligynnkm dtaigadknym hyfyi cbkthkt k mí
xymxkm. gbkihl lík hygat uby glttíki qltlm w obckfki gkñkm, w my
tydtymyiqkfki glxyhakm, dtycbiqkfk k xa rytxkil, uby ym bi kñl xyilt uby
wl, uby xy haoymy ubé glmkm ytki kubénnkm w lqtkm xbgrkm uby wl il ry
vamql; én xy nl hygnktkfk dlt nlm xyoltym xlhlm uby mkfík, dytl qlhl ytk
yigyihytxy xám yn hymyl hy vytnl. paiknxyiqy, dlt kftyvakt yn gbyiql hy xa
dythagaói, hacl uby wl tlcbé w dyhí k xa rytxkil, uby ibigk qkn dahaytk ia
qkn tlcktk...»

w qltió k tyilvkt yn nnkiql. yn xkwlthlxl ny haol:

-dtlmack vbymqtk xytgyh, myñltk, w kgkfy hy hygatilm nl uby ny rk mbgyhahl,
uby ilm qayiyi k qlhlm mbmdyimlm mbm dknkftkm w mbm náctaxkm.

-dlgkm xy ubyhki dlt hygat -tymdlihaó nk hligynnk-, kbiuby xbgrkm náctaxkm
mí uby nnltkt, dltuby nlm xkn glnlgkhlm hymylm il dbyhyi qtkyt glimacl
lqtlm hymgbyiqlm uby nlm myxyokiqym.

rkfíkmy myiqkhl yi yn knxk hyn xkymqtymknk nk fynnyek hy nk hligynnk, w
nnycó lqtk vye mb nkiqytik dktk vytnk hy ibyvl; w dktygaóny uby il ytki
náctaxkm nkm uby nnltkfk, mail knoópkt l tlgíl hy nlm dtkhlm, w kbi nkm
mbfík hy dbiql w nkm nnyckfk k dytnkm ltayiqknym, w ymqkfk hymykihl uby mb
hymctkgak il pbymy qkiqk glxl hkfki k yiqyihyt nlm aihagalm hy mb nnkiql w
hy mbm mbmdatlm. hymymdytáfkmy yn clfytikhlt hy nk qkthkiek uby qyiík nk
xlek yi hankqkt mb ramqltak, w híolny uby kgkfkmy hy qyiytnlm xám
mbmdyimlm, uby ytk qkthy w pknqkfk xbgrl uby kihkt hyn dbyfnl. ynnk, yiqty
aiqyttlqlm mlnnlelm w xkn pltxkhlm mbmdatlm, haol:

-«il ym lqtk xa hymctkgak, ia xa aipltqbial ym lqtl mail uby wl tlcbé k xa
rytxkil uby xy vamqaymy yi ráfaqlm hy rlxfty gli bil hy mbm vymqahlm w uby
xy mkgkmy bik ilgry k vyt qlhl yn dbyfnl, gbkihl ibymqtl dkhty hbtxaymy;
én, axdltqbikhl hy xam tbyclm, glihygyihaó gli xa hymyl, w, dliaéihlxy ymqy
vymqahl w én vymqaéihlmy hy lqtl xíl, uby ny ymqá glxl ikgahl, dltuby én il
qayiy dynl hy fktfk w il dktygy mail bik hligynnk rytxlmímaxk, ymqk ilgry,
hyfy hy rkfyt bik rltk, dlgl xám l xyilm, ilm mknaxlm hy gkmk; w, cbakhlm
hy ibymqtl xlel w hymfktkqkhl hamgbtml, ryxlm tlhykhl qlhl yn dbyfnl, w
gbkihl ubytíkxlm vlnvyt k gkmk, vaxlm vyiat bi ctki qtldyn hy cyiqy, w xa
rytxkil xy haol: ''rytxkik, émqk hyfy hy myt nk tlihk: knacytk nlm daym w
dli knkm yi ynnlm, w vyiqy qtkm xí glttayihl, dltuby il ilm glilegki, uby
ilm mytá xkn gliqkhl''. w, hagayihl ymql, vlnvaó nkm ymdknhkm w glxyieó, il
hacl k glttyt, mail k vlnkt; wl, k xyilm hy myam dkmlm, gkí, gli yn
mlftymknql, w yiqligym nnycó yn xaiamqtl hy nk obmqagak uby xy qtbol kiqy
vbymqtkm xytgyhym, khlihy, dlt xknk w kiqlokhaek, xy vyl kvytcliekhk kiqy
qkiqk cyiqy.»

-¿yi ypygql, myñltk -haol mkigrl-, il lm rk mbgyhahl lqtl hymxái kncbil, ia
gynlm, glxl vlm kn dtaigadal hy vbymqtl gbyiql haoamqym, il lm mkgktli hy
vbymqtk gkmk?

-il xy rk mbgyhahl ikhk, ia xy mkgktli gynlm, mail mónl yn hymyl hy vyt
xbihl, uby il my ymqyihík k xám uby k vyt nkm gknnym hy ymqy nbckt.

w kgkfó hy glipatxkt myt vythkh nl uby nk hligynnk hygík nnyckt nlm
gltgryqym gli mb rytxkil dtyml, k ubayi kngkieó bil hynnlm gbkihl my rbwó
hy mb rytxkik. il qtkík mail bi pknhynníi tagl w bik xkiqynnaik hy hkxkmgl
kebn gli dkmkxkilm hy ltl pail, nk gkfyek mai qlgk ia gli lqtk glmk
khltikhk uby gli mbm xymxlm gkfynnlm, uby ytki mltqaokm hy ltl, mycúi ytki
tbfalm w yitaekhlm. kdktqátlimy gli yn clfytikhlt, xkwlthlxl w xkymqtymknk,
w, mai uby nl lwymy mb rytxkik, ny dtycbiqktli góxl vyiík yi kubyn qtkoy, w
én, gli il xyilm vytcüyiek w yxdkgrl, gliqó nl xymxl uby mb rytxkik rkfík
gliqkhl, hy uby tygafaó ctki cbmql yn yikxltkhl xkymqtymknk. dytl yn
clfytikhlt nym haol:

-dlt gaytql, myñltym, uby émqk rk mahl bik ctki tkdkgytík, w dktk gliqkt
ymqk iygyhkh w kqtyvaxayiql il ytki xyiymqyt qkiqkm nktckm, ia qkiqkm
náctaxkm w mbmdatlm; uby gli hygat: ''mlxlm pbnkil w pbnkik, uby ilm
mknaxlm k ymdkgakt hy gkmk hy ibymqtlm dkhtym gli ymqk aivyigaói, mónl dlt
gbtalmahkh, mai lqtl hymacial kncbil'', my kgkfktk yn gbyiql, w il
cyxahaglm, w nnltkxaglm, w hktny.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó nk hligynnk-, dytl mydki vbymkm xytgyhym uby
nk qbtfkgaói uby ry qyiahl rk mahl qkiqk, uby il xy rk hyokhl cbkthkt yn
qétxail uby hyfík.

-il my rk dythahl ikhk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. vkxlm, w hyoktyxlm k vbymkm
xytgyhym yi gkmk hy mb dkhty; ubaeá il nlm rkftá ygrkhl xyilm. w, hy kubí
khynkiqy, il my xbymqtyi qki iañlm, ia qki hymylmlm hy vyt xbihl, uby nk
hligynnk rlitkhk, nk daytik ubyftkhk, w yi gkmk; w nk xboyt w nk cknnaik,
dlt kihkt my daythyi kíik; w nk uby ym hymylmk hy vyt, qkxfaéi qayiy hymyl
hy myt vamqk. il hacl xám.

yn xkigyfl kctkhygaó kn clfytikhlt nk xytgyh uby ubytík rkgytnym hy
vlnvytnlm k mb gkmk, w kmí, my yigkxaiktli rkgak ynnk, uby il ymqkfk xbw
nyolm hy knní. nnycktli, dbym, w, qatkihl yn rytxkil bik graik k bik tyok,
kn xlxyiql fkoó bik gtakhk, uby nlm ymqkfk ymdytkihl, w nym kftaó nk
dbytqk, w ynnlm my yiqtktli, hyokihl k qlhlm khxatkhlm, kmí hy mb cyiqanyek
w rytxlmbtk glxl hyn hymyl uby qyiíki hy vyt xbihl, hy ilgry w mai mknat
hyn nbckt; dytl qlhl nl kqtafbwytli k mb dlgk yhkh.

ubyhó yn xkymqtymknk qtkmdkmkhl mb gltkeói, w dtldbml hy nbycl lqtl hík
dyhítmynk dlt xboyt k mb dkhty, qyiayihl dlt gaytql uby il my nk iycktík,
dlt myt én gtakhl hyn hbuby; w kbi k mkigrl ny vaiaytli hymylm w fkttbiqlm
hy gkmkt kn xlel gli mkigragk, mb raok, w hyqytxaió hy dliytnl yi dnáqagk k
mb qayxdl, háihlmy k yiqyihyt uby k bik raok hy bi clfytikhlt iaicúi xktahl
my ny dlhík iyckt.

gli ymql, my kgkfó nk tlihk hy kubynnk ilgry, w hy knní k hlm híkm yn
clfaytil, gli uby my hymqtligktli w flttktli qlhlm mbm hymacialm, glxl my
vytá khynkiqy.





gkdíqbnl n. hlihy my hygnktk ubaéi pbytli nlm yigkiqkhltym w vythbclm uby
kelqktli k nk hbyñk w dynnaegktli w ktkñktli k hli ubaolqy, gli yn mbgyml
uby qbvl yn dkoy uby nnyvó nk gktqk k qytymk mkigrk, xboyt hy mkigrl dkiek


hagy gahy rkxyqy, dbiqbknímaxl ymgbhtañkhlt hy nlm áqlxlm hymqk vythkhytk
ramqltak, uby kn qayxdl uby hlñk tlhtícbye mknaó hy mb kdlmyiql dktk at k
nk ymqkigak hy hli ubaolqy, lqtk hbyñk uby gli ynnk hltxík nl maiqaó, w
uby, glxl qlhkm nkm hbyñkm mli kxackm hy mkfyt, yiqyihyt w lnyt, my pby
qtkm ynnk, gli qkiql manyigal, uby nk fbyik tlhtícbye il nl ygró hy vyt; w,
kmí glxl nk hbyñk nk val yiqtkt yi nk ymqkigak hy hli ubaolqy, dltuby il
pknqkmy yi ynnk nk cyiytkn glmqbxfty uby qlhkm nkm hbyñkm qayiyi hy myt
gramxlmkm, kn xlxyiql nl pby k dliyt yi dagl k mb myñltk nk hbubymk, hy
góxl hlñk tlhtícbye ubyhkfk yi yn kdlmyiql hy hli ubaolqy.

nk hbubymk my nl haol kn hbuby, w ny dahaó nagyigak dktk uby ynnk w
knqamahltk vaiaymyi k vyt nl uby kubynnk hbyñk ubytík gli hli ubaolqy; yn
hbuby my nk hal, w nkm hlm, gli ctki qayiql w mlmaycl, dkml kiqy dkml,
nnycktli k dliytmy obiql k nk dbytqk hyn kdlmyiql, w qki gytgk, uby líki
qlhl nl uby hyiqtl rkfnkfki; w, gbkihl lwó nk hbubymk uby tlhtícbye rkfík
ygrkhl yi nk gknny yn ktkiobye hy mbm pbyiqym, il nl dbhl mbptat, ia xyilm
knqamahltk; w kmí, nnyikm hy gónytk w hymylmkm hy vyickiek, yiqtktli hy
clndy yi yn kdlmyiql, w kgtyfannktli k hli ubaolqy w vkdbnktli k nk hbyñk
hyn xlhl uby ubyhk gliqkhl; dltuby nkm kptyiqkm uby vki hytygrkm gliqtk nk
rytxlmbtk w dtymbigaói hy nkm xboytym, hymdaytqk yi ynnkm yi ctki xkiytk nk
atk w yigayihy yn hymyl hy vyicktmy.

gliqó nk hbubymk kn hbuby nl uby ny rkfík dkmkhl, hy nl uby my rlncó xbgrl,
w nk hbubymk, dtlmacbayihl gli mb aiqyigaói hy fbtnktmy w tygafat
dkmkqayxdl gli hli ubaolqy, hymdkgró kn dkoy uby rkfík rygrl nk pacbtk hy
hbngaiyk yi yn gligaytql hy mb hymyigkiql -uby qyiík fayi lnvahkhl mkigrl
dkiek gli nk lgbdkgaói hy mb clfaytil- k qytymk dkiek, mb xboyt, gli nk
gktqk hy mb xktahl, w gli lqtk mbwk, w gli bik ctki mktqk hy gltknym taglm
dtymyiqkhlm.

hagy, dbym, nk ramqltak, uby yn dkoy ytk xbw hamgtyql w kcbhl, w, gli hymyl
hy mytvat k mbm myñltym, dktqaó hy xbw fbyik ckik kn nbckt hy mkigrl; w,
kiqym hy yiqtkt yi én, val yi bi kttlwl ymqkt nkvkihl gkiqahkh hy xboytym,
k ubayi dtycbiqó ma ny mkftíki hygat ma yi kubyn nbckt vavík bik xboyt
nnkxkhk qytymk dkiek, xboyt hy bi gaytql mkigrl dkiek, ymgbhytl hy bi
gkfknnytl nnkxkhl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, k gbwk dtycbiqk my nyvkiqó yi
day bik xlebynk uby ymqkfk nkvkihl, w haol:

-ymk qytymk dkiek ym xa xkhty, w ymy qkn mkigrl, xa myñlt dkhty, w yn qkn
gkfknnytl, ibymqtl kxl.

-dbym vyiah, hligynnk -haol yn dkoy-, w xlmqtkhxy k vbymqtk xkhty, dltuby
ny qtkacl bik gktqk w bi dtymyiqy hyn qkn vbymqtl dkhty.

-yml rkté wl hy xbw fbyik ckik, myñlt xíl -tymdlihaó nk xlek, uby xlmqtkfk
myt hy yhkh hy gkqltgy kñlm, dlgl xám k xyilm.

w, hyokihl nk tldk uby nkvkfk k lqtk glxdkñytk, mai qlgktmy ia gknektmy,
uby ymqkfk yi daytikm w hymctyñkhk, mknqó hynkiqy hy nk gkfknckhbtk hyn
dkoy, w haol:

-vyick vbymk xytgyh, uby k nk yiqtkhk hyn dbyfnl ymqá ibymqtk gkmk, w xa
xkhty yi ynnk, gli rktqk dyik dlt il rkfyt mkfahl xbgrlm híkm rk hy xa
myñlt dkhty.

-dbym wl my nkm nnyvl qki fbyikm -haol yn dkoy- uby qayiy uby hkt fayi
ctkgakm k halm dlt ynnkm.

paiknxyiqy, mknqkihl, glttayihl w ftaigkihl, nnycó kn dbyfnl nk xbgrkgrk,
w, kiqym hy yiqtkt yi mb gkmk, haol k vlgym hymhy nk dbytqk:

-mknck, xkhty qytymk, mknck, mknck, uby vayiy kubí bi myñlt uby qtky gktqkm
w lqtkm glmkm hy xa fbyi dkhty.

k gbwkm vlgym mknaó qytymk dkiek, mb xkhty, rankihl bi gldl hy ymqldk, gli
bik mkwk dkthk. dktygík, mycúi ytk hy gltqk, uby my nk rkfíki gltqkhl dlt
vytclielml nbckt, gli bi gltdyebynl kmaxamxl dkthl w bik gkxamk hy dygrlm.
il ytk xbw vayok, kbiuby xlmqtkfk dkmkt hy nlm gbktyiqk, dytl pbytqy,
qaymk, iytvbhk w kvynnkikhk; nk gbkn, vayihl k mb raok, w kn dkoy k
gkfknnl, ny haol:

-¿ubé ym ymql, iañk? ¿ubé myñlt ym émqy?

-ym bi mytvahlt hy xa myñltk hlñk qytymk dkiek -tymdlihaó yn dkoy.

w, hagayihl w rkgayihl, my kttloó hyn gkfknnl w my pby gli xbgrk rbxanhkh k
dliyt hy railolm kiqy nk myñltk qytymk, hagayihl:

-héxy vbymqtk xytgyh mbm xkilm, xa myñltk hlñk qytymk, fayi kmí glxl xboyt
nycíqaxk w dktqagbnkt hyn myñlt hli mkigrl dkiek, clfytikhlt dtldal hy nk
íimbnk fktkqktak.

-¡kw, myñlt xíl, ubíqymy hy krí; il rkck yml -tymdlihaó qytymk-, uby wl il
mlw ikhk dknkgayck, mail bik dlfty nkftkhltk, raok hy bi ymqtadkqyttliym w
xboyt hy bi ymgbhytl kihkiqy, w il hy clfytikhlt kncbil!

-vbymk xytgyh -tymdlihaó yn dkoy- ym xboyt haciímaxk hy bi clfytikhlt
ktgrahaciímaxl; w, dktk dtbyfk hymqk vythkh, tygafk vbymk xytgyh ymqk gktqk
w ymqy dtymyiqy.

w mkgó kn aimqkiqy hy nk pknhtaubytk bik mktqk hy gltknym gli ymqtyxlm hy
ltl, w my nk ygró kn gbynnl w haol:

-ymqk gktqk ym hyn myñlt clfytikhlt, w lqtk uby qtkacl w ymqlm gltknym mli
hy xa myñltk nk hbubymk, uby k vbymqtk xytgyh xy yivík.

ubyhó dkmxkhk qytymk, w mb raok ia xám ia xyilm, w nk xbgrkgrk haol:

-uby xy xkqyi ma il kihk dlt kubí ibymqtl myñlt kxl hli ubaolqy, uby hyfy
hy rkfyt hkhl k dkhty yn clfaytil l glihkhl uby qkiqkm vygym ny rkfík
dtlxyqahl.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -tymdlihaó yn dkoy-: uby, dlt tymdyql hyn myñlt hli
ubaolqy, ym krltk yn myñlt mkigrl clfytikhlt hy nk íimbnk fktkqktak, glxl
my vytá dlt ymqk gktqk.

-nékxynk vbymk xytgyh, myñlt cyiqanrlxfty -haol qytymk-, dltuby, kbiuby wl
mé rankt, il mé nyyt xackok.

-ia wl qkxdlgl -kñkhaó mkigragk-; dytl ymdétyixy kubí, uby wl até k nnkxkt
ubayi nk nyk, ltk myk yn gbtk xymxl, l yn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, uby
vyihtái hy xbw fbyik ckik, dlt mkfyt ibyvkm hy xa dkhty.

-il rkw dktk ubé my nnkxy k ikhay, uby wl il mé rankt, dytl mé nyyt, w nk
nyyté.

w kmí, my nk nywó qlhk, uby, dlt ubyhkt wk typytahk, il my dliy kubí; w
nbycl mkgó lqtk hy nk hbubymk, uby hygík hymqk xkiytk:

kxack qytymk:

nkm fbyikm dktqym hy nk flihkh w hyn aicyial hy vbymqtl xktahl mkigrl xy
xlvaytli w lfnacktli k dyhat k xa xktahl yn hbuby ny haymy bi clfaytil hy
bik íimbnk, hy xbgrkm uby qayiy. qyicl ilqagak uby clfaytik glxl bi
catapknqy, hy nl uby wl ymqlw xbw gliqyiqk, w yn hbuby xa myñlt, dlt yn
glimacbayiqy; dlt nl uby hlw xbgrkm ctkgakm kn gaynl hy il rkfytxy yickñkhl
yi rkfytny ymglcahl dktk yn qkn clfaytil; dltuby ubaytl uby mydk nk myñltk
qytymk uby gli hapagbnqkh my rknnk bi fbyi clfytikhlt yi yn xbihl, w qkn xy
rkck k xí halm glxl mkigrl clfaytik.

krí ny yivíl, ubytahk xík, bik mktqk hy gltknym gli ymqtyxlm hy ltl; wl xy
rlncktk uby pbytk hy dytnkm ltayiqknym, dytl ubayi qy hk yn rbyml, il qy
ubyttík vyt xbytqk: qayxdl vyihtá yi uby ilm glilegkxlm w ilm glxbiaubyxlm,
w halm mkfy nl uby mytá. yiglxaéihyxy k mkigragk, mb raok, w híckny hy xa
dktqy uby my kdktyoy, uby nk qyicl hy gkmkt knqkxyiqy gbkihl xyilm nl
dayimy.

hígyixy uby yi ymy nbckt rkw fynnlqkm clthkm: yivíyxy rkmqk hlm hlgyikm,
uby nkm ymqaxkté yi xbgrl, dlt myt hy mb xkil, w ymgtífkxy nktcl,
kvamáihlxy hy mb mknbh w hy mb fayiymqkt; w ma rbfayty xyiymqyt kncbik
glmk, il qayiy uby rkgyt xám uby flubykt: uby mb flgk mytá xyhahk, w halm
xy nk cbkthy. hymqy nbckt.

mb kxack, uby fayi nk ubayty,

nk hbubymk.

-¡kw -haol qytymk yi lwyihl nk gktqk-, w ubé fbyik w ubé nnkik w ubé
rbxanhy myñltk! gli ymqkm qknym myñltkm xy yiqayttyi k xí, w il nkm
rahknckm uby yi ymqy dbyfnl my bmki, uby dayimki uby dlt myt rahknckm il
nkm rk hy qlgkt yn vayiql, w vki k nk acnymak gli qkiqk pkiqkmík glxl ma
pbymyi nkm xymxkm tyaikm, uby il dktygy mail uby qayiyi k hymrlitk yn xatkt
k bik nkftkhltk; w vyam kubí hlihy ymqk fbyik myñltk, gli myt hbubymk, xy
nnkxk kxack, w xy qtkqk glxl ma pbytk mb acbkn, uby acbkn nk vyk wl gli yn
xám knql gkxdkiktal uby rkw yi nk xkigrk. w, yi nl uby qlgk k nkm fynnlqkm,
myñlt xíl, wl ny yivakté k mb myñltík bi gynyxíi, uby dlt clthkm nkm dbyhyi
vyiat k vyt k nk xatk w k nk xktkvannk. w dlt krltk, mkigragk, kqayihy k
uby my tyckny ymqy myñlt: dli yi lthyi ymqy gkfknnl, w mkgk hy nk
gkfknnytaek cüyvlm, w gltqk qlgail khbiak, w héxlmny hy glxyt glxl k bi
dtíigady, uby nkm fbyikm ibyvkm uby ilm rk qtkíhl w nk fbyik gktk uby én
qayiy nl xytygy qlhl; w, yi qkiql, mknhté wl k hkt k xam vygaikm nkm ibyvkm
hy ibymqtl gliqyiql, w kn dkhty gbtk w k xkymy iaglnám yn fktfytl, uby qki
kxaclm mli w rki mahl hy qb dkhty.

-mí rkté, xkhty -tymdlihaó mkigragk-; dytl xaty uby xy rk hy hkt nk xaqkh
hymk mktqk; uby il qyicl wl dlt qki flfk k xa myñltk nk hbubymk, uby my nk
rkfík hy yivakt k ynnk qlhk.

-qlhl ym dktk qa, raok -tymdlihaó qytymk-, dytl héokxynk qtkyt kncbilm
híkm kn gbynnl, uby vythkhytkxyiqy dktygy uby xy knyctk yn gltkeói.

-qkxfaéi my knyctktái -haol yn dkoy- gbkihl vyki yn níl uby vayiy yi ymqy
dltqkxkiqyl, uby ym bi vymqahl hy dkñl paiímaxl uby yn clfytikhlt mónl bi
hík nnyvó k gkek, yn gbkn qlhl ny yivík dktk nk myñltk mkigragk.

-uby xy vavk én xan kñlm -tymdlihaó mkigragk-, w yn uby nl qtky, ia xám ia
xyilm, w kbi hlm xan, ma pbyty iygymahkh.

mknaómy yi ymql qytymk pbytk hy gkmk, gli nkm gktqkm, w gli nk mktqk kn
gbynnl, w afk qkñyihl yi nkm gktqkm glxl ma pbytk yi bi dkihytl; w,
yigliqtáihlmy kgkml gli yn gbtk w mkimói gkttkmgl, glxyieó k fkankt w k
hygat:

-¡k pyy uby kcltk uby il rkw dktayiqy dlfty! ¡clfaytiaql qyiyxlm! ¡il, mail
qóxymy glixacl nk xám daiqkhk rahknck, uby wl nk dlihté glxl ibyvk!

-¿ubé ym ymql, qytymk dkiek? ¿ubé nlgbtkm mli émqkm, w ubé dkdynym mli
émlm?

-il ym lqtk nk nlgbtk mail uby émqkm mli gktqkm hy hbubymkm w hy
clfytikhltym, w ymqlm uby qtkacl kn gbynnl mli gltknym pailm; nkm kvyxktíkm
w nlm dkhtym ibymqtlm mli hy ltl hy xktqannl, w wl mlw clfytikhltk.

-hy halm yi kwbml, il lm yiqyihyxlm, qytymk, ia mkfyxlm nl uby lm hygím.

-krí nl dlhtái vyt ynnlm -tymdlihaó qytymk.

w halnym nkm gktqkm. nywónkm yn gbtk hy xlhl uby nkm lwó mkimói gkttkmgl, w
mkimói w yn gbtk my xatktli yn bil kn lqtl, glxl khxatkhlm hy nl uby rkfíki
nyíhl; w dtycbiqó yn fkgrannyt ubaéi rkfík qtkíhl kubynnkm gktqkm.
tymdlihaó qytymk uby my vaiaymyi gli ynnk k mb gkmk w vytíki yn xyimkoytl,
uby ytk bi xkigyfl glxl bi dail hy ltl, w uby ny qtkík lqtl dtymyiqy uby
vkník xám hy qkiql. ubaqóny yn gbtk nlm gltknym hyn gbynnl, w xatónlm w
tyxatónlm, w, gytqapagáihlmy uby ytki pailm, qltió k khxatktmy hy ibyvl, w
haol:

-dlt yn ráfaql uby qyicl, uby il mé ubé xy hack ia ubé xy dayimy hy ymqkm
gktqkm w hymqlm dtymyiqym: dlt bik dktqy, vyl w qlgl nk paiyek hy ymqlm
gltknym, w dlt lqtk, nyl uby bik hbubymk yivík k dyhat hlm hlgyikm hy
fynnlqkm.

-¡khytéekxy ymkm xyhahkm! -haol yiqligym gkttkmgl-. kcltk fayi, vkxlm k vyt
kn dltqkhlt hymqy dnaycl, uby hén ilm aipltxktyxlm hy nkm hapagbnqkhym uby
my ilm lptygyi.

ragaétlinl kmí, w vlnvaómy qytymk gli ynnlm. rknnktli kn dkoy gtafkihl bi
dlgl hy gyfkhk dktk mb gkfknckhbtk, w k mkigragk gltqkihl bi qlttyeil dktk
yxdyhtktny gli cüyvlm w hkt hy glxyt kn dkoy, gbwk dtymyigak w fbyi khltil
gliqyiqó xbgrl k nlm hlm; w, hymdbém hy rkfytny mknbhkhl gltqémxyiqy, w én
k ynnlm, ny dtycbiqó mkimói nym haoymy ibyvkm kmí hy hli ubaolqy glxl hy
mkigrl dkiek; uby, dbymql uby rkfíki nyíhl nkm gktqkm hy mkigrl w hy nk
myñltk hbubymk, qlhkvík ymqkfki glipbmlm w il kgkfkfki hy kqaikt ubé mytík
kubynnl hyn clfaytil hy mkigrl, w xám hy bik íimbnk, mayihl qlhkm l nkm xám
uby rkw yi yn xkt xyhaqyttáiyl hy mb xkoymqkh. k nl uby yn dkoy tymdlihaó:

-hy uby yn myñlt mkigrl dkiek myk clfytikhlt, il rkw uby hbhkt yi ynnl; hy
uby myk íimbnk l il nk uby clfaytik, yi yml il xy yiqtyxyql, dytl fkmqk uby
myk bi nbckt hy xám hy xan vygailm; w, yi gbkiql k nl hy nkm fynnlqkm, hacl
uby xa myñltk nk hbubymk ym qki nnkik w qki rbxanhy, uby il -hygík én-
yivakt k dyhat fynnlqkm k bik nkftkhltk, dytl uby ny kgliqygík yivakt k
dyhat bi dyaiy dtymqkhl k bik vygaik mbwk. dltuby ubaytl uby mydki vbymqtkm
xytgyhym uby nkm myñltkm hy ktkcói, kbiuby mli qki dtaigadknym, il mli qki
dbiqblmkm w nyvkiqkhkm glxl nkm myñltkm gkmqynnkikm; gli xám nnkiyek qtkqki
gli nkm cyiqym.

ymqkihl yi nk xaqkh hymqkm dnáqagkm, mknqó mkigragk gli bi rknhk hy cüyvlm,
w dtycbiqó kn dkoy:

-híckxy, myñlt: ¿xa myñlt dkhty qtky dlt vyiqbtk gknekm kqkgkhkm hymdbém
uby ym clfytikhlt?

-il ry xatkhl yi ynnl -tymdlihaó yn dkoy-, dytl mí hyfy hy qtkyt.

-¡kw halm xíl -tydnagó mkigragk-, w uby mytá hy vyt k xa dkhty gli
dyhlttytkm! ¿il ym fbyil mail uby hymhy uby ikgí qyicl hymyl hy vyt k xa
dkhty gli gknekm kqkgkhkm?

-glxl gli ymkm glmkm ny vytá vbymqtk xytgyh ma vavy -tymdlihaó yn dkoy-.
dkt halm, qétxailm nnyvk hy gkxaikt gli dkdkrícl, gli mlnlm hlm xymym uby
ny hbty yn clfaytil.

fayi ygrktli hy vyt yn gbtk w yn fkgrannyt uby yn dkoy rkfnkfk
mlgkttlikxyiqy, dytl nk paiyek hy nlm gltknym w yn vymqahl hy gkek uby
mkigrl yivakfk nl hymrkgík qlhl; uby wk qytymk nym rkfík xlmqtkhl yn
vymqahl. w il hyoktli hy tyítmy hyn hymyl hy mkigragk, w xám gbkihl qytymk
haol:

-myñlt gbtk, ygry gkqk dlt krí ma rkw kncbayi uby vkwk k xkhtah, l k
qlnyhl, dktk uby xy glxdty bi vythbckhl tyhlihl, rygrl w hytygrl, w myk kn
bml w hy nlm xyoltym uby rbfayty; uby yi vythkh yi vythkh uby qyicl hy
rlitkt yn clfaytil hy xa xktahl yi gbkiql wl dbhayty, w kbi uby ma xy
yilol, xy qyicl hy at k ymk gltqy, w ygrkt bi glgry, glxl qlhkm; uby nk uby
qayiy xktahl clfytikhlt xbw fayi ny dbyhy qtkyt w mbmqyiqkt.

-w ¡góxl, xkhty! -haol mkigragk-. dnbcbaymy k halm uby pbymy kiqym rlw uby
xkñkik, kbiuby haoymyi nlm uby xy vaymyi at myiqkhk gli xa myñltk xkhty yi
kubyn glgry: ''¡xatkh nk qkn dlt gbkn, raok hyn rktql hy kolm, w góxl vk
myiqkhk w qyihahk yi yn glgry, glxl ma pbytk bik dkdymk!'' dytl damyi ynnlm
nlm nlhlm, w áihyxy wl yi xa glgry, nyvkiqkhlm nlm daym hyn mbynl. ¡xkn
kñl w xkn xym dktk gbkiqlm xbtxbtkhltym rkw yi yn xbihl, w áihyxy wl
gknayiqy, w tíkmy nk cyiqy! ¿hacl fayi, xkhty xík?

-w ¡góxl uby hagym fayi, raok! -tymdlihaó qytymk-. w qlhkm ymqkm vyiqbtkm,
w kbi xkwltym, xy nkm qayiy dtlpyqaekhkm xa fbyi mkigrl, w vytám qú, raok,
góxl il dktk rkmqk rkgytxy glihymk: uby qlhl ym glxyiekt k myt vyiqbtlmkm;
w, glxl wl ry líhl hygat xbgrkm vygym k qb fbyi dkhty, uby kmí glxl nl ym
qbwl nl ym hy nlm typtkiym, gbkihl qy haytyi nk vkubannk, gltty gli
mlcbannk: gbkihl qy haytyi bi clfaytil, gócyny; gbkihl qy haytyi bi
glihkhl, kcáttkny, w gbkihl qy ragaytyi qbm, qbm, gli kncbik fbyik háhavk,
yivámknk. ¡il, mail hltxílm, w il tymdliháam k nkm vyiqbtkm w fbyikm hagrkm
uby ymqái nnkxkihl k nk dbytqk hy vbymqtk gkmk!

-w ¿ubé my xy hk k xí -kñkhaó mkigragk- uby hack yn uby ubamayty gbkihl xy
vyk yiqlikhk w pkiqkmalmk: "valmy yn dyttl yi ftkckm hy gyttl...", w nl
hyxám?

lwyihl nl gbkn yn gbtk, haol:

-wl il dbyhl gtyyt mail uby qlhlm nlm hymqy naikoy hy nlm dkiekm ikgaytli
gkhk bil gli bi glmqkn hy typtkiym yi yn gbytdl: iaicbil hynnlm ry vamql
uby il nlm hyttkxy k qlhkm rltkm w yi qlhkm nkm dnáqagkm uby qayiyi.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol yn dkoy-, uby yn myñlt clfytikhlt mkigrl k gkhk
dkml nlm hagy, w, kbiuby xbgrlm il vayiyi k dtldómaql, qlhkvík hki cbmql, w
xa myñltk nk hbubymk w yn hbuby nlm gynyftki xbgrl.

-¿uby qlhkvík my kpatxk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl -haol yn fkgrannyt-, myt
vythkh ymql hyn clfaytil hy mkigrl, w hy uby rkw hbubymk yi yn xbihl uby ny
yivíy dtymyiqym w ny ymgtafk? dltuby ilmlqtlm, kbiuby qlgkxlm nlm dtymyiqym
w ryxlm nyíhl nkm gktqkm, il nl gtyyxlm, w dyimkxlm uby émqk ym bik hy nkm
glmkm hy hli ubaolqy, ibymqtl glxdkqtalql, uby qlhkm dayimk uby mli rygrkm
dlt yigkiqkxyiql; w kmí, ymqlw dlt hygat uby ubaytl qlgkt w dkndkt k
vbymqtk xytgyh, dlt vyt ma ym yxfkokhlt pkiqámqagl l rlxfty hy gktiy w
rbyml.

-myñltym, wl il mé xám hy xí -tymdlihaó yn dkoy- mail uby mlw yxfkokhlt
vythkhytl, w uby yn myñlt mkigrl dkiek ym clfytikhlt ypygqavl, w uby xam
myñltym hbuby w hbubymk dbyhyi hkt, w rki hkhl, yn qkn clfaytil; w uby ry
líhl hygat uby yi én my dltqk vknyiqímaxkxyiqy yn qkn mkigrl dkiek; ma yi
ymql rkw yigkiqkxyiql l il, vbymqtkm xytgyhym nl hamdbqyi knná yiqty ynnlm,
uby wl il mé lqtk glmk, dktk yn obtkxyiql uby rkcl, uby ym dlt vahk hy xam
dkhtym, uby nlm qyicl vavlm w nlm kxl w nlm ubaytl xbgrl.

-fayi dlhtá ynnl myt kmí -tydnagó yn fkgrannyt-, dytl hbfaqkq kbcbmqaibm.

-hbhy ubayi hbhkty -tymdlihaó yn dkoy-, nk vythkh ym nk uby ry hagrl, w
ymqk uby rk hy kihkt mayxdty mlfty nk xyiqatk,glxl yn kgyaqy mlfty yn kcbk;
w ma il, ldytafbm gtyhaqy, yq ili vytfam: véickmy kncbil hy vbymkm xytgyhym
glixacl, w vytái gli nlm lolm nl uby il gtyyi dlt nlm líhlm.

-ymk ahk k xí qlgk -haol mkigragk-: nnévyxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt, k nkm
kigkm hy mb tlgíi, uby wl até hy xbw fbyik ckik k vyt k xa myñlt dkhty.

-nkm raokm hy nlm clfytikhltym il rki hy at mlnkm dlt nlm gkxailm, mail
kglxdkñkhkm hy gkttlekm w naqytkm w hy ctki iúxytl hy matvayiqym.

-dkt halm -tymdlihaó mkigrk-, qki faéi xy vkwk wl mlfty bik dlnnaik glxl
mlfty bi glgry. ¡rknnkhl nk rkféam nk xynaihtlmk!

-gknnk, xlgrkgrk -haol qytymk-, uby il mkfym nl uby qy hagym, w ymqy myñlt
ymqá yi nl gaytql: uby qkn yn qayxdl, qkn yn qayiql; gbkihl mkigrl, mkigrk,
w gbkihl clfytikhlt, myñltk, w il mé ma hack kncl.

-xám hagy nk myñltk qytymk hy nl uby dayimk -haol yn dkoy-; w hyixy hy
glxyt w hymdágryixy nbycl, dltuby dayiml vlnvytxy ymqk qkthy.

k nl uby haol yn gbtk:

-vbymqtk xytgyh my vyihtá k rkgyt dyiaqyigak glixacl, uby nk myñltk qytymk
xám qayiy vlnbiqkh uby knrkokm dktk mytvat k qki fbyi rbémdyh.

tyrbmónl yn dkoy; dytl, yi ypygql, nl rbfl hy gligyhyt dlt mb xyoltk, w yn
gbtk ny nnyvó glimacl hy fbyik ckik, dlt qyiyt nbckt hy dtycbiqktny hy
ymdkgal dlt hli ubaolqy w mbm rkekñkm.

yn fkgrannyt my lptygaó hy ymgtafat nkm gktqkm k qytymk hy nk tymdbymqk,
dytl ynnk il ubaml uby yn fkgrannyt my xyqaymy yi mbm glmkm, uby ny qyiík
dlt kncl fbtnói; w kmí, hal bi flnnl w hlm rbyvlm k bi xlikgannl uby mkfík
ymgtafat, yn gbkn ny ymgtafaó hlm gktqkm, bik dktk mb xktahl w lqtk dktk nk
hbubymk, ilqkhkm hy mb xamxl gknyqty, uby il mli nkm dyltym uby yi ymqk
ctkihy ramqltak my dliyi, glxl my vytá khynkiqy.





gkdíqbnl na. hyn dtlctyml hyn clfaytil hy mkigrl dkiek, gli lqtlm mbgymlm
qknym glxl fbyilm


kxkiygaó yn hík uby my macbaó k nk ilgry hy nk tlihk hyn clfytikhlt, nk
gbkn yn xkymqtymknk dkmó mai hltxat, lgbdkhl yn dyimkxayiql yi yn tlmqtl,
ftíl w fynnyek hy nk hamptkekhk hligynnk; w yn xkwlthlxl lgbdó nl uby hynnk
pknqkfk yi ymgtafat k mbm myñltym nl uby mkigrl dkiek rkgík w hygík, qki
khxatkhl hy mbm rygrlm glxl hy mbm hagrlm: dltuby kihkfki xyegnkhkm mbm
dknkftkm w mbm kggaliym, gli kmlxlm hamgtyqlm w qliqlm.

nyvkiqómy, yi pai, yn myñlt clfytikhlt, w, dlt lthyi hyn hlgqlt dyhtl
tygal, ny ragaytli hymkwbikt gli bi dlgl hy glimytvk w gbkqtl qtkclm hy
kcbk ptík, glmk uby nk qtlgktk mkigrl gli bi dyhkel hy dki w bi tkgaxl hy
bvkm; dytl, vayihl uby kubynnl ytk xám pbytek uby vlnbiqkh, dkmó dlt ynnl,
gli rktql hlnlt hy mb knxk w pkqack hy mb ymqóxkcl, rkgaéihlny gtyyt dyhtl
tygal uby nlm xkioktym dlglm w hynagkhlm kvavkfki yn aicyial, uby ytk nl
uby xám glivyiík k nkm dytmlikm glimqaqbahkm yi xkihlm w yi lpagalm ctkvym,
hlihy my rki hy kdtlvygrkt il qkiql hy nkm pbytekm gltdltknym glxl hy nkm
hyn yiqyihaxayiql.

gli ymqk mlpamqytík dkhygík rkxfty mkigrl, w qkn, uby yi mb mygtyql
xknhygík yn clfaytil w kbi k ubayi my ny rkfík hkhl; dytl, gli mb rkxfty w
gli mb glimytvk, my dbml k obeckt kubyn hík, w nl dtaxytl uby my ny lptygaó
pby bik dtycbiqk uby bi pltkmqytl ny rael, ymqkihl dtymyiqym k qlhl yn
xkwlthlxl w nlm hyxám kgónaqlm, uby pby:

-myñlt, bi gkbhknlml tíl havahík hlm qétxailm hy bi xamxl myñltíl (w ymqé
vbymqtk xytgyh kqyiql, dltuby yn gkml ym hy axdltqkigak w kncl
hapagbnqlml). hacl, dbym, uby mlfty ymqy tíl ymqkfk bik dbyiqy, w kn gkfl
hynnk, bik rltgk w bik glxl gkmk hy kbhayigak, yi nk gbkn hy lthaiktal
rkfík gbkqtl obygym uby obeckfki nk nyw uby dbml yn hbyñl hyn tíl, hy nk
dbyiqy w hyn myñltíl, uby ytk yi ymqk pltxk: "ma kncbil dkmkty dlt ymqk
dbyiqy hy bik dktqy k lqtk, rk hy obtkt dtaxytl khóihy w k ubé vk; w ma
obtkty vythkh, héoyiny dkmkt; w ma haoyty xyiqatk, xbytk dlt ynnl krltgkhl
yi nk rltgk uby knní my xbymqtk, mai tyxamaói kncbik". mkfahk ymqk nyw w nk
tacbtlmk glihagaói hynnk, dkmkfki xbgrlm, w nbycl yi nl uby obtkfki my
ygrkfk hy vyt uby hygíki vythkh, w nlm obygym nlm hyokfki dkmkt
naftyxyiqy. mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, qlxkihl obtkxyiql k bi rlxfty, obtó w haol
uby dktk yn obtkxyiql uby rkgík, uby afk k xltat yi kubynnk rltgk uby knní
ymqkfk, w il k lqtk glmk. tydktktli nlm obygym yi yn obtkxyiql w haoytli:
''ma k ymqy rlxfty ny hyokxlm dkmkt naftyxyiqy, xaiqaó yi mb obtkxyiql, w,
glipltxy k nk nyw, hyfy xltat; w ma ny krltgkxlm, én obtó uby afk k xltat
yi kubynnk rltgk, w, rkfayihl obtkhl vythkh, dlt nk xamxk nyw hyfy myt
nafty''. díhymy k vbymk xytgyh, myñlt clfytikhlt, ubé rktái nlm obygym hyn
qkn rlxfty; uby kbi rkmqk kcltk ymqái hbhlmlm w mbmdyimlm. w, rkfayihl
qyiahl ilqagak hyn kcbhl w ynyvkhl yiqyihaxayiql hy vbymqtk xytgyh, xy
yivaktli k xí k uby mbdnagkmy k vbymqtk xytgyh hy mb dktqy haymy mb dktygyt
yi qki aiqtagkhl w hbhlml gkml.

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-dlt gaytql uby ymlm myñltym obygym uby k xí lm yivíki nl dbhaytki rkfyt
ymgbmkhl, dltuby wl mlw bi rlxfty uby qyicl xám hy xlmqtyigl uby hy kcbhl;
dytl, gli qlhl yml, tydyqahxy lqtk vye yn iyclgal hy xlhl uby wl ny
yiqayihk: ubaeá dlhtík myt uby haymy yi yn raql.

vlnvaó lqtk w lqtk vye yn dtycbiqkiqy k typytat nl uby dtaxytl rkfík hagrl,
w mkigrl haol:

-k xa dktygyt, ymqy iyclgal yi hlm dknyqkm ny hygnktkté wl, w ym kmí: yn
qkn rlxfty obtk uby vk k xltat yi nk rltgk, w ma xbyty yi ynnk, obtó
vythkh, w dlt nk nyw dbymqk xytygy myt nafty w uby dkmy nk dbyiqy; w ma il
ny krltgki, obtó xyiqatk, w dlt nk xamxk nyw xytygy uby ny krltubyi.

-kmí ym glxl yn myñlt clfytikhlt hagy -haol yn xyimkoytl-; w gbkiql k nk
yiqytyek w yiqyihaxayiql hyn gkml, il rkw xám uby dyhat ia uby hbhkt.

-hacl wl, dbym, kcltk -tydnagó mkigrl- uby hymqy rlxfty kubynnk dktqy uby
obtó vythkh nk hyoyi dkmkt, w nk uby haol xyiqatk nk krltubyi, w hymqk
xkiytk my gbxdnatá kn day hy nk nyqtk nk glihagaói hyn dkmkoy.

-dbym, myñlt clfytikhlt -tydnagó yn dtycbiqkhlt-, mytá iygymktal uby yn qkn
rlxfty my havahk yi dktqym, yi xyiqatlmk w vythkhytk; w ma my havahy, dlt
pbytek rk hy xltat, w kmí il my glimacby glmk kncbik hy nl uby nk nyw dahy,
w ym hy iygymahkh ymdtymk uby my gbxdnk gli ynnk.

-vyiah kgá, myñlt fbyi rlxfty -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; ymqy dkmkoytl uby hygím,
l wl mlw bi dlttl, l én qayiy nk xamxk tkeói dktk xltat uby dktk vavat w
dkmkt nk dbyiqy; dltuby ma nk vythkh ny mknvk, nk xyiqatk ny glihyik
acbknxyiqy; w, mayihl ymql kmí, glxl nl ym, mlw hy dktygyt uby hacáam k
ymlm myñltym uby k xí lm yivaktli uby, dbym ymqái yi bi pan nkm tkeliym hy
glihyiktny l kmlnvytny, uby ny hyoyi dkmkt naftyxyiqy, dbym mayxdty ym
knkfkhl xám yn rkgyt fayi uby xkn, w ymql nl haytk patxkhl hy xa ilxfty, ma
mbdaytk patxkt; w wl yi ymqy gkml il ry rkfnkhl hy xíl, mail uby my xy vail
k nk xyxltak bi dtygydql, yiqty lqtlm xbgrlm uby xy hal xa kxl hli ubaolqy
nk ilgry kiqym uby vaiaymy k myt clfytikhlt hymqk íimbnk: uby pby uby,
gbkihl nk obmqagak ymqbvaymy yi hbhk, xy hygkiqkmy w kglcaymy k nk
xamytaglthak; w rk ubytahl halm uby kcltk my xy kglthkmy, dlt vyiat yi ymqy
gkml glxl hy xlnhy.

kmí ym -tymdlihaó yn xkwlthlxl-, w qyicl dktk xí uby yn xamxl nagbtcl, uby
hal nywym k nlm nkgyhyxlialm, il dbhaytk hkt xyolt myiqyigak uby nk uby yn
ctki dkiek rk hkhl. w kgáfymy gli ymql nk kbhayigak hymqk xkñkik, w wl hkté
lthyi glxl yn myñlt clfytikhlt glxk xbw k mb cbmql.

-yml dahl, w fkttkm hytygrkm -haol mkigrl-: hyixy hy glxyt, w nnbyvki gkmlm
w hbhkm mlfty xí, uby wl nkm hymdkfankté yi yn katy.

gbxdnaó mb dknkftk yn xkwlthlxl, dktygaéihlny myt gktcl hy gligayigak xkqkt
hy rkxfty k qki hamgtyql clfytikhlt; w xám, uby dyimkfk glignbat gli én
kubynnk xamxk ilgry rkgaéihlny nk fbtnk únqaxk uby qtkík yi glxamaói hy
rkgytny.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, rkfayihl glxahl kubyn hík gliqtk nkm tycnkm w kpltamxlm
hyn hlgqlt qatqykpbytk, kn nyvkiqkt hy nlm xkiqynym, yiqtó bi glttyl gli
bik gktqk hy hli ubaolqy dktk yn clfytikhlt. xkihó mkigrl kn mygtyqktal uby
nk nywymy dktk mí, w uby ma il vaiaymy yi ynnk kncbik glmk hacik hy
mygtyql, nk nywymy yi vle knqk. ríelnl kmí yn mygtyqktal, w, tydkmáihlnk
dtaxytl, haol:

-fayi my dbyhy nyyt yi vle knqk, uby nl uby yn myñlt hli ubaolqy ymgtafy k
vbymqtk xytgyh xytygy ymqkt ymqkxdkhl w ymgtaql gli nyqtkm hy ltl, w hagy
kmí:

gktqk hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk k mkigrl dkiek, clfytikhlt hy nk íimbnk
fktkqktak

gbkihl ymdytkfk lít ibyvkm hy qbm hymgbahlm y axdytqaiyigakm, mkigrl kxacl,
nkm lí hy qbm hamgtygaliym, hy uby ha dlt ynnl ctkgakm dktqagbnktym kn
gaynl, yn gbkn hyn ymqaétgln mkfy nyvkiqkt nlm dlftym, w hy nlm qliqlm
rkgyt hamgtyqlm. hígyixy uby clfaytikm glxl ma pbymym rlxfty, w uby ytym
rlxfty glxl ma pbymym fymqak, mycúi ym nk rbxanhkh gli uby qy qtkqkm; w
ubaytl uby khvaytqkm, mkigrl, uby xbgrkm vygym glivayiy w ym iygymktal, dlt
nk kbqltahkh hyn lpagal, at gliqtk nk rbxanhkh hyn gltkeói; dltuby yn fbyi
khltil hy nk dytmlik uby ymqá dbymqk yi ctkvym gktclm rk hy myt glipltxy k
nl uby ynnlm dahyi, w il k nk xyhahk hy nl uby mb rbxanhy glihagaói ny
aignaik. vímqyqy fayi, uby bi dknl glxdbymql il dktygy dknl. il hacl uby
qtkackm haoym ia cknkm, ia uby mayihl obye qy vamqkm glxl mlnhkhl, mail uby
qy khltiym gli yn ráfaql uby qb lpagal tyubayty, gli qkn uby myk naxdal w
fayi glxdbymql.

dktk ckikt nk vlnbiqkh hyn dbyfnl uby clfaytikm, yiqty lqtkm rkm hy rkgyt
hlm glmkm: nk bik, myt fayi gtakhl gli qlhlm, kbiuby ymql wk lqtk vye qy nl
ry hagrl; w nk lqtk, dtlgbtkt nk kfbihkigak hy nlm xkiqyiaxayiqlm; uby il
rkw glmk uby xám pkqacby yn gltkeói hy nlm dlftym uby nk rkxfty w nk
gktymqík.

il rkckm xbgrkm dtkcxáqagkm; w ma nkm ragaytym, dtlgbtk uby myki fbyikm, w,
mlfty qlhl, uby my cbkthyi w gbxdnki; uby nkm dtkcxáqagkm uby il my
cbkthki, nl xamxl ym uby ma il nl pbymyi; kiqym hki k yiqyihyt uby yn
dtíigady uby qbvl hamgtygaói w kbqltahkh dktk rkgytnkm, il qbvl vknlt dktk
rkgyt uby my cbkthkmyi; w nkm nywym uby kqyxltaeki w il my yoygbqki, vayiyi
k myt glxl nk vack, tyw hy nkm tkikm: uby kn dtaigadal nkm ymdkiqó, w gli
yn qayxdl nk xyilmdtygaktli w my mbfaytli mlfty ynnk.

mé dkhty hy nkm vatqbhym w dkhtkmqtl hy nlm vagalm. il mykm mayxdty
tacbtlml, ia mayxdty fnkihl, w ymglcy yn xyhal yiqty ymqlm hlm ymqtyxlm,
uby yi ymql ymqá yn dbiql hy nk hamgtygaói. vamaqk nkm gátgynym, nkm
gktiagytíkm w nkm dnkekm, uby nk dtymyigak hyn clfytikhlt yi nbcktym qknym
ym hy xbgrk axdltqkigak: glimbynk k nlm dtymlm, uby ymdytki nk ftyvyhkh hy
mb hymdkgrl; ym glgl k nlm gktiagytlm, uby dlt yiqligym acbknki nlm dymlm,
w ym ymdkiqkol k nkm dnkgytkm, dlt nk xamxk tkeói. il qy xbymqtym, kbiuby
dlt vyiqbtk nl mykm -nl gbkn wl il gtyl-, glhagalml, xboytaycl ia cnlqói;
dltuby, yi mkfayihl yn dbyfnl w nlm uby qy qtkqki qb aignaikgaói
hyqytxaikhk, dlt knní qy hktái fkqytík, rkmqk hyttafktqy yi yn dtlpbihl hy
nk dythagaói.

xatk w tyxatk, dkmk w tydkmk nlm glimyolm w hlgbxyiqlm uby qy ha dlt
ymgtaql kiqym uby hy kubí dktqaymym k qb clfaytil, w vytám glxl rknnkm yi
ynnlm, ma nlm cbkthkm, bik kwbhk hy glmqk uby qy mlftynnyvy nlm qtkfkolm w
hapagbnqkhym uby k gkhk dkml k nlm clfytikhltym my nym lptygyi. ymgtafy k
qbm myñltym w xbémqtkqynym kctkhygahl, uby nk aictkqaqbh ym raok hy nk
mlfytfak, w bil hy nlm xkwltym dygkhlm uby my mkfy, w nk dytmlik uby ym
kctkhygahk k nlm uby fayi ny rki rygrl, hk aihagal uby qkxfaéi nl mytá k
halm, uby qkiqlm fayiym ny rael w hy gliqail ny rkgy.

nk myñltk hbubymk hymdkgró bi dtldal gli qb vymqahl w lqtl dtymyiqy k qb
xboyt qytymk dkiek; dlt xlxyiqlm ymdytkxlm tymdbymqk.

wl ry ymqkhl bi dlgl xkn hamdbymql hy bi gaytql ckqykxayiql uby xy mbgyhaó
il xbw k gbyiql hy xam iktagym; dytl il pby ikhk, uby ma rkw yigkiqkhltym
uby xy xknqtkqyi, qkxfaéi nlm rkw uby xy hypayihki.

kvímkxy ma yn xkwlthlxl uby ymqá gliqacl qbvl uby vyt yi nkm kggaliym hy nk
qtapknha, glxl qú mlmdygrkmqy, w hy qlhl nl uby qy mbgyhayty xy atám hkihl
kvaml, dbym ym qki gltql yn gkxail; gbkiql xám, uby wl dayiml hyokt dtymql
ymqk vahk lgalmk yi uby ymqlw, dbym il ikgí dktk ynnk.

bi iyclgal my xy rk lptygahl, uby gtyl uby xy rk hy dliyt yi hymctkgak
hymqlm myñltym; dytl, kbiuby my xy hk xbgrl, il my xy hk ikhk, dbym, yi pai
yi pai, qyicl hy gbxdnat kiqym gli xa dtlpymaói uby gli mb cbmql, glipltxy
k nl uby mbyny hygatmy: kxagbm dnkql, myh xkcam kxagk vytaqkm. híclqy ymqy
nkqíi dltuby xy hlw k yiqyihyt uby, hymdbém uby ytym clfytikhlt, nl rkftám
kdtyihahl. w k halm, yn gbkn qy cbkthy hy uby iaicbil qy qyick námqaxk.

qb kxacl,

hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk.

lwó mkigrl nk gktqk gli xbgrk kqyigaói, w pby gynyftkhk w qyiahk dlt
hamgtyqk hy nlm uby nk lwytli; w nbycl mkigrl my nyvkiqó hy nk xymk, w,
nnkxkihl kn mygtyqktal, my yigyttó gli én yi mb ymqkigak, w, mai hankqktnl
xám, ubaml tymdlihyt nbycl k mb myñlt hli ubaolqy, w haol kn mygtyqktal
uby, mai kñkhat ia ubaqkt glmk kncbik, pbymy ymgtafayihl nl uby én ny
haoymy, w kmí nl rael; w nk gktqk hy nk tymdbymqk pby hyn qyilt macbayiqy:

gktqk hy mkigrl dkiek k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk

nk lgbdkgaói hy xam iyclgalm ym qki ctkihy uby il qyicl nbckt dktk tkmgktxy
nk gkfyek, ia kbi dktk gltqktxy nkm bñkm; w kmí, nkm qtkacl qki gtygahkm
gbkn halm nl tyxyhay. hacl ymql, myñlt xíl hy xa knxk, dltuby vbymk xytgyh
il my ymdkiqy ma rkmqk kcltk il ry hkhl kvaml hy xa fayi l xkn ymqkt yi
ymqy clfaytil, yi yn gbkn qyicl xám rkxfty uby gbkihl kiháfkxlm nlm hlm dlt
nkm mynvkm w dlt nlm hymdlfnkhlm.

ymgtafaóxy yn hbuby, xa myñlt, yn lqtl hík, háihlxy kvaml uby rkfíki
yiqtkhl yi ymqk íimbnk gaytqkm ymdíkm dktk xkqktxy, w rkmqk kcltk wl il ry
hymgbfaytql lqtk uby bi gaytql hlgqlt uby ymqá yi ymqy nbckt kmknktakhl
dktk xkqkt k gbkiqlm clfytikhltym kubí vaiaytyi: nnáxkmy yn hlgqlt dyhtl
tygal, w ym ikqbtkn hy qatqykpbytk: ¡dltuby vyk vbymk xytgyh ubé ilxfty
dktk il qyxyt uby ry hy xltat k mbm xkilm! ymqy qkn hlgqlt hagy én xamxl hy
mí xamxl uby én il gbtk nkm yipytxyhkhym gbkihl nkm rkw, mail uby nkm
dtyvayiy, dktk uby il vyicki; w nkm xyhygaikm uby bmk mli hayqk w xám
hayqk, rkmqk dliyt nk dytmlik yi nlm rbymlm xlihlm, glxl ma il pbymy xkwlt
xkn nk pnkubyek uby nk gknyiqbtk. paiknxyiqy, én xy vk xkqkihl hy rkxfty, w
wl xy vlw xbtayihl hy hymdygrl, dbym gbkihl dyimé vyiat k ymqy clfaytil k
glxyt gknayiqy w k fyfyt ptíl, w k tygtykt yn gbytdl yiqty máfkikm hy
rlnkihk, mlfty glngrliym hy dnbxk, ry vyiahl k rkgyt dyiaqyigak, glxl ma
pbytk ytxaqkñl; w, glxl il nk rkcl hy xa vlnbiqkh, dayiml uby, kn gkfl kn
gkfl, xy rk hy nnyvkt yn hakfnl.

rkmqk kcltk il ry qlgkhl hytygrl ia nnyvkhl glrygrl, w il dbyhl dyimkt yi
ubé vk ymql; dltuby kubí xy rki hagrl uby nlm clfytikhltym uby k ymqk
íimbnk mbynyi vyiat, kiqym hy yiqtkt yi ynnk, l nym rki hkhl l nym rki
dtymqkhl nlm hyn dbyfnl xbgrlm haiytlm, w uby émqk ym lthaiktak bmkiek yi
nlm hyxám uby vki k clfaytilm, il mlnkxyiqy yi émqy.

kilgry, kihkihl hy tlihk, qldé bik xbw rytxlmk hligynnk yi qtkoy hy vktói w
bi rytxkil mbwl yi ráfaql hy xboyt; hy nk xlek my yikxltó xa xkymqtymknk, w
nk ymglcaó yi mb axkcaikgaói dktk mb xboyt, mycúi én rk hagrl, w wl ymglcí
kn xlel dktk xa wytil; rlw nlm hlm dlihtyxlm yi dnáqagk ibymqtlm
dyimkxayiqlm gli yn dkhty hy yiqtkxflm, uby ym bi qkn haycl hy nk nnkik,
rahkncl w gtamqakil vayol gbkiql my ubayty.

wl vamaql nkm dnkekm, glxl vbymqtk xytgyh xy nl kglimyok, w kwyt rknné bik
qyihytk uby vyihík kvynnkikm ibyvkm, w kvytacüény uby rkfík xyegnkhl gli
bik rkiyck hy kvynnkikm ibyvkm lqtk hy vayokm, vkikm w dlhtahkm; kdnaubénkm
qlhkm dktk nlm iañlm hy nk hlgqtaik, uby nkm mkftíki fayi hamqaicbat, w
myiqyigaénk uby dlt ubaigy híkm il yiqtkmy yi nk dnkek. rkixy hagrl uby nl
ragy vknytlmkxyiqy; nl uby mé hygat k vbymqtk xytgyh ym uby ym pkxk yi ymqy
dbyfnl uby il rkw cyiqy xám xknk uby nkm dnkgytkm, dltuby qlhkm mli
hymvytcliekhkm, hymknxkhkm w kqtyvahkm, w wl kmí nl gtyl, dlt nkm uby ry
vamql yi lqtlm dbyfnlm.

hy uby xa myñltk nk hbubymk rkwk ymgtaql k xa xboyt qytymk dkiek w
yivaáhlny yn dtymyiqy uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, ymqlw xbw mkqampygrl, w
dtlgbtkté hy xlmqtktxy kctkhygahl k mb qayxdl: fémyny vbymqtk xytgyh nkm
xkilm hy xa dktqy, hagayihl uby hacl wl uby il nl rk ygrkhl yi mkgl tlql,
glxl nl vytá dlt nk lftk.

il ubyttík uby vbymqtk xytgyh qbvaymy qtkfkgbyiqkm hy hamcbmql gli ymlm xam
myñltym, dltuby ma vbymqtk xytgyh my yilok gli ynnlm, gnktl ymqá uby rk hy
tyhbihkt yi xa hkñl, w il mytá fayi uby, dbym my xy hk k xí dlt glimyol uby
myk kctkhygahl, uby vbymqtk xytgyh il nl myk gli ubayi qkiqkm xytgyhym ny
qayiy rygrkm w gli qkiql tycknl rk mahl qtkqkhl yi mb gkmqannl.

kubynnl hyn ckqykhl il yiqayihl, dytl axkcail uby hyfy hy myt kncbik hy nkm
xknkm pygrltíkm uby gli vbymqtk xytgyh mbynyi bmkt nlm xknlm yigkiqkhltym;
wl nl mkfté gbkihl ilm vykxlm.

ubamaytk yivaktny k vbymqtk xytgyh kncbik glmk, dytl il mé ubé yivíy, ma il
ym kncbilm gkñbqlm hy oytaickm, uby dktk gli vyoackm nlm rkgyi yi ymqk
íimbnk xbw gbtalmlm; kbiuby ma xy hbtk yn lpagal, wl fbmgkté ubé yivakt hy
rknhkm l hy xkickm.

ma xy ymgtafayty xa xboyt qytymk dkiek, dkcby vbymqtk xytgyh yn dltqy w
yivíyxy nk gktqk,uby qyicl ctkihímaxl hymyl hy mkfyt hyn ymqkhl hy xa gkmk,
hy xa xboyt w hy xam raolm. w gli ymql, halm nafty k vbymqtk xytgyh hy xkn
aiqyigalikhlm yigkiqkhltym, w k xí xy mkuby gli fayi w yi dke hymqy
clfaytil, uby nl hbhl, dltuby ny dayiml hyokt gli nk vahk, mycúi xy qtkqk
yn hlgqlt dyhtl tygal.

gtakhl hy vbymqtk xytgyh,

mkigrl dkiek, yn clfytikhlt.

gyttó nk gktqk yn mygtyqktal w hymdkgró nbycl kn glttyl; w, obiqáihlmy nlm
fbtnkhltym hy mkigrl, haytli lthyi yiqty mí góxl hymdkgrktny hyn clfaytil;
w kubynnk qkthy nk dkmó mkigrl yi rkgyt kncbikm lthyikiekm qlgkiqym kn fbyi
clfaytil hy nk uby én axkcaikfk myt íimbnk, w lthyió uby il rbfaymy
tyckqliym hy nlm fkmqaxyiqlm yi nk tydúfnagk, w uby dbhaymyi xyqyt yi ynnk
vail hy nkm dktqym uby ubamaymyi, gli khaqkxyiql uby hygnktkmyi yn nbckt hy
hlihy ytk, dktk dliytny yn dtygal mycúi mb ymqaxkgaói, flihkh w pkxk, w yn
uby nl kcbkmy l ny xbhkmy yn ilxfty, dythaymy nk vahk dlt ynnl.

xlhytó yn dtygal hy qlhl gknekhl, dtaigadknxyiqy yn hy nlm ekdkqlm, dlt
dktygytny uby glttík gli yzltfaqkigak; dbml qkmk yi nlm mknktalm hy nlm
gtakhlm, uby gkxaikfki k tayihk mbynqk dlt yn gkxail hyn aiqytymy; dbml
ctkvímaxkm dyikm k nlm uby gkiqkmyi gkiqktym nkmgavlm w hymglxdbymqlm, ia
hy ilgry ia hy hík. lthyió uby iaicúi gaycl gkiqkmy xankctl yi gldnkm ma il
qtboymy qymqaxlial kbqéiqagl hy myt vythkhytl, dlt dktygytny uby nlm xám
uby nlm gayclm gkiqki mli paicahlm, yi dytobagal hy nlm vythkhytlm.

rael w gtyó bi kncbkgan hy dlftym, il dktk uby nlm dytmacbaymy, mail dktk
uby nlm yzkxaikmy ma nl ytki, dltuby k nk mlxftk hy nk xkiubyhkh paicahk w
hy nk nnkck pknmk kihki nlm ftkelm nkhtliym w nk mknbh flttkgrk. yi
tymlnbgaói: én lthyió glmkm qki fbyikm uby rkmqk rlw my cbkthki yi kubyn
nbckt, w my ilxftki nkm glimqaqbgaliym hyn ctki clfytikhlt mkigrl dkiek.





gkdíqbnl naa. hlihy my gbyiqk nk kvyiqbtk hy nk mycbihk hbyñk hlnltahk, l
kicbmqakhk, nnkxkhk dlt lqtl ilxfty hlñk tlhtícbye


gbyiqk gahy rkxyqy uby ymqkihl wk hli ubaolqy mkil hy mbm ktbñlm, ny
dktygaó uby nk vahk uby yi kubyn gkmqannl qyiík ytk gliqtk qlhk nk lthyi hy
gkfknnytík uby dtlpymkfk, w kmí, hyqytxaió hy dyhat nagyigak k nlm hbubym
dktk dktqatmy k ektkclek, gbwkm paymqkm nnyckfki gytgk, khlihy dyimkfk
ckikt yn ktiém uby yi nkm qknym paymqkm my gliubamqk.

w, ymqkihl bi hík k nk xymk gli nlm hbubym, w glxyiekihl k dliyt yi lftk mb
aiqyigaói w dyhat nk nagyigak, vyam kubí k hymrltk yiqtkt dlt nk dbytqk hy
nk ctki mknk hlm xboytym, glxl hymdbém dktygaó, gbfaytqkm hy nbql hy nlm
daym k nk gkfyek, w nk bik hynnkm, nnycáihlmy k hli ubaolqy, my ny ygró k
nlm daym qyihahk hy nktcl k nktcl, nk flgk glmahk gli nlm daym hy hli
ubaolqy, w hkfk bilm cyxahlm qki qtamqym, qki dtlpbihlm w qki hlnltlmlm,
uby dbml yi glipbmaói k qlhlm nlm uby nk líki w xatkfki; w, kbiuby nlm
hbubym dyimktli uby mytík kncbik fbtnk uby mbm gtakhlm ubytíki rkgyt k hli
ubaolqy, qlhkvík, vayihl gli yn kríigl uby nk xboyt mbmdatkfk, cyxík w
nnltkfk, nlm qbvl hbhlmlm w mbmdyimlm, rkmqk uby hli ubaolqy, glxdkmavl, nk
nyvkiqó hyn mbynl w rael uby my hymgbftaymy w ubaqkmy yn xkiql hy mlfty nk
pke nnltlmk.

ynnk nl rael kmí, w xlmqtó myt nl uby okxám my dbhaytk dyimkt, dltuby
hymgbftaó yn tlmqtl hy hlñk tlhtícbye, nk hbyñk hy gkmk, w nk lqtk yinbqkhk
ytk mb raok, nk fbtnkhk hyn raol hyn nkftkhlt tagl. khxatátlimy qlhlm
kubynnlm uby nk glilgíki, w xám nlm hbubym uby iaicbil; uby, dbymql uby nk
qyiíki dlt flfk w hy fbyik dkmqk, il dlt qkiql uby vaiaymy k rkgyt nlgbtkm.
paiknxyiqy, hlñk tlhtícbye, vlnvaéihlmy k nlm myñltym, nym haol:

-vbymkm yzgynyigakm myki mytvahlm hy hktxy nagyigak uby wl hydktqk bi dlgl
gli ymqy gkfknnytl, dltuby kmí glivayiy dktk mknat gli fayi hyn iyclgal yi
uby xy rk dbymql yn kqtyvaxayiql hy bi xkn aiqyigalikhl vannkil.

yn hbuby haol uby én my nk hkfk, w uby hydktqaymy gli yn myñlt hli ubaolqy
gbkiql ny vaiaymy yi hymyl. ynnk, yihytyekihl nk vle w yn tlmqtl k hli
ubaolqy, haol:

-híkm rk, vknytlml gkfknnytl, uby lm qyicl hkhk gbyiqk hy nk maitkeói w
knyvlmík uby bi xkn nkftkhlt qayiy pygrk k xa xbw ubytahk w kxkhk paok, uby
ym ymqk hymhagrkhk uby kubí ymqá dtymyiqy, w vlm xy rkfyhym dtlxyqahl hy
vlnvyt dlt ynnk, yihytyeáihlny yn qbytql uby ny qayiyi pygrl, w kcltk rk
nnyckhl k xa ilqagak uby lm ubytyhym dktqat hymqy gkmqannl, yi fbmgk hy nkm
fbyikm vyiqbtkm uby halm lm hydkty; w kmí, ubyttík uby, kiqym uby lm
ymgbttaémyhym dlt ymlm gkxailm, hymkpaámyhym k ymqy túmqagl aihóxaql, w ny
ragaémyhym uby my gkmkmy gli xa raok, yi gbxdnaxayiql hy nk dknkftk uby ny
hal hy myt mb ymdlml, kiqym w dtaxytl uby wlckmy gli ynnk; dltuby dyimkt
uby yn hbuby xa myñlt xy rk hy rkgyt obmqagak ym dyhat dytkm kn lnxl, dlt
nk lgkmaói uby wk k vbymk xytgyh yi dbtahkh qyicl hygnktkhk. w gli ymql,
ibymqtl myñlt hé k vbymk xytgyh xbgrk mknbh, w k ilmlqtkm il ilm hymkxdkty.

k gbwkm tkeliym tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy, gli xbgrk ctkvyhkh w dtlmldldywk:

-fbyik hbyñk, qyxdnkh vbymqtkm náctaxkm, l, dlt xyolt hygat, yiobckhnkm w
krlttkh hy vbymqtlm mbmdatlm, uby wl qlxl k xa gktcl yn tyxyhal hy vbymqtk
raok, k nk gbkn ny rbfaytk ymqkhl xyolt il rkfyt mahl qki págan yi gtyyt
dtlxymkm hy yikxltkhlm, nkm gbknym, dlt nk xkwlt dktqy, mli nacytkm hy
dtlxyqyt w xbw dymkhkm hy gbxdnat; w kmí, gli nagyigak hyn hbuby xa myñlt,
wl xy dktqaté nbycl yi fbmgk hymy hymknxkhl xkigyfl, w ny rknnkté, w ny
hymkpakté, w ny xkqkté gkhk w gbkihl uby my ymgbmkty hy gbxdnat nk
dtlxyqahk dknkftk; uby yn dtaigadkn kmbxdql hy xa dtlpymaói ym dythlikt k
nlm rbxanhym w gkmqackt k nlm mlfytfalm; ubaytl hygat: kglttyt k nlm
xamytkfnym w hymqtbat k nlm tacbtlmlm.

-il ym xyiymqyt -tymdlihaó yn hbuby- uby vbymk xytgyh my dlick yi qtkfkol
hy fbmgkt kn túmqagl hy ubayi ymqk fbyik hbyñk my ubyok, ia ym xyiymqyt
qkxdlgl uby vbymk xytgyh xy dahk k xí nagyigak dktk hymkpaktny; uby wl ny
hlw dlt hymkpakhl, w qlxl k xa gktcl hy rkgytny mkfyt ymqy hymkpíl, w uby
ny kgyqy, w vyick k tymdlihyt dlt mí k ymqy xa gkmqannl, hlihy k yiqtkxflm
hkté gkxdl mycbtl, cbkthkihl qlhkm nkm glihagaliym uby yi qknym kgqlm
mbynyi w hyfyi cbkthktmy, cbkthkihl acbknxyiqy mb obmqagak k gkhk bil, glxl
ymqái lfnackhlm k cbkthktnk qlhlm kubynnlm dtíigadym uby hki gkxdl ptkigl k
nlm uby my glxfkqyi yi nlm qétxailm hy mbm myñltílm.

-dbym gli ymy mycbtl w gli fbyik nagyigak hy vbymqtk ctkihyek -tydnagó hli
ubaolqy-, hymhy kubí hacl uby dlt ymqk vye tyibigal k xa rahkncbík, w xy
knnkil w kobmql gli nk nnkiyek hyn hkñkhlt, w xy rkcl acbkn gli én,
rkfanaqáihlny dktk dlhyt glxfkqat glixacl; w kmí, kbiuby kbmyiqy, ny
hymkpíl w tydql, yi tkeói hy uby rael xkn yi hyptkbhkt k ymqk dlfty, uby
pby hligynnk w wk dlt mb gbndk il nl ym, w uby ny rk hy gbxdnat nk dknkftk
uby ny hal hy myt mb nycíqaxl ymdlml, l xltat yi nk hyxkihk.

w nbycl, hymgkneáihlmy bi cbkiqy, ny kttloó yi xaqkh hy nk mknk, w yn hbuby
ny kneó, hagayihl uby, glxl wk rkfík hagrl, én kgyqkfk yn qkn hymkpíl yi
ilxfty hy mb vkmknnl, w myñknkfk yn dnkel hy knní k myam híkm; w yn gkxdl,
yi nk dnkek hy kubyn gkmqannl; w nkm ktxkm, nkm kglmqbxftkhkm hy nlm
gkfknnytlm: nkiek w ymgbhl, w ktiém qtkiekhl, gli qlhkm nkm hyxám dayekm,
mai yickñl, mbdytgrytík l mbdytmqagaói kncbik, yzkxaikhkm w vamqkm dlt nlm
obygym hyn gkxdl.

-dytl, kiqy qlhkm glmkm, ym xyiymqyt uby ymqk fbyik hbyñk w ymqk xknk
hligynnk dlicki yn hytygrl hy mb obmqagak yi xkilm hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy;
uby hy lqtk xkiytk il my rktá ikhk, ia nnycktá k hyfahk yoygbgaói yn qkn
hymkpíl.

-wl mí dlicl -tymdlihaó nk hbyñk.

-w wl qkxfaéi -kñkhaó nk raok, qlhk nnltlmk w qlhk vytclielmk w hy xkn
qknkiqy.

qlxkhl, dbym, ymqy kdbiqkxayiql, w rkfayihl axkcaikhl yn hbuby nl uby rkfík
hy rkgyt yi yn gkml, nkm yinbqkhkm my pbytli, w lthyió nk hbubymk uby hy
knní khynkiqy il nkm qtkqkmyi glxl k mbm gtakhkm, mail glxl k myñltkm
kvyiqbtytkm uby vyiíki k dyhat obmqagak k mb gkmk; w kmí, nym haytli gbktql
kdktqy w nkm matvaytli glxl k pltkmqytkm, il mai ymdkiql hy nkm hyxám
gtakhkm, uby il mkfíki yi ubé rkfík hy dktkt nk mkihye w hymyivlnqbtk hy
hlñk tlhtícbye w hy mb xknkihkiqy raok.

ymqkihl yi ymql, dktk kgkfkt hy tyclgaokt nk paymqk w hkt fbyi pai k nk
glxahk, vyam kubí hlihy yiqtó dlt nk mknk yn dkoy uby nnyvó nkm gktqkm w
dtymyiqym k qytymk dkiek, xboyt hyn clfytikhlt mkigrl dkiek, hy gbwk
nnyckhk tygafaytli ctki gliqyiql nlm hbubym, hymylmlm hy mkfyt nl uby ny
rkfík mbgyhahl yi mb vakoy; w, dtycbiqáihlmynl, tymdlihaó yn dkoy uby il nl
dlhík hygat qki yi dúfnagl ia gli ftyvym dknkftkm: uby mbm yzgynyigakm
pbymyi mytvahlm hy hyoktnl dktk k mlnkm, w uby yiqtyqkiql my yiqtyqbvaymyi
gli kubynnkm gktqkm. w, mkgkihl hlm gktqkm, nkm dbml yi xkilm hy nk
hbubymk. nk bik hygík yi yn mlftyymgtaql: gktqk dktk xa myñltk nk hbubymk
qkn, hy il mé hóihy, w nk lqtk: k xa xktahl mkigrl dkiek, clfytikhlt hy nk
íimbnk fktkqktak, uby halm dtlmdyty xám kñlm uby k xí. il my ny glgík yn
dki, glxl mbyny hygatmy, k nk hbubymk rkmqk nyyt mb gktqk, w kftaéihlnk w
nyíhl dktk mí, w vayihl uby nk dlhík nyyt yi vle knqk dktk uby yn hbuby w
nlm gatgbimqkiqym nk lwymyi, nywó hymqk xkiytk:

gktqk hy qytymk dkiek k nk hbubymk

xbgrl gliqyiql xy hal, myñltk xík, nk gktqk uby vbymk ctkihyek xy ymgtafaó,
uby yi vythkh uby nk qyiík fayi hymykhk. nk mktqk hy gltknym ym xbw fbyik,
w yn vymqahl hy gkek hy xa xktahl il ny vk yi ekck. hy uby vbymqtk myñltík
rkwk rygrl clfytikhlt k mkigrl, xa glimltqy, rk tygyfahl xbgrl cbmql qlhl
ymqy nbckt, dbymql uby il rkw ubayi nl gtyk, dtaigadknxyiqy yn gbtk, w xkmy
iaglnám yn fktfytl, w mkimói gkttkmgl yn fkgrannyt; dytl k xí il my xy hk
ikhk; uby, glxl ynnl myk kmí, glxl nl ym, hack gkhk bil nl uby ubamayty;
kbiuby, ma vk k hygat vythkh, k il vyiat nlm gltknym w yn vymqahl, qkxdlgl
wl nl gtywytk, dltuby yi ymqy dbyfnl qlhlm qayiyi k xa xktahl dlt bi dlttl,
w uby, mkgkhl hy clfytikt bi rkql hy gkftkm, il dbyhyi axkcaikt dktk ubé
clfaytil dbyhk myt fbyil. halm nl rkck, w nl yigkxaiy glxl vyy uby nl rki
xyiymqyt mbm raolm.

wl, myñltk hy xa knxk, ymqlw hyqytxaikhk, gli nagyigak hy vbymk xytgyh, hy
xyqyt ymqy fbyi hík yi xa gkmk, wéihlxy k nk gltqy k qyihytxy yi bi glgry,
dktk ubyftkt nlm lolm k xan yivahalmlm uby wk qyicl; w kmí, mbdnagl k vbymk
yzgynyigak xkihy k xa xktahl xy yivíy kncúi haiytannl, w uby myk kncl ubé,
dltuby yi nk gltqy mli nlm ckmqlm ctkihym: uby yn dki vkny k tykn, w nk
gktiy, nk naftk, k qtyaiqk xktkvyhím, uby ym bi obagal; w ma ubamayty uby
il vkwk, uby xy nl kvamy gli qayxdl, dltuby xy ymqái fbnnyihl nlm daym dlt
dliytxy yi gkxail; uby xy hagyi xam kxackm w xam vygaikm uby, ma wl w xa
raok kihkxlm ltlihkm w dlxdlmkm yi nk gltqy, vyihtá k myt glilgahl xa
xktahl dlt xí xám uby wl dlt én, mayihl pltelml uby dtycbiqyi xbgrlm:
''-¿ubaéi mli ymqkm myñltkm hymqy glgry?'' w bi gtakhl xíl tymdlihyt: ''-nk
xboyt w nk raok hy mkigrl dkiek, clfytikhlt hy nk íimbnk fktkqktak''; w
hymqk xkiytk mytá glilgahl mkigrl, w wl myté ymqaxkhk, w k tlxk dlt qlhl.

démkxy, gbkiql dymktxy dbyhy, uby ymqy kñl il my rki glcahl fynnlqkm yi
ymqy dbyfnl; gli qlhl yml, yivíl k vbymk knqyek rkmqk xyhal gynyxíi, uby
bik k bik nkm pba wl k glcyt w k ymglcyt kn xliqy, w il nkm rknné xám
xkwltym; wl ubamaytk uby pbytki glxl rbyvlm hy kvymqtbe.

il my ny lnvahy k vbymqtk dlxdlmahkh hy ymgtafatxy, uby wl qyihté gbahkhl
hy nk tymdbymqk, kvamkihl hy xa mknbh w hy qlhl nl uby rbfayty uby kvamkt
hymqy nbckt, hlihy ubyhl tlckihl k ibymqtl myñlt cbkthy k vbymqtk ctkihyek,
w k xí il lnvahy. mkigrk, xa raok, w xa raol fymki k vbymqtk xytgyh nkm
xkilm.

nk uby qayiy xám hymyl hy vyt k vbymqtk myñltík uby hy ymgtafatnk, mb
gtakhk,

qytymk dkiek.

ctkihy pby yn cbmql uby qlhlm tygafaytli hy lít nk gktqk hy qytymk dkiek,
dtaigadknxyiqy nlm hbubym, w nk hbubymk dahaó dktygyt k hli ubaolqy ma
mytík fayi kftat nk gktqk uby vyiík dktk yn clfytikhlt, uby axkcaikfk hyfík
hy myt fliímaxk. hli ubaolqy haol uby én nk kftatík dlt hktnym cbmql, w kmí
nl rael, w val uby hygík hymqk xkiytk:

gktqk hy qytymk dkiek k mkigrl dkiek mb xktahl

qb gktqk tygafí, mkigrl xíl hy xa knxk, w wl qy dtlxyql w obtl glxl
gkqónagk gtamqakik uby il pknqktli hlm hyhlm dktk vlnvytxy nlgk hy
gliqyiql. xatk, rytxkil: gbkihl wl nnycbé k lít uby ytym clfytikhlt, xy
dyimé knní gkyt xbytqk hy dbtl clel, uby wk mkfym qú uby hagyi uby kmí xkqk
nk knyctík múfaqk glxl yn hlnlt ctkihy. k mkigragk, qb raok, my ny pbytli
nkm kcbkm mai myiqatnl, hy dbtl gliqyiql. yn vymqahl uby xy yivakmqy qyiík
hynkiqy, w nlm gltknym uby xy yivaó xa myñltk nk hbubymk kn gbynnl, w nkm
gktqkm yi nkm xkilm, w yn dltqkhlt hynnkm knní dtymyiqy, w, gli qlhl yml,
gtyík w dyimkfk uby ytk qlhl mbyñl nl uby vyík w nl uby qlgkfk; dltuby,
¿ubaéi dlhík dyimkt uby bi dkmqlt hy gkftkm rkfík hy vyiat k myt clfytikhlt
hy íimbnkm? wk mkfym qú, kxacl, uby hygík xa xkhty uby ytk xyiymqyt vavat
xbgrl dktk vyt xbgrl: híclnl dltuby dayiml vyt xám ma vavl xám; dltuby il
dayiml dktkt rkmqk vytqy kttyihkhlt l kngkfknytl, uby mli lpagalm uby,
kbiuby nnyvk yn hakfnl k ubayi xkn nlm bmk, yi pai yi pai, mayxdty qayiyi w
xkiyoki haiytlm. xa myñltk nk hbubymk qy hatá yn hymyl uby qyicl hy at k nk
gltqy; xítkqy yi ynnl, w kvímkxy hy qb cbmql, uby wl dtlgbtkté rlitktqy yi
ynnk kihkihl yi glgry.

yn gbtk, yn fktfytl, yn fkgrannyt w kbi yn mkgtamqái il dbyhyi gtyyt uby
ytym clfytikhlt, w hagyi uby qlhl ym yxfynygl, l glmkm hy yigkiqkxyiql,
glxl mli qlhkm nkm hy hli ubaolqy qb kxl; w hagy mkimói uby rk hy at k
fbmgktqy w k mkgktqy yn clfaytil hy nk gkfyek, w k hli ubaolqy nk nlgbtk hy
nlm gkmglm; wl il rkcl mail tyítxy, w xatkt xa mktqk, w hkt qtkek hyn
vymqahl uby qyicl hy rkgyt hyn qbwl k ibymqtk raok.

bikm fynnlqkm yivaé k xa myñltk nk hbubymk; wl ubamaytk uby pbytki hy ltl.
yivíkxy qú kncbikm mktqkm hy dytnkm, ma my bmki yi ymk íimbnk.

nkm ibyvkm hymqy nbckt mli uby nk fyttbygk gkmó k mb raok gli bi daiqlt hy
xknk xkil, uby nnycó k ymqy dbyfnl k daiqkt nl uby mknaymy; xkihóny yn
gligyol daiqkt nkm ktxkm hy mb xkoymqkh mlfty nkm dbytqkm hyn kwbiqkxayiql,
dahaó hlm hbgkhlm, haétlimynlm khynkiqkhlm, qtkfkoó lgrl híkm, kn gkfl hy
nlm gbknym il daiqó ikhk, w haol uby il kgytqkfk k daiqkt qkiqkm fktkqaokm;
vlnvaó yn haiytl, w, gli qlhl yml, my gkmó k qíqbnl hy fbyi lpagakn; vythkh
ym uby wk rk hyokhl yn daigyn w qlxkhl yn kekhk, w vk kn gkxdl glxl
cyiqanrlxfty. yn raol hy dyhtl hy nlfl my rk lthyikhl hy ctkhlm w gltlik,
gli aiqyigaói hy rkgytmy gnétacl; múdlnl xaicbannk, nk iayqk hy xaicl
manvkql, w rkny dbymql hyxkihk hy uby nk qayiy hkhk dknkftk hy gkmkxayiql;
xknkm nyicbkm ubaytyi hygat uby rk ymqkhl yigaiqk hén, dytl én nl iayck k
daym obiqannkm.

rlckñl il rkw kgyaqbikm, ia my rknnk bik clqk hy vaikcty yi qlhl ymqy
dbyfnl. dlt kubí dkmó bik glxdkñík hy mlnhkhlm; nnyvátlimy hy gkxail qtym
xlekm hymqy dbyfnl; il qy ubaytl hygat ubaéi mli: ubaeá vlnvytái, w il
pknqktá ubayi nkm qlxy dlt xboytym, gli mbm qkgrkm fbyikm l xknkm.

mkigragk rkgy dbiqkm hy tkihkm; ckik gkhk hík lgrl xktkvyhím rlttlm, uby
nlm vk ygrkihl yi bik kngkigík dktk kwbhk k mb kobkt; dytl krltk uby ym
raok hy bi clfytikhlt, qú ny hktám nk hlqy mai uby ynnk nl qtkfkoy. nk
pbyiqy hy nk dnkek my mygó; bi tkwl gkwó yi nk daglqk, w knní xy nkm hyi
qlhkm.

ymdytl tymdbymqk hémqk w nk tymlnbgaói hy xa ahk k nk gltqy; w, gli ymql,
halm qy xy cbkthy xám kñlm uby k xí l qkiqlm, dltuby il ubyttík hyoktqy mai
xí yi ymqy xbihl.

qb xboyt,

qytymk dkiek.

nkm gktqkm pbytli mlnyiaekhkm, tyíhkm, ymqaxkhkm w khxatkhkm; w, dktk
kgkfkt hy ygrkt yn mynnl, nnycó yn glttyl, yn uby qtkík nk uby mkigrl
yivakfk k hli ubaolqy, uby kmaxymxl my nywó dúfnagkxyiqy, nk gbkn dbml yi
hbhk nk mkihye hyn clfytikhlt.

tyqatómy nk hbubymk, dktk mkfyt hyn dkoy nl uby ny rkfík mbgyhahl yi yn
nbckt hy mkigrl, yn gbkn my nl gliqó xbw dlt ymqyiml, mai hyokt
gatgbimqkigak uby il typataymy; halny nkm fynnlqkm, w xám bi ubyml uby
qytymk ny hal, dlt myt xbw fbyil, uby my kvyiqkokfk k nlm hy qtligrói
tygafaónl nk hbubymk gli ctkihímaxl cbmql, gli yn gbkn nk hyoktyxlm, dlt
gliqkt yn pai uby qbvl yn clfaytil hyn ctki mkigrl dkiek, pnlt w ymdyol hy
qlhlm nlm aimbnkilm clfytikhltym.





gkdíqbnl naaa. hyn pkqackhl pai w tyxkqy uby qbvl yn clfaytil hy mkigrl
dkiek


''dyimkt uby yi ymqk vahk nkm glmkm hynnk rki hy hbtkt mayxdty yi bi ymqkhl
ym dyimkt yi nl ymgbmkhl; kiqym dktygy uby ynnk kihk qlhl yi tyhlihl, hacl,
k nk tyhlihk: nk dtaxkvytk macby kn vytkil, yn vytkil kn ymqíl, yn ymqíl kn
lqlñl, w yn lqlñl kn aivaytil, w yn aivaytil k nk dtaxkvytk, w kmí qltik k
kihktmy yn qayxdl gli ymqk tbyhk gliqaibk; mlnk nk vahk rbxkik gltty k mb
pai nacytk xám uby yn qayxdl, mai ymdytkt tyilvktmy ma il ym yi nk lqtk,
uby il qayiy qétxailm uby nk naxaqyi''. ymql hagy gahy rkxyqy, panómlpl
xkrlxéqagl; dltuby ymql hy yiqyihyt nk nacytyek y aimqkfanahkh hy nk vahk
dtymyiqy, w hy nk hbtkgaói hy nk yqytik uby my ymdytk, xbgrlm mai nbxfty hy
py, mail gli nk nbe ikqbtkn, nl rki yiqyihahl; dytl kubí, ibymqtl kbqlt nl
hagy dlt nk dtymqyek gli uby my kgkfó, my glimbxaó, my hymrael, my pby glxl
yi mlxftk w rbxl yn clfaytil hy mkigrl.

yn gbkn, ymqkihl nk médqaxk ilgry hy nlm híkm hy mb clfaytil yi mb gkxk, il
rktql hy dki ia hy vail, mail hy obeckt w hkt dktygytym w hy rkgyt
ymqkqbqlm w dtkcxáqagkm, gbkihl yn mbyñl, k hymdygrl w dymkt hy nk rkxfty,
ny glxyiekfk k gyttkt nlm dátdkhlm, lwó qki ctki tbahl hy gkxdkikm w hy
vlgym, uby il dktygík mail uby qlhk nk íimbnk my rbihík. myiqómy yi nk
gkxk, w ymqbvl kqyiql w ymgbgrkihl, dlt vyt ma hkfk yi nk gbyiqk hy nl uby
dlhík myt nk gkbmk hy qki ctkihy knfltlql; dytl il mónl il nl mbdl, dytl,
kñkhaéihlmy kn tbahl hy vlgym w gkxdkikm yn hy aipaiaqkm qtlxdyqkm w
kqkxfltym, ubyhó xám glipbml w nnyil hy qyxlt w ymdkiql; w, nyvkiqáihlmy yi
day, my dbml bikm graiynkm, dlt nk rbxyhkh hyn mbynl, w, mai dliytmy
mlftyttldk hy nyvkiqkt, ia glmk uby my dktygaymy, mknaó k nk dbytqk hy mb
kdlmyiql, k qayxdl gbkihl val vyiat dlt bilm glttyhltym xám hy vyaiqy
dytmlikm gli rkgrkm yigyihahkm yi nkm xkilm w gli nkm ymdkhkm
hymyivkaikhkm, ctaqkihl qlhlm k ctkihym vlgym:

-¡ktxk, ktxk, myñlt clfytikhlt, ktxk!; uby rki yiqtkhl aipaiaqlm yiyxaclm
yi nk íimbnk, w mlxlm dythahlm ma vbymqtk aihbmqtak w vknlt il ilm mlgltty.

gli ymqy tbahl, pbtak w knfltlql nnycktli hlihy mkigrl ymqkfk, kqóiaql w
yxfynymkhl hy nl uby lík w vyík; w, gbkihl nnycktli k én, bil ny haol:

-¡Átxymy nbycl vbymqtk myñltík, ma il ubayty dythytmy w uby qlhk ymqk
íimbnk my daythk!

-¿ubé xy qyicl hy ktxkt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ia ubé mé wl hy ktxkm ia hy
mlglttlm? ymqkm glmkm xyolt mytá hyoktnkm dktk xa kxl hli ubaolqy, uby yi
hlm dknyqkm nkm hymdkgrktá w dlihtá yi glftl; uby wl, dygkhlt pba k halm,
il my xy yiqayihy ikhk hymqkm dtaymkm.

-¡kr, myñlt clfytikhlt! -haol lqtl-. ¿ubé tynyiqy ym émy? Átxymy vbymk
xytgyh, uby kubí ny qtkyxlm ktxkm lpyimavkm w hypyimavkm, w mknck k ymk
dnkek, w myk ibymqtk cbík w ibymqtl gkdaqái, dbym hy hytygrl ny qlgk yn
mytnl, mayihl ibymqtl clfytikhlt.

-Átxyixy iltkfbyik -tydnagó mkigrl.

w kn xlxyiql ny qtboytli hlm dkvymym, uby vyiíki dtlvyíhlm hynnlm, w ny
dbmaytli yigaxk hy nk gkxamk, mai hyoktny qlxkt lqtl vymqahl, bi dkvém
hynkiqy w lqtl hyqtám, w, dlt bikm gligkvahkhym uby qtkíki rygrkm, ny
mkgktli nlm ftkelm, w ny naktli xbw fayi gli bilm glthynym, hy xlhl uby
ubyhó yxdktyhkhl w yiqkfnkhl, hytygrl glxl bi rbml, mai dlhyt hlfnkt nkm
tlhannkm ia xyiyktmy bi mlnl dkml. dbmaétliny yi nkm xkilm bik nkiek, k nk
gbkn my kttaxó dktk dlhyt qyiytmy yi day. gbkihl kmí ny qbvaytli, ny
haoytli uby gkxaikmy, w nlm cbakmy w kiaxkmy k qlhlm; uby, mayihl én mb
iltqy, mb nkiqytik w mb nbgytl, qyihtíki fbyi pai mbm iyclgalm.

-¿góxl qyicl hy gkxaikt, hymvyiqbtkhl wl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby il dbyhl
obckt nkm grlubyebynkm hy nkm tlhannkm, dltuby xy nl axdahyi ymqkm qkfnkm
uby qki glmahkm qyicl gli xam gktiym? nl uby rki hy rkgyt ym nnyvktxy yi
ftkelm w dliytxy, kqtkvymkhl l yi day, yi kncúi dlmqacl, uby wl ny
cbkthkté, l gli ymqk nkiek l gli xa gbytdl.

-kihy, myñlt clfytikhlt -haol lqtl-, uby xám yn xayhl uby nkm qkfnkm ny
axdahyi yn dkml; kgkfy w xyiéymy, uby ym qkthy, w nlm yiyxaclm gtygyi, w
nkm vlgym my kbxyiqki w yn dynactl gktck.

dlt gbwkm dytmbkmaliym w vaqbdytalm dtlfó yn dlfty clfytikhlt k xlvytmy, w
pby hkt glimacl yi yn mbynl qki ctki clndy, uby dyimó uby my rkfík rygrl
dyhkelm. ubyhó glxl cknádkcl yigyttkhl w gbfaytql gli mbm gligrkm, l glxl
xyhal qlgail xyqahl yiqty hlm ktqymkm, l fayi kmí glxl fktgk uby hk kn
qtkvém yi nk ktyik; w il dlt vytny gkíhl kubynnk cyiqy fbtnkhltk ny
qbvaytli glxdkmaói kncbik; kiqym, kdkckihl nkm kiqltgrkm, qltiktli k
typltekt nkm vlgym, w k tyaqytkt yn ¡ktxk! gli qki ctki dtaymk, dkmkihl dlt
yigaxk hyn dlfty mkigrl, háihlny aipaiaqkm gbgrannkhkm mlfty nlm dkvymym,
uby ma én il my tyglcaytk w yiglcaytk, xyqayihl nk gkfyek yiqty nlm
dkvymym, nl dkmktk xbw xkn yn dlfty clfytikhlt, yn gbkn, yi kubynnk
ymqtygryek tyglcahl, mbhkfk w qtkmbhkfk, w hy qlhl gltkeói my yiglxyihkfk k
halm uby hy kubyn dynactl ny mkgkmy.

bilm qtldyekfki yi én, lqtlm gkíki, w qkn rbfl uby my dbml yigaxk bi fbyi
ymdkgal, w hymhy knní, glxl hymhy kqknkwk, clfytikfk nlm yoétgaqlm, w k
ctkihym vlgym hygík:

-¡kubí hy nlm ibymqtlm, uby dlt ymqk dktqy gktcki xám nlm yiyxaclm! ¡kubyn
dltqannl my cbkthy, kubynnk dbytqk my gaytty, kubynnkm ymgknkm my qtkiubyi!
¡vyicki kngkigíkm, dye w tymaik yi gknhytkm hy kgyaqy kthayihl!
¡qtaigréyimy nkm gknnym gli glngrliym!

yi pai, én ilxftkfk gli qlhl kríigl qlhkm nkm fktkqaokm y aimqtbxyiqlm w
dytqtygrlm hy cbyttk gli uby mbyny hypyihytmy yn kmknql hy bik gabhkh, w yn
xlnahl mkigrl, uby nl ymgbgrkfk w mbptík qlhl, hygík yiqty mí:

-¡lr, ma xa myñlt pbymy mytvahl uby my kgkfkmy wk hy dythyt ymqk íimbnk, w
xy vaymy wl l xbytql l pbytk hymqk ctkihy kicbmqak!

lwó yn gaynl mb dyqagaói, w, gbkihl xyilm nl ymdytkfk, lwó vlgym uby
hygíki:

-¡vaqltak, vaqltak! ¡nlm yiyxaclm vki hy vyigahk! ¡yk, myñlt clfytikhlt,
nyváiqymy vbymk xytgyh w vyick k clekt hyn vyigaxayiql w k tydktqat nlm
hymdlolm uby my rki qlxkhl k nlm yiyxaclm, dlt yn vknlt hymy aivyigafny
ftkel!

-nyváiqyixy -haol gli vle hlnayiqy yn hlnltahl mkigrl.

kwbhátliny k nyvkiqkt, w, dbymql yi day, haol:

-yn yiyxacl uby wl rbfayty vyigahl ubaytl uby xy ny gnkvyi yi nk ptyiqy. wl
il ubaytl tydktqat hymdlolm hy yiyxaclm, mail dyhat w mbdnagkt k kncúi
kxacl, ma ym uby ny qyicl, uby xy hé bi qtkcl hy vail, uby xy mygl, w xy
yiobcby ymqy mbhlt, uby xy rkcl kcbk.

naxdaátliny, qtboétliny yn vail, hymnaátliny nlm dkvymym, myiqómy mlfty mb
nygrl w hymxkwómy hyn qyxlt, hyn mlftymknql w hyn qtkfkol. wk nym dymkfk k
nlm hy nk fbtnk hy rkfétmynk rygrl qki dymkhk; dytl yn rkfyt vbynql yi mí
mkigrl nym qyxdnó nk dyik uby nym rkfík hkhl mb hymxkwl. dtycbiqó ubé rltk
ytk, tymdlihaétliny uby wk kxkiygík. gknnó, w, mai hygat lqtk glmk, glxyieó
k vymqatmy, qlhl mydbnqkhl yi manyigal, w qlhlm ny xatkfki w ymdytkfki yi
ubé rkfík hy dktkt nk dtaymk gli uby my vymqík. vamqaómy, yi pai, w dlgl k
dlgl, dltuby ymqkfk xlnahl w il dlhík at xbgrl k xbgrl, my pby k nk
gkfknnytaek, macbaéihlny qlhlm nlm uby knní my rknnkfki, w, nnycáihlmy kn
tbgal, ny kftkeó w ny hal bi fyml hy dke yi nk ptyiqy, w, il mai náctaxkm
yi nlm lolm, ny haol:

-vyiah vlm kgá, glxdkñytl xíl w kxacl xíl, w glinnyvkhlt hy xam qtkfkolm w
xamytakm: gbkihl wl xy kvyiík gli vlm w il qyiík lqtlm dyimkxayiqlm uby nlm
uby xy hkfki nlm gbahkhlm hy tyxyihkt vbymqtlm kdktyolm w hy mbmqyiqkt
vbymqtl gltdyebynl, hagrlmkm ytki xam rltkm, xam híkm w xam kñlm; dytl,
hymdbém uby lm hyoé w xy mbfí mlfty nkm qlttym hy nk kxfagaói w hy nk
mlfytfak, my xy rki yiqtkhl dlt yn knxk khyiqtl xan xamytakm, xan qtkfkolm
w gbkqtl xan hymkmlmayclm.

w, yi qkiql uby ymqkm tkeliym afk hagayihl, afk kmaxymxl yiknfkthkihl yn
kmil, mai uby ikhay ikhk ny haoymy. yiknfkthkhl, dbym, yn tbgal, gli ctki
dyik w dymkt mbfaó mlfty én, w, yigkxaikihl mbm dknkftkm w tkeliym kn
xkwlthlxl, kn mygtyqktal, kn xkymqtymknk w k dyhtl tygal yn hlgqlt, w k
lqtlm xbgrlm uby knní dtymyiqym ymqkfki, haol:

-kftah gkxail, myñltym xílm, w hyokhxy vlnvyt k xa kiqacbk nafytqkh;
hyokhxy uby vkwk k fbmgkt nk vahk dkmkhk, dktk uby xy tymbgaqy hy ymqk
xbytqy dtymyiqy. wl il ikgí dktk myt clfytikhlt, ia dktk hypyihyt íimbnkm
ia gabhkhym hy nlm yiyxaclm uby ubamaytyi kglxyqytnkm. xyolt my xy yiqayihy
k xí hy ktkt w gkvkt, dlhkt w yimktxyiqkt nkm vañkm, uby hy hkt nywym ia hy
hypyihyt dtlvaigakm ia tyailm. fayi my ymqá mki dyhtl yi tlxk: ubaytl
hygat, uby fayi my ymqá gkhk bil bmkihl yn lpagal dktk uby pby ikgahl.
xyolt xy ymqá k xí bik rle yi nk xkil uby bi gyqtl hy clfytikhlt; xám
ubaytl rktqktxy hy ckedkgrlm uby ymqkt mboyql k nk xamytak hy bi xéhagl
axdytqaiyiqy uby xy xkqy hy rkxfty; w xám ubaytl tyglmqktxy k nk mlxftk hy
bik yigaik yi yn vytkil w kttldktxy gli bi ekxkttl hy hlm dynlm yi yn
aivaytil, yi xa nafytqkh, uby kglmqktxy gli nk mboygaói hyn clfaytil yiqty
máfkikm hy rlnkihk w vymqatxy hy xktqkm gyflnnaikm. vbymqtkm xytgyhym my
ubyhyi gli halm, w hacki kn hbuby xa myñlt uby, hymibhl ikgí, hymibhl xy
rknnl: ia daythl ia ckil; ubaytl hygat, uby mai fnkigk yiqté yi ymqy
clfaytil w mai ynnk mkncl, fayi kn tyvém hy glxl mbynyi mknat nlm
clfytikhltym hy lqtkm íimbnkm. w kdátqyimy: héoyixy at, uby xy vlw k
faexkt; uby gtyl uby qyicl ftbxkhkm qlhkm nkm glmqannkm, xytgyh k nlm
yiyxaclm uby ymqk ilgry my rki dkmykhl mlfty xí.

-il rk hy myt kmí, myñlt clfytikhlt -haol yn hlgqlt tygal-, uby wl ny hkté
k vbymk xytgyh bik fyfahk gliqtk gkíhkm w xlnaxayiqlm, uby nbycl ny vbynvk
yi mb dtímqaik yiqytyek w vaclt; w, yi nl hy nk glxahk, wl dtlxyql k vbymk
xytgyh hy yixyihktxy, hyoáihlny glxyt kfbihkiqyxyiqy hy qlhl kubynnl uby
ubamayty.

-¡qkthy dakgry! -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. kmí hyokté hy atxy glxl vlnvytxy qbtgl.
il mli ymqkm fbtnkm dktk hlm vygym. dlt halm uby kmí xy ubyhy yi émqy, ia
khxaqk lqtl clfaytil, kbiuby xy ny haymyi yiqty hlm dnkqlm, glxl vlnkt kn
gaynl mai knkm. wl mlw hyn naikoy hy nlm dkiekm, uby qlhlm mli qymqktbhlm,
w ma bik vye hagyi iliym, iliym rki hy myt, kbiuby myki dktym, k dymkt hy
qlhl yn xbihl. ubéhyimy yi ymqk gkfknnytaek nkm knkm hy nk rltxack, uby xy
nyvkiqktli yi yn katy dktk uby xy glxaymyi vyigyolm w lqtlm dáoktlm, w
vlnváxlilm k kihkt dlt yn mbynl gli day nnkil, uby, ma il ny khltiktyi
ekdkqlm dagkhlm hy glthlfái, il ny pknqktái kndktckqkm qlmgkm hy gbythk.
gkhk lvyok gli mb dktyok, w ikhay qayihk xám nk daytik hy gbkiql pbyty
nktck nk máfkik; w héoyixy dkmkt, uby my xy rkgy qkthy.

k nl uby yn xkwlthlxl haol:

-myñlt clfytikhlt, hy xbw fbyik ckik hyoátkxlm at k vbymk xytgyh, dbymql
uby ilm dymktá xbgrl hy dythytny, uby mb aicyial w mb gtamqakil dtlgyhyt
lfnacki k hymyktny; dytl wk my mkfy uby qlhl clfytikhlt ymqá lfnackhl,
kiqym uby my kbmyiqy hy nk dktqy hlihy rk clfytikhl, hkt dtaxytl
tymahyigak: hénk vbymk xytgyh hy nlm haye híkm uby rk uby qayiy yn
clfaytil, w váwkmy k nk dke hy halm.

-ikhay xy nk dbyhy dyhat -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma il ym ubayi lthyikty yn
hbuby xa myñlt; wl vlw k vytxy gli én, w k én my nk hkté hy xlnhy; gbkiql
xám uby, mknayihl wl hymibhl, glxl mkncl, il ym xyiymqyt lqtk myñkn dktk
hkt k yiqyihyt uby ry clfytikhl glxl bi áicyn.

-dkt halm uby qayiy tkeói yn ctki mkigrl -haol yn hlgqlt tygal-, w uby mlw
hy dktygyt uby ny hyoyxlm at, dltuby yn hbuby rk hy cbmqkt aipaiaql hy
vytny.

qlhlm vaiaytli yi ynnl, w ny hyoktli at, lptygaéihlny dtaxytl glxdkñík w
qlhl kubynnl uby ubamaymy dktk yn tycknl hy mb dytmlik w dktk nk glxlhahkh
hy mb vakoy. mkigrl haol uby il ubytík xám hy bi dlgl hy gyfkhk dktk yn
tbgal w xyhal ubyml w xyhal dki dktk én; uby, dbym yn gkxail ytk qki gltql,
il rkfík xyiymqyt xkwlt ia xyolt tydlmqytík. kftkeátliny qlhlm, w én,
nnltkihl, kftkeó k qlhlm, w nlm hyoó khxatkhlm, kmí hy mbm tkeliym glxl hy
mb hyqytxaikgaói qki tymlnbqk w qki hamgtyqk.





gkdíqbnl nav. uby qtkqk hy glmkm qlgkiqym k ymqk ramqltak, w il k lqtk
kncbik


tymlnvaétlimy yn hbuby w nk hbubymk hy uby yn hymkpíl uby hli ubaolqy rael
k mb vkmknnl, dlt nk gkbmk wk typytahk, dkmkmy khynkiqy; w, dbymql uby yn
xlel ymqkfk yi pnkihym, khlihy my rkfík ahl rbwyihl, dlt il qyiyt dlt
mbyctk k hlñk tlhtícbye, lthyiktli hy dliyt yi mb nbckt k bi nkgkwl ckmgói,
uby my nnkxkfk qlmanlm, aihbmqtaáihlny dtaxytl xbw fayi hy qlhl nl uby
rkfík hy rkgyt.

hy knní k hlm híkm haol yn hbuby k hli ubaolqy glxl hymhy knní k gbkqtl
vyihtík mb gliqtktal, w my dtymyiqktík yi yn gkxdl, ktxkhl glxl gkfknnytl,
w mbmqyiqktík glxl nk hligynnk xyiqík dlt xaqkh hy nk fktfk, w kbi dlt qlhk
nk fktfk yiqytk, ma my kpatxkfk uby én ny rbfaymy hkhl dknkftk hy
gkmkxayiql. hli ubaolqy tygafaó xbgrl cbmql gli nkm qknym ibyvkm, w my
dtlxyqaó k mí xamxl hy rkgyt xktkvannkm yi yn gkml, w qbvl k ctki vyiqbtk
rkfétmyny lptygahl lgkmaói hlihy kubynnlm myñltym dbhaymyi vyt rkmqk hóihy
my ymqyihík yn vknlt hy mb dlhytlml ftkel; w kmí, gli knfltlel w gliqyiql,
ymdytkfk nlm gbkqtl híkm, uby my ny afki rkgayihl, k nk gbyiqk hy mb hymyl,
gbkqtlgayiqlm macnlm.

hyoéxlmnlm dkmkt ilmlqtlm, glxl hyokxlm dkmkt lqtkm glmkm, w vkxlm k
kglxdkñkt k mkigrl, uby yiqty knycty w qtamqy vyiík gkxaikihl mlfty yn
tbgal k fbmgkt k mb kxl, gbwk glxdkñík ny kctkhkfk xám uby myt clfytikhlt
hy qlhkm nkm íimbnkm hyn xbihl.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, il rkfaéihlmy knlickhl xbgrl hy nk íimbnk hyn mb
clfaytil -uby én ibigk my dbml k kvytacbkt ma ytk íimbnk, gabhkh, vannk l
nbckt nk uby clfytikfk-, val uby dlt yn gkxail dlt hlihy én afk vyiíki myam
dytyctailm gli mbm flthliym, hy ymqlm ymqtkioytlm uby dahyi nk naxlmik
gkiqkihl, nlm gbknym, yi nnyckihl k én, my dbmaytli yi knk, w, nyvkiqkihl
nkm vlgym qlhlm obiqlm, glxyiektli k gkiqkt yi mb nyicbk nl uby mkigrl il
dbhl yiqyihyt, ma il pby bik dknkftk uby gnktkxyiqy dtlibigakfk naxlmik,
dlt hlihy yiqyihaó uby ytk naxlmik nk uby yi mb gkiql dyhíki; w glxl én,
mycúi hagy gahy rkxyqy, ytk gktaqkqavl khyxám, mkgó hy mbm knpltokm xyhal
dki w xyhal ubyml, hy uby vyiík dtlvyíhl, w haómynl, hagaéihlnym dlt myñkm
uby il qyiík lqtk glmk uby hktnym. ynnlm nl tygafaytli hy xbw fbyik ckik, w
haoytli:

-¡cbynqy! ¡cbynqy!

-il yiqayihl -tymdlihaó mkigrl- ubé ym nl uby xy dyhím, fbyik cyiqy.

yiqligym bil hy ynnlm mkgó bik flnmk hyn myil w xlmqtómynk k mkigrl, dlt
hlihy yiqyihaó uby ny dyhíki haiytlm; w én, dliaéihlmy yn hyhl dbnckt yi nk
cktckiqk w ymqyihayihl nk xkil kttafk, nym hal k yiqyihyt uby il qyiík
lmqbcl hy xliyhk, w, dagkihl kn tbgal, tlxdaó dlt ynnlm; w, kn dkmkt,
rkfaéihlny ymqkhl xatkihl bil hynnlm gli xbgrk kqyigaói, kttyxyqaó k én,
ygráihlny nlm ftkelm dlt nk gaiqbtk; yi vle knqk w xbw gkmqynnkik, haol:

-¡vánkxy halm! ¿ubé ym nl uby vyl? ¿ym dlmafny uby qyicl yi xam ftkelm kn
xa gktl kxacl, kn xa fbyi vygail mkigrl dkiek? mí qyicl, mai hbhk, dltuby
wl ia hbytxl, ia ymqlw krltk flttkgrl.

khxatómy mkigrl hy vytmy ilxftkt dlt mb ilxfty w hy vytmy kftkekt hyn
ymqtkioytl dytyctail, w, hymdbém hy rkfytny ymqkhl xatkihl mai rkfnkt
dknkftk, gli xbgrk kqyigaói, ibigk dbhl glilgytny; dytl, vayihl mb
mbmdyimaói yn dytyctail, ny haol:

-¿góxl, w ym dlmafny, mkigrl dkiek rytxkil, uby il glilgym k qb vygail
taglqy yn xltamgl, qyihytl hy qb nbckt?

yiqligym mkigrl ny xató gli xám kqyigaói w glxyieó k tkpacbtktny, w ,
paiknxyiqy, ny vail k glilgyt hy qlhl dbiql, w, mai kdyktmy hyn obxyiql, ny
ygró nlm ftkelm kn gbynnl, w ny haol:

-¿ubaéi hakfnlm qy rkfík hy glilgyt, taglqy, yi ymy qtkoy hy xlrkttkgrl uby
qtkym? haxy: ¿ubaéi qy rk rygrl ptkigrlqy, w góxl qayiym kqtyvaxayiql hy
vlnvyt k ymdkñk, hlihy ma qy glcyi w glilgyi qyihtám rktqk xknk vyiqbtk?

-ma qú il xy hymgbftym, mkigrl -tymdlihaó yn dytyctail-, mycbtl ymqlw uby
yi ymqy qtkoy il rkftá ikhay uby xy glilegk; w kdktqéxlilm hyn gkxail k
kubynnk knkxyhk uby knní dktygy, hlihy ubaytyi glxyt w tydlmkt xam
glxdkñytlm, w knní glxytám gli ynnlm, uby mli xbw kdkgafny cyiqy. wl qyihté
nbckt hy gliqktqy nl uby xy rk mbgyhahl hymdbém uby xy dktqí hy ibymqtl
nbckt, dlt lfyhygyt yn fkihl hy mb xkoymqkh, uby gli qkiql taclt k nlm
hymhagrkhlm hy xa ikgaói kxyikekfk, mycúi límqy.

ríelnl kmí mkigrl, w, rkfnkihl taglqy k nlm hyxám dytyctailm, my kdktqktli
k nk knkxyhk uby my dktygík, fayi hymvakhlm hyn gkxail tykn. kttloktli nlm
flthliym, ubaqátlimy nkm xbgyqkm l ymgnkvaikm w ubyhktli yi dynlqk, w qlhlm
ynnlm ytki xlelm w xbw cyiqanymrlxftym, yzgydql taglqy, uby wk ytk rlxfty
yiqtkhl yi kñlm. qlhlm qtkíki knpltokm, w qlhkm, mycúi dktygaó, vyiíki fayi
dtlvyíhkm, k nl xyilm, hy glmkm aigaqkqavkm w uby nnkxki k nk myh hy hlm
nycbkm.

qyihaétlimy yi yn mbynl, w, rkgayihl xkiqynym hy nkm wytfkm, dbmaytli mlfty
ynnkm dki, mkn, gbgrannlm, ibygym, tkokm hy ubyml, rbymlm xlihlm hy okxói,
uby ma il my hyokfki xkmgkt, il hypyihíki yn myt grbdkhlm. dbmaytli
kmaxamxl bi xkiokt iyctl uby hagyi uby my nnkxk gkvakn, w ym rygrl hy
rbyvlm hy dymgkhlm, ctki hymdytqkhlt hy nk glnkxfty. il pknqktli kgyaqbikm,
kbiuby mygkm w mai khlfl kncbil, dytl mkftlmkm w yiqtyqyiahkm. dytl nl uby
xám gkxdyó yi yn gkxdl hy kubyn fkiubyqy pbytli myam flqkm hy vail, uby
gkhk bil mkgó nk mbwk hy mb knpltok; rkmqk yn fbyi taglqy, uby my rkfík
qtkimpltxkhl hy xltamgl yi knyxái l yi qbhymgl, mkgó nk mbwk, uby yi
ctkihyek dlhík glxdyqat gli nkm gaigl.

glxyiektli k glxyt gli ctkihímaxl cbmql w xbw hy ymdkgal, mkfltyáihlmy gli
gkhk flgkhl, uby ny qlxkfki gli nk dbiqk hyn gbgrannl, w xbw dlubaql hy
gkhk glmk, w nbycl, kn dbiql, qlhlm k bik, nyvkiqktli nlm ftkelm w nkm
flqkm yi yn katy; dbymqkm nkm flgkm yi mb flgk, gnkvkhlm nlm lolm yi yn
gaynl, il dktygík mail uby dliíki yi én nk dbiqytík; w hymqk xkiytk,
xyiykihl nkm gkfyekm k bi nkhl w k lqtl, myñknym uby kgtyhaqkfki yn cbmql
uby tygyfíki, my ymqbvaytli bi fbyi ymdkgal, qtkmyckihl yi mbm ymqóxkclm
nkm yiqtkñkm hy nkm vkmaokm.

qlhl nl xatkfk mkigrl, w hy iaicbik glmk my hlník; kiqym, dlt gbxdnat gli
yn typtái, uby én xbw fayi mkfík, hy "gbkihl k tlxk pbytym, rke glxl
vaytym", dahaó k taglqy nk flqk, w qlxó mb dbiqytík glxl nlm hyxám, w il
gli xyilm cbmql uby ynnlm.

gbkqtl vygym haytli nbckt nkm flqkm dktk myt yxdaikhkm; dytl nk ubaiqk il
pby dlmafny, dltuby wk ymqkfki xám yiobqkm w mygkm uby bi ymdktql, glmk uby
dbml xbmqak nk knyctík uby rkmqk knní rkfíki xlmqtkhl. hy gbkihl yi gbkihl,
obiqkfk kncbil mb xkil hytygrk gli nk hy mkigrl, w hygík:

-ymdkñln w qbhymuba, qbql bil: fli glxdkñl.

w mkigrl tymdlihík: fli glxdkñl, obtk ha!

w hamdktkfk gli bik tamk uby ny hbtkfk bi rltk, mai kglthktmy yiqligym hy
ikhk hy nl uby ny rkfík mbgyhahl yi mb clfaytil; dltuby mlfty yn tkql w
qayxdl gbkihl my glxy w fyfy, dlgk obtamhagaói mbynyi qyiyt nlm gbahkhlm.
paiknxyiqy, yn kgkfátmyny yn vail pby dtaigadal hy bi mbyñl uby hal k
qlhlm, ubyháihlmy hltxahlm mlfty nkm xamxkm xymkm w xkiqynym; mlnlm taglqy
w mkigrl ubyhktli knytqk, dltuby rkfíki glxahl xám w fyfahl xyilm; w,
kdktqkihl taglqy k mkigrl, my myiqktli kn day hy bik rkwk, hyokihl k nlm
dytyctailm mydbnqkhlm yi hbngy mbyñl; w taglqy, mai qtldyekt ikhk yi mb
nyicbk xltamgk, yi nk dbtk gkmqynnkik ny haol nkm macbayiqym tkeliym:

-«fayi mkfym, ¡lr mkigrl dkiek, vygail w kxacl xíl!, glxl yn dtycói w fkihl
uby mb xkoymqkh xkihó dbfnagkt gliqtk nlm hy xa ikgaói dbml qyttlt w
ymdkiql yi qlhlm ilmlqtlm; k nl xyilm, yi xí ny dbml hy mbytqy uby xy
dktygy uby kiqym hyn qayxdl uby my ilm gligyhík dktk uby ragaémyxlm
kbmyigak hy ymdkñk, wk qyiík yn taclt hy nk dyik yoygbqkhl yi xa dytmlik w
yi nk hy xam raolm. lthyié, dbym, k xa dktygyt glxl dtbhyiqy, fayi kmí glxl
yn uby mkfy uby dktk qkn qayxdl ny rki hy ubaqkt nk gkmk hlihy vavy w my
dtlvyy hy lqtk hlihy xbhktmy; lthyié, hacl, hy mknat wl mlnl, mai xa
pkxanak, hy xa dbyfnl, w at k fbmgkt hlihy nnyvktnk gli glxlhahkh w mai nk
dtaymk gli uby nlm hyxám mknaytli; dltuby fayi va, w vaytli qlhlm ibymqtlm
kigakilm, uby kubynnlm dtycliym il ytki mónl kxyikekm, glxl kncbilm hygíki,
mail vythkhytkm nywym, uby my rkfíki hy dliyt yi yoygbgaói k mb hyqytxaikhl
qayxdl; w plteáfkxy k gtyyt ymqk vythkh mkfyt wl nlm tbaiym w hamdktkqkhlm
aiqyiqlm uby nlm ibymqtlm qyiíki, w qknym, uby xy dktygy uby pby
aimdatkgaói havaik nk uby xlvaó k mb xkoymqkh k dliyt yi ypygql qki
cknnkthk tymlnbgaói, il dltuby qlhlm pbémyxlm gbndkhlm, uby kncbilm rkfík
gtamqakilm patxym w vythkhytlm; dytl ytki qki dlglm uby il my dlhíki ldliyt
k nlm uby il nl ytki, w il ytk fayi gtakt nk maytdy yi yn myil, qyiayihl
nlm yiyxaclm hyiqtl hy gkmk. paiknxyiqy, gli obmqk tkeói pbaxlm gkmqackhlm
gli nk dyik hyn hymqayttl, fnkihk w mbkvy kn dktygyt hy kncbilm, dytl kn
ibymqtl, nk xám qyttafny uby my ilm dlhík hkt. hlubaytk uby ymqkxlm
nnltkxlm dlt ymdkñk, uby, yi pai, ikgaxlm yi ynnk w ym ibymqtk dkqtak
ikqbtkn; yi iaicbik dktqy rknnkxlm yn kglcaxayiql uby ibymqtk hymvyiqbtk
hymyk, w yi fytfytík, w yi qlhkm nkm dktqym hy Áptagk, hlihy ymdytáfkxlm
myt tygyfahlm, kglcahlm w tycknkhlm, knní ym hlihy xám ilm lpyihyi w
xknqtkqki. il ryxlm glilgahl yn fayi rkmqk uby ny ryxlm dythahl; w ym yn
hymyl qki ctkihy, uby gkma qlhlm qyiyxlm hy vlnvyt k ymdkñk, uby nlm xám hy
kubynnlm, w mli xbgrlm, uby mkfyi nk nyicbk glxl wl, my vbynvyi k ynnk, w
hyoki knná mbm xboytym w mbm raolm hymkxdktkhlm: qkiql ym yn kxlt uby nk
qayiyi; w kcltk glilegl w yzdytaxyiql nl uby mbyny hygatmy: uby ym hbngy yn
kxlt hy nk dkqtak. mkní, glxl hacl, hy ibymqtl dbyfnl, yiqté yi ptkigak, w,
kbiuby knní ilm rkgíki fbyi kglcaxayiql, ubamy vytnl qlhl. dkmé k aqknak w
nnycbé k knyxkiak, w knní xy dktygaó uby my dlhík vavat gli xám nafytqkh,
dltuby mbm rkfaqkhltym il xatki yi xbgrkm hynagkhyekm: gkhk bil vavy glxl
ubayty, dltuby yi nk xkwlt dktqy hynnk my vavy gli nafytqkh hy gligayigak.
hyoé qlxkhk gkmk yi bi dbyfnl obiql k kbcbmqk; obiqéxy gli ymqlm
dytyctailm, uby qayiyi dlt glmqbxfty hy vyiat k ymdkñk xbgrlm hynnlm, gkhk
kñl, k vamaqkt nlm mkiqbktalm hynnk, uby nlm qayiyi dlt mbm aihakm, w dlt
gytqímaxk ctkioytík w glilgahk ckikigak. Áihkink gkma qlhk, w il rkw dbyfnl
iaicbil hy hlihy il mkncki glxahlm w fyfahlm, glxl mbyny hygatmy, w gli bi
tykn, dlt nl xyilm, yi haiytlm, w kn gkfl hy mb vakoy mknyi gli xám hy gayi
ymgbhlm hy mlftk uby, qtlgkhlm yi ltl, l wk yi yn rbygl hy nlm flthliym, l
yiqty nlm tyxayihlm hy nkm ymgnkvaikm, l gli nk aihbmqtak uby ynnlm dbyhyi,
nlm mkgki hyn tyail w nlm dkmki k mbm qayttkm, k dymkt hy nkm cbkthkm hy
nlm dbymqlm w dbytqlm hlihy my tycamqtki. krltk ym xa aiqyigaói, mkigrl,
mkgkt yn qymltl uby hyoé yiqyttkhl, uby dlt ymqkt pbytk hyn dbyfnl nl dlhté
rkgyt mai dynactl w ymgtafat l dkmkt hymhy vknyigak k xa raok w k xa xboyt,
uby mé uby ymqá yi ktcyn, w hkt qtkek glxl qtkytnkm k kncúi dbytql hy
ptkigak, w hymhy knní nnyvktnkm k knyxkiak, hlihy ymdytktyxlm nl uby halm
ubamayty rkgyt hy ilmlqtlm; uby, yi tymlnbgaói, mkigrl, wl mé gaytql uby nk
taglqk xa raok w ptkigamgk taglqk, xa xboyt, mli gkqónagkm gtamqakikm, w,
kbiuby wl il nl mlw qkiql, qlhkvík qyicl xám hy gtamqakil uby hy xltl, w
tbycl mayxdty k halm xy kftk nlm lolm hyn yiqyihaxayiql w xy hé k glilgyt
góxl ny qyicl hy mytvat. w nl uby xy qayiy khxatkhl ym il mkfyt dlt ubé my
pby xa xboyt w xa raok kiqym k fytfytík uby k ptkigak, khlihy dlhík vavat
glxl gtamqakik.»

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-xatk, taglqy, yml il hyfaó ymqkt yi mb xkil, dltuby nkm nnyvó obki
qaldaywl, yn rytxkil hy qb xboyt; w, glxl hyfy hy myt pail xltl, pbymy k nl
xám fayi dktkhl, w méqy hygat lqtk glmk: uby gtyl uby vkm yi fknhy k fbmgkt
nl uby hyokmqy yigyttkhl; dltuby qbvaxlm ibyvkm uby rkfíki ubaqkhl k qb
gbñkhl w qb xboyt xbgrkm dytnkm w xbgrl haiytl yi ltl uby nnyvkfki dlt
tycamqtkt.

-fayi dbyhy myt yml -tydnagó taglqy-, dytl wl mé, mkigrl, uby il qlgktli k
xa yigayttl, dltuby wl il nym hymgbftí hóihy ymqkfk, qyxytlml hy kncúi
hymxái; w kmí, ma qú, mkigrl, ubaytym vyiat glixacl w kwbhktxy k mkgktnl w
k yigbftatnl, wl qy hkté hlgayiqlm ymgbhlm, gli uby dlhtám tyxyhakt qbm
iygymahkhym, uby wk mkfym uby mé wl uby nkm qayiym xbgrkm.

-wl nl ragaytk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl il mlw ikhk glhagalml; uby, k
mytnl, bi lpagal hyoé wl ymqk xkñkik hy nkm xkilm, hlihy dbhaytk rkgyt nkm
dktyhym hy xa gkmk hy ltl, w glxyt kiqym hy myam xymym yi dnkqlm hy dnkqk;
w, kmí dlt ymql glxl dlt dktygytxy rktík qtkagaói k xa tyw yi hkt pkvlt k
mbm yiyxaclm, il pbytk gliqacl, ma glxl xy dtlxyqym hlgayiqlm ymgbhlm, xy
haytkm kubí hy gliqkhl gbkqtlgayiqlm.

-w ¿ubé lpagal ym yn uby rkm hyokhl, mkigrl? -dtycbiqó taglqy.

-ry hyokhl hy myt clfytikhlt hy bik íimbnk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w qkn, uby k
fbyik pyy uby il rknnyi lqtk glxl ynnk k qtym qatliym.

-¿w hóihy ymqá ymk íimbnk? -dtycbiqó taglqy.

-¿khóihy? -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. hlm nycbkm hy kubí, w my nnkxk nk íimbnk
fktkqktak.

-gknnk, mkigrl -haol taglqy-, uby nkm íimbnkm ymqái knná hyiqtl hy nk xkt;
uby il rkw íimbnkm yi nk qayttk patxy.

-¿góxl il? -tydnagó mkigrl-. híclqy, taglqy kxacl, uby ymqk xkñkik xy dktqí
hynnk, w kwyt ymqbvy yi ynnk clfytikihl k xa dnkgyt, glxl bi mkcaqktal;
dytl, gli qlhl yml, nk ry hyokhl, dlt dktygytxy lpagal dynactlml yn hy nlm
clfytikhltym.

-w ¿ubé rkm ckikhl yi yn clfaytil? -dtycbiqó taglqy.

-ry ckikhl -tymdlihaó mkigrl- yn rkfyt glilgahl uby il mlw fbyil dktk
clfytikt, ma il ym bi rkql hy ckikhl, w uby nkm taubyekm uby my ckiki yi
nlm qknym clfaytilm mli k glmqk hy dythyt yn hymgkiml w yn mbyñl, w kbi yn
mbmqyiql; dltuby yi nkm íimbnkm hyfyi hy glxyt dlgl nlm clfytikhltym,
ymdygaknxyiqy ma qayiyi xéhaglm uby xatyi dlt mb mknbh.

-wl il qy yiqayihl, mkigrl -haol taglqy-, dytl dktégyxy uby qlhl nl uby
hagym ym hamdktkqy; uby, ¿ubaéi qy rkfík hy hkt k qa íimbnkm uby
clfytikmym? ¿pknqkfki rlxftym yi yn xbihl xám ráfanym dktk clfytikhltym uby
qú ytym? gknnk, mkigrl, w vbynvy yi qa, w xatk ma ubaytym vyiat glixacl,
glxl qy ry hagrl, k kwbhktxy k mkgkt yn qymltl uby hyoé ymglihahl; uby yi
vythkh uby ym qkiql, uby my dbyhy nnkxkt qymltl, w qy hkté gli uby vavkm,
glxl qy ry hagrl.

-wk qy ry hagrl, taglqy -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby il ubaytl; gliqéiqkqy uby dlt
xí il mytám hymgbfaytql, w dtlmacby yi fbyik rltk qb gkxail, w héokxy
mycbat yn xíl; uby wl mé uby nl fayi ckikhl my daythy, w nl xknl, ynnl w mb
hbyñl.

-il ubaytl dltpakt, mkigrl -haol taglqy-, dytl haxy: ¿rknnámqyqy yi ibymqtl
nbckt, gbkihl my dktqaó hén xa xboyt, xa raok w xa gbñkhl?

-mí rknné -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w méqy hygat uby mknaó qb raok qki rytxlmk
uby mknaytli k vytnk gbkiqlm rkfík yi yn dbyfnl, w qlhlm hygíki uby ytk nk
xám fynnk gtakqbtk hyn xbihl. afk nnltkihl w kftkekfk k qlhkm mbm kxackm w
glilgahkm, w k gbkiqlm nnyckfki k vytnk, w k qlhlm dyhík nk yiglxyihkmyi k
halm w k ibymqtk myñltk mb xkhty; w ymql, gli qkiql myiqaxayiql, uby k xí
xy rael nnltkt, uby il mbynl myt xbw nnltói. w k pyy uby xbgrlm qbvaytli
hymyl hy ymglihytnk w mknat k ubaqátmynk yi yn gkxail; dytl yn xayhl hy at
gliqtk yn xkihkhl hyn tyw nlm hyqbvl. dtaigadknxyiqy my xlmqtó xám
kdkmalikhl hli dyhtl ctycltal, kubyn xkigyfl xkwltkecl tagl uby qú glilgym,
uby hagyi uby nk ubytík xbgrl, w hymdbém uby ynnk my dktqaó, ibigk xám én
rk dktygahl yi ibymqtl nbckt, w qlhlm dyimkxlm uby afk qtkm ynnk dktk
tlfktnk; dytl rkmqk krltk il my rk mkfahl ikhk.

-mayxdty qbvy wl xknk mlmdygrk -haol taglqy- hy uby ymy gkfknnytl khkxkfk k
xa raok; dytl, pakhl yi yn vknlt hy xa taglqk, ibigk xy hal dymkhbxfty yn
mkfyt uby nk ubytík fayi; uby wk rkftám líhl hygat, mkigrl, uby nkm
xltamgkm dlgkm l iaicbik vye my xyegnktli dlt kxltym gli gtamqakilm vayolm,
w xa raok, uby, k nl uby wl gtyl, kqyihík k myt xám gtamqakik uby
yikxltkhk, il my gbtktík hy nkm mlnagaqbhym hy ymy myñlt xkwltkecl.

-halm nl rkck -tydnagó mkigrl-, uby k yiqtkxflm nym ymqktík xkn. w héokxy
dktqat hy kubí, taglqy kxacl, uby ubaytl nnyckt ymqk ilgry khlihy ymqá xa
myñlt hli ubaolqy.

-halm vkwk gliqacl, mkigrl rytxkil, uby wk xam glxdkñytlm my tyfbnnyi, w
qkxfaéi ym rltk uby dtlmackxlm ibymqtl gkxail.

w nbycl my kftkektli nlm hlm, w mkigrl mbfaó yi mb tbgal, w taglqy my
kttaxó k mb flthói, w my kdktqktli.





gkdíqbnl nv. hy glmkm mbgyhahkm k mkigrl yi yn gkxail, w lqtkm uby il rkw
xám uby vyt


yn rkfytmy hyqyiahl mkigrl gli taglqy il ny hal nbckt k uby kubyn hík
nnyckmy kn gkmqannl hyn hbuby, dbymql uby nnycó xyhak nycbk hén, hlihy ny
qlxó nk ilgry, kncl ymgbtk w gyttkhk; dytl, glxl ytk vytkil, il ny hal
xbgrk dymkhbxfty; w kmí, my kdktqó hyn gkxail gli aiqyigaói hy ymdytkt nk
xkñkik; w ubaml mb gltqk w hymvyiqbtkhk mbytqy uby, fbmgkihl nbckt hlihy
xyolt kglxlhktmy, gkwytli én w yn tbgal yi bik rlihk w ymgbtímaxk maxk uby
yiqty bilm yhapagalm xbw kiqacblm ymqkfk, w kn qayxdl hyn gkyt, my
yiglxyihó k halm hy qlhl gltkeói, dyimkihl uby il rkfík hy dktkt rkmqk yn
dtlpbihl hy nlm kfamxlm. w il pby kmí, dltuby k dlgl xám hy qtym ymqkhlm
hal plihl yn tbgal, w én my rknnó yigaxk hén, mai rkfyt tygyfahl namaói ia
hkñl kncbil.

qyiqómy qlhl yn gbytdl, w tyglcaó yn knayiql, dlt vyt ma ymqkfk mkil l
kcboytykhl dlt kncbik dktqy; w, vaéihlmy fbyil, yiqytl w gkqónagl hy mknbh,
il my rktqkfk hy hkt ctkgakm k halm ibymqtl myñlt hy nk xytgyh uby ny rkfík
rygrl, dltuby mai hbhk dyimó uby ymqkfk rygrl xan dyhkelm. qyiqó kmaxamxl
gli nkm xkilm dlt nkm dktyhym hy nk maxk, dlt vyt ma mytík dlmafny mknat
hynnk mai kwbhk hy ikhay; dytl qlhkm nkm rknnó tkmkm w mai kmahytl kncbil,
hy nl uby mkigrl my glicloó xbgrl, ymdygaknxyiqy gbkihl lwó uby yn tbgal my
ubyokfk qaytik w hlnltlmkxyiqy; w il ytk xbgrl, ia my nkxyiqkfk hy vagal,
uby, k nk vythkh, il ymqkfk xbw fayi dktkhl.

-¡kw -haol yiqligym mkigrl dkiek-, w gbái il dyimkhlm mbgymlm mbynyi
mbgyhyt k gkhk dkml k nlm uby vavyi yi ymqy xamytkfny xbihl! ¿ubaéi haoytk
uby yn uby kwyt my val yiqtliaekhl clfytikhlt hy bik íimbnk, xkihkihl k mbm
matvayiqym w k mbm vkmknnlm, rlw my rkfík hy vyt mydbnqkhl yi bik maxk, mai
rkfyt dytmlik kncbik uby ny tyxyhay, ia gtakhl ia vkmknnl uby kgbhk k mb
mlglttl? kubí rkftyxlm hy dytygyt hy rkxfty wl w xa obxyiql, ma wk il ilm
xltaxlm kiqym, én hy xlnahl w ubyftkiqkhl, w wl hy dymktlml. k nl xyilm, il
myté wl qki vyiqbtlml glxl nl pby xa myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk gbkihl
hygyihaó w fkoó k nk gbyvk hy kubyn yigkiqkhl xliqymailm, hlihy rknnó ubayi
ny tycknkmy xyolt uby yi mb gkmk, uby il dktygy mail uby my pby k xymk
dbymqk w k gkxk rygrk. knní val én vamaliym rytxlmkm w kdkgafnym, w wl vyté
kubí, k nl uby gtyl, mkdlm w gbnyftkm. ¡hymhagrkhl hy xí, w yi ubé rki
dktkhl xam nlgbtkm w pkiqkmíkm! hy kubí mkgktái xam rbymlm, gbkihl yn gaynl
myk mytvahl uby xy hymgbftki, xlihlm, fnkiglm w tkíhlm, w nlm hy xa fbyi
tbgal gli ynnlm, dlt hlihy ubaeá my ygrktá hy vyt ubaéi mlxlm, k nl xyilm
hy nlm uby qbvaytyi ilqagak uby ibigk mkigrl dkiek my kdktqó hy mb kmil, ia
mb kmil hy mkigrl dkiek. lqtk vye hacl: ¡xamytkfnym hy ilmlqtlm, uby il rk
ubytahl ibymqtk gltqk mbytqy uby xbtaémyxlm yi ibymqtk dkqtak w yiqty nlm
ibymqtlm, hlihy wk uby il rknnktk tyxyhal ibymqtk hymctkgak, il pknqktk
ubayi hynnl my hlnaytk, w yi nk rltk únqaxk hy ibymqtl dkmkxayiql ilm
gyttktk nlm lolm! ¡lr glxdkñytl w kxacl xíl, ubé xkn dkcl qy ry hkhl hy qbm
fbyilm mytvagalm! dythóikxy w dahy k nk pltqbik, yi yn xyolt xlhl uby
mbdaytym, uby ilm mkuby hymqy xamytkfny qtkfkol yi uby ymqkxlm dbymqlm nlm
hlm; uby wl dtlxyql hy dliytqy bik gltlik hy nkbtyn yi nk gkfyek, uby il
dktyegkm mail bi nkbtykhl dlyqk, w hy hktqy nlm dayimlm hlfnkhlm.

hymqk xkiytk my nkxyiqkfk mkigrl dkiek, w mb obxyiql ny ymgbgrkfk mai
tymdlihytny dknkftk kncbik: qkn ytk yn kdtayql w kicbmqak yi uby yn dlfty
my rknnkfk. paiknxyiqy, rkfayihl dkmkhl qlhk kubynnk ilgry yi xamytkfnym
ubyokm w nkxyiqkgaliym, vail yn hík, gli gbwk gnktahkh w tymdnkihlt val
mkigrl uby ytk axdlmafny hy qlhk axdlmafanahkh mknat hy kubyn dlel mai myt
kwbhkhl, w glxyieó k nkxyiqktmy w hkt vlgym, dlt vyt ma kncbil ny lík; dytl
qlhkm mbm vlgym ytki hkhkm yi hymaytql, dbym dlt qlhlm kubynnlm gliqltilm
il rkfík dytmlik uby dbhaymy ymgbgrktny, w yiqligym my kgkfó hy hkt dlt
xbytql.

ymqkfk yn tbgal flgk kttafk, w mkigrl dkiek ny kglxlhó hy xlhl uby ny dbml
yi day, uby kdyikm my dlhík qyiyt; w, mkgkihl hy nkm knpltokm, uby qkxfaéi
rkfíki glttahl nk xymxk pltqbik hy nk gkíhk, bi dyhkel hy dki, nl hal k mb
obxyiql, uby il ny mbdl xkn, w híolny mkigrl, glxl ma nl yiqyihaytk:

-qlhlm nlm hbynlm gli dki mli fbyilm.

yi ymql, hymgbftaó k bi nkhl hy nk maxk bi kcboytl, gkdke hy gkfyt dlt én
bik dytmlik, ma my kclfakfk w yiglcík. kgbhaó k én mkigrl dkiek, w,
kckekdáihlmy, my yiqtó dlt én w val uby dlt hy hyiqtl ytk ymdkgalml w
nktcl, w dúhlnl vyt, dltuby dlt nl uby my dlhík nnkxkt qygrl yiqtkfk bi
tkwl hy mln uby nl hymgbftík qlhl. val qkxfaéi uby my hankqkfk w knktckfk
dlt lqtk gligkvahkh ymdkgalmk; vayihl nl gbkn, vlnvaó k mknat khlihy ymqkfk
yn obxyiql, w gli bik dayhtk glxyieó k hymxltlikt nk qayttk hyn kcboytl, hy
xlhl uby yi dlgl ymdkgal rael nbckt hlihy gli pkganahkh dbhaymy yiqtkt yn
kmil, glxl nl rael; w, glcaéihlny hyn gkfymqtl, glxyieó k gkxaikt dlt
kubynnk ctbqk khynkiqy, dlt vyt ma rknnkfk kncbik mknahk dlt lqtk dktqy. k
vygym afk k ymgbtkm, w k vygym mai nbe, dytl iaicbik vye mai xayhl.

-¡vánkxy halm qlhldlhytlml! -hygík yiqty mí-. ymqk uby dktk xí ym
hymvyiqbtk, xyolt pbytk dktk kvyiqbtk hy xa kxl hli ubaolqy. Én mí uby
qbvaytk ymqkm dtlpbihahkhym w xkexlttkm dlt okthaiym pnltahlm w dlt
dknkgalm hy cknakik, w ymdytktk mknat hy ymqk ymgbtahkh w ymqtygryek k
kncúi pnltahl dtkhl; dytl wl, mai vyiqbtk, pknql hy glimyol w xyilmgkfkhl
hy áiaxl, k gkhk dkml dayiml uby hyfkol hy nlm daym hy axdtlvaml my rk hy
kftat lqtk maxk xám dtlpbihk uby nk lqtk, uby kgkfy hy qtkcktxy. ¡fayi
vyickm xkn, ma vayiym mlnl!

hymqk xkiytk w gli ymqlm dyimkxayiqlm ny dktygaó uby rkftík gkxaikhl dlgl
xám hy xyhak nycbk, kn gkfl hy nk gbkn hymgbftaó bik glipbmk gnktahkh, uby
dktygaó myt wk hy hík, w uby dlt kncbik dktqy yiqtkfk, uby hkfk aihagal hy
qyiyt pai kfaytql kubyn, dktk én, gkxail hy nk lqtk vahk.

kubí ny hyok gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna, w vbynvy k qtkqkt hy hli ubaolqy,
uby, knfltlekhl w gliqyiql, ymdytkfk yn dnkel hy nk fkqknnk uby rkfík hy
rkgyt gli yn tlfkhlt hy nk rlitk hy nk raok hy hlñk tlhtícbye, k ubayi
dyimkfk yihytyekt yn qbytql w hymkcbamkhl uby xknkxyiqy ny qyiíki pygrl.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, mknaéihlmy bik xkñkik k axdliytmy w yimkwktmy yi nl uby
rkfík hy rkgyt yi yn qtkigy yi uby lqtl hík dyimkfk vytmy, hkihl bi tydynói
l kttyxyqahk k tlgaikiqy, nnycó k dliyt nlm daym qki obiql k bik gbyvk,
uby, k il qatktny pbytqyxyiqy nkm tayihkm, pbytk axdlmafny il gkyt yi ynnk.
yi pai, ny hyqbvl w il gkwó, w, nnycáihlmy kncl xám gytgk, mai kdyktmy,
xató kubynnk rlihbtk; w, ymqáihlnk xatkihl, lwó ctkihym vlgym hyiqtl; w,
ymgbgrkihl kqyiqkxyiqy, dbhl dytgyfat w yiqyihyt uby yn uby nkm hkfk hygík:

-¡kr hy kttafk! ¿rkw kncúi gtamqakil uby xy ymgbgry, l kncúi gkfknnytl
gktaqkqavl uby my hbynk hy bi dygkhlt yiqyttkhl yi vahk, l bi hymhagrkhl
hymclfytikhl clfytikhlt?

dktygaóny k hli ubaolqy uby lík nk vle hy mkigrl dkiek, hy uby ubyhó
mbmdyiml w kmlxftkhl, w, nyvkiqkihl nk vle qlhl nl uby dbhl, haol:

-¿ubaéi ymqá knná fkol? ¿ubaéi my ubyok?

-¿ubaéi dbyhy ymqkt kubí, l ubaéi my rk hy ubyokt -tymdlihaytli-, mail yn
kmyihytykhl hy mkigrl dkiek, clfytikhlt, dlt mbm dygkhlm w dlt mb xknk
kihkiek, hy nk íimbnk fktkqktak, ymgbhytl uby pby hyn pkxlml gkfknnytl hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk?

lwyihl nl gbkn hli ubaolqy, my ny hlfnó nk khxatkgaói w my ny kgtygyiqó yn
dkmxl, vaiaéihlmyny kn dyimkxayiql uby mkigrl dkiek hyfík hy myt xbytql, w
uby ymqkfk knní dyikihl mb knxk, w nnyvkhl hymqk axkcaikgaói haol:

-glioútlqy dlt qlhl kubynnl uby dbyhl gliobtktqy glxl gkqónagl gtamqakil,
uby xy hackm ubaéi ytym; w ma ytym knxk yi dyik, haxy ubé ubaytym uby rkck
dlt qa; uby, dbym ym xa dtlpymaói pkvltygyt w kglttyt k nlm iygymaqkhlm
hymqy xbihl, qkxfaéi nl myté dktk kglttyt w kwbhkt k nlm xyiymqytlmlm hyn
lqtl xbihl, uby il dbyhyi kwbhktmy dlt mí dtldalm.

-hymk xkiytk -tymdlihaytli-, vbymqtk xytgyh uby xy rkfnk hyfy hy myt xa
myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, w kbi yi yn ótckil hy nk vle il ym lqtl,
mai hbhk.

-hli ubaolqy mlw -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, yn uby dtlpyml mlglttyt w kwbhkt yi
mbm iygymahkhym k nlm vavlm w k nlm xbytqlm. dlt yml haxy ubaéi ytym, uby
xy qayiym kqóiaql; dltuby ma ytym xa ymgbhytl mkigrl dkiek, w qy rkm
xbytql, glxl il qy rkwki nnyvkhl nlm hakfnlm, w, dlt nk xamytaglthak hy
halm, ymqém yi yn dbtckqltal, mbptkcalm qayiy ibymqtk mkiqk xkhty nk
acnymak gkqónagk tlxkik fkmqkiqym k mkgktqy hy nkm dyikm yi uby ymqám, w
wl, uby nl mlnagaqkté gli ynnk, dlt xa dktqy, gli gbkiql xa rkgayihk
kngkiekty; dlt yml, kgkfk hy hygnktktqy w haxy ubaéi ytym.

-¡vlql k qkn! -tymdlihaytli-, w dlt yn ikgaxayiql hy ubayi vbymk xytgyh
ubamayty, obtl, myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, uby wl mlw mb ymgbhytl
mkigrl dkiek, w uby ibigk xy ry xbytql yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk; mail
uby, rkfayihl hyokhl xa clfaytil dlt glmkm w gkbmkm uby ym xyiymqyt xám
ymdkgal dktk hygatnkm, kilgry gkí yi ymqk maxk hlihy wkcl, yn tbgal
glixacl, uby il xy hyoktá xyiqat, dbym, dlt xám myñkm, ymqá kubí glixacl.

w rkw xám: uby il dktygy mail uby yn obxyiql yiqyihaó nl uby mkigrl haol,
dltuby kn xlxyiql glxyieó k tyfbeikt, qki tygal, uby qlhk nk gbyvk
tyqbxfkfk.

-¡pkxlml qymqacl! -haol hli ubaolqy-. yn tyfbeil glilegl glxl ma ny
dktaytk, w qb vle lacl, mkigrl xíl. ymdétkxy; até kn gkmqannl hyn hbuby,
uby ymqá kubí gytgk, w qtkyté ubayi qy mkuby hymqk maxk, hlihy qbm dygkhlm
qy hyfyi hy rkfyt dbymql.

-vkwk vbymk xytgyh -haol mkigrl-, w vbynvk dtymql, dlt bi mlnl halm, uby wk
il nl dbyhl nnyvkt yn ymqkt kubí mydbnqkhl yi vahk, w xy ymqlw xbtayihl hy
xayhl.

hyoóny hli ubaolqy, w pby kn gkmqannl k gliqkt k nlm hbubym yn mbgyml hy
mkigrl dkiek, hy uby il dlgl my xktkvannktli, kbiuby fayi yiqyihaytli uby
hyfík hy rkfyt gkíhl dlt nk glttymdlihyigak hy kubynnk ctbqk uby hy qayxdlm
aixyxltaknym ymqkfk knní rygrk; dytl il dlhíki dyimkt góxl rkfík hyokhl yn
clfaytil mai qyiyt ynnlm kvaml hy mb vyiahk. paiknxyiqy, glxl hagyi,
nnyvktli mlckm w xktlxkm; w, k glmqk hy xbgrk cyiqy w hy xbgrl qtkfkol,
mkgktli kn tbgal w k mkigrl dkiek hy kubynnkm qaiayfnkm k nk nbe hyn mln.
valny bi ymqbhakiqy, w haol:

-hymqk xkiytk rkfíki hy mknat hy mbm clfaytilm qlhlm nlm xknlm
clfytikhltym, glxl mkny ymqy dygkhlt hyn dtlpbihl hyn kfamxl: xbytql hy
rkxfty, hymglnltahl, w mai fnkigk, k nl uby wl gtyl.

lwónl mkigrl, w haol:

-lgrl híkm l haye rk, rytxkil xbtxbtkhlt, uby yiqté k clfytikt nk íimbnk
uby xy haytli, yi nlm gbknym il xy va rktql hy dki maubaytk bi rltk; yi
ynnlm xy rki dytmycbahl xéhaglm, w yiyxaclm xy rki ftbxkhl nlm cüymlm; ia
ry qyiahl nbckt hy rkgyt glrygrlm, ia hy glftkt hytygrlm; w, mayihl ymql
kmí, glxl nl ym, il xytygík wl, k xa dktygyt, mknat hy ymqk xkiytk; dytl yn
rlxfty dliy w halm hamdliy, w halm mkfy nl xyolt w nl uby ny ymqá fayi k
gkhk bil; w gbkn yn qayxdl, qkn yn qayiql; w ikhay hack "hymqk kcbk il
fyfyté", uby khlihy my dayimk uby rkw qlgailm, il rkw ymqkgkm; w halm xy
yiqayihy, w fkmqk, w il hacl xám, kbiuby dbhaytk.

-il qy yiloym, mkigrl, ia tygafkm dymkhbxfty hy nl uby lwytym, uby mytá
ibigk kgkfkt: vyi qú gli mycbtk gligayigak, w hacki nl uby haoytyi; w ym
ubytyt kqkt nkm nyicbkm hy nlm xknhagayiqym nl xymxl uby ubytyt dliyt
dbytqkm kn gkxdl. ma yn clfytikhlt mkny tagl hy mb clfaytil, hagyi hén uby
rk mahl bi nkhtói, w ma mkny dlfty, uby rk mahl bi dktk dlgl w bi
xyiqygkql.

-k fbyi mycbtl -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby dlt ymqk vye kiqym xy rki hy qyiyt
dlt qliql uby dlt nkhtói.

yi ymqkm dnáqagkm nnycktli, tlhykhlm hy xbgrkgrlm w hy lqtk xbgrk cyiqy, kn
gkmqannl, khlihy yi bilm glttyhltym ymqkfki wk yn hbuby w nk hbubymk
ymdytkihl k hli ubaolqy w k mkigrl, yn gbkn il ubaml mbfat k vyt kn hbuby
mai uby dtaxytl il rbfaymy kglxlhkhl kn tbgal yi nk gkfknnytaek, dltuby
hygík uby rkfík dkmkhl xbw xknk ilgry yi nk dlmkhk; w nbycl mbfaó k vyt k
mbm myñltym, kiqy nlm gbknym, dbymql hy tlhannkm, haol:

-wl, myñltym, dltuby nl ubaml kmí vbymqtk ctkihyek, mai iaicúi xytygaxayiql
xíl, pba k clfytikt vbymqtk íimbnk fktkqktak, yi nk gbkn yiqté hymibhl, w
hymibhl xy rknnl: ia daythl, ia ckil. ma ry clfytikhl fayi l xkn, qymqaclm
ry qyiahl hynkiqy, uby hatái nl uby ubamaytyi. ry hygnktkhl hbhkm,
myiqyigakhl dnyaqlm, mayxdty xbytql hy rkxfty, dlt rkfytnl ubytahl kmí yn
hlgqlt dyhtl tygal, ikqbtkn hy qatqykpbytk, xéhagl aimbnkil w
clfytikhltymgl. kglxyqaétliilm yiyxaclm hy ilgry, w, rkfaéihlilm dbymql yi
ctkihy kdtayql, hagyi nlm hy nk íimbnk uby mknaytli naftym w gli vaqltak
dlt yn vknlt hy xa ftkel, uby qkn mknbh nym hé halm glxl ynnlm hagyi
vythkh. yi tymlnbgaói, yi ymqy qayxdl wl ry qkiqykhl nkm gktckm uby qtky
glimacl, w nkm lfnackgaliym, yn clfytikt, w ry rknnkhl dlt xa gbyiqk uby il
nkm dlhtái nnyvkt xam rlxftlm, ia mli dyml hy xam glmqannkm, ia pnygrkm hy
xa knokfk; w kmí, kiqym uby haymy glixacl kn qtkvém yn clfaytil, ry ubytahl
wl hkt gli yn clfaytil kn qtkvém, w kwyt hy xkñkik hyoé nk íimbnk glxl nk
rknné: gli nkm xamxkm gknnym, gkmkm w qyokhlm uby qyiík gbkihl yiqté yi
ynnk. il ry dyhahl dtymqkhl k ikhay, ia xyqíhlxy yi ctkioytíkm; w, kbiuby
dyimkfk rkgyt kncbikm lthyikiekm dtlvygrlmkm, il ragy iaicbik, qyxytlml uby
il my rkfíki hy cbkthkt: uby ym nl xymxl rkgytnkm uby il rkgytnkm. mkní,
glxl hacl, hy nk íimbnk mai lqtl kglxdkñkxayiql uby yn hy xa tbgal; gkí yi
bik maxk, víiyxy dlt ynnk khynkiqy, rkmqk uby, ymqk xkñkik, gli nk nbe hyn
mln, va nk mknahk, dytl il qki págan uby, k il hydktktxy yn gaynl k xa
myñlt hli ubaolqy, knní xy ubyhktk rkmqk nk pai hyn xbihl. kmí uby, xam
myñltym hbuby w hbubymk, kubí ymqá vbymqtl clfytikhlt mkigrl dkiek, uby rk
ctkioykhl yi mlnlm haye híkm uby rk qyiahl yn clfaytil k glilgyt uby il my
ny rk hy hkt ikhk dlt myt clfytikhlt, il uby hy bik íimbnk, mail hy qlhl yn
xbihl; w, gli ymqy dtymbdbymql, fymkihl k vbymqtkm xytgyhym nlm daym,
axaqkihl kn obycl hy nlm xbgrkgrlm, uby hagyi "mknqk qú, w háxynk qú", hlw
bi mknql hyn clfaytil, w xy dkml kn mytvagal hy xa myñlt hli ubaolqy; uby,
yi pai, yi én, kbiuby glxl yn dki gli mlftymknql, rátqlxy, k nl xyilm, w
dktk xí, glxl wl ymqé rktql, yml xy rkgy uby myk hy ekikrltakm uby hy
dythagym.

gli ymql hal pai k mb nktck dnáqagk mkigrl, qyxayihl mayxdty hli ubaolqy
uby rkfík hy hygat yi ynnk xannktym hy hamdktkqym; w, gbkihl ny val kgkfkt
gli qki dlglm, hal yi mb gltkeói ctkgakm kn gaynl, w yn hbuby kftkeó k
mkigrl, w ny haol uby ny dymkfk yi yn knxk hy uby rbfaymy hyokhl qki dtymql
yn clfaytil; dytl uby én rktík hy mbytqy uby my ny haymy yi mb ymqkhl lqtl
lpagal hy xyilm gktck w hy xám dtlvygrl. kftkeóny nk hbubymk kmaxamxl, w
xkihó uby ny tycknkmyi, dltuby hkfk myñknym hy vyiat xkn xlnahl w dylt
dktkhl.





gkdíqbnl nva. hy nk hymglxbikn w ibigk vamqk fkqknnk uby dkmó yiqty hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk w yn nkgkwl qlmanlm, yi nk hypyimk hy nk raok hy nk
hbyñk hlñk tlhtícbye


il ubyhktli kttydyiqahlm nlm hbubym hy nk fbtnk rygrk k mkigrl dkiek hyn
clfaytil uby ny haytli; w xám, uby kubyn xamxl hík vail mb xkwlthlxl, w nym
gliqó dbiql dlt dbiql, qlhkm gkma, nkm dknkftkm w kggaliym uby mkigrl rkfík
hagrl w rygrl yi kubynnlm híkm, w paiknxyiqy nym yigktygaó yn kmknql hy nk
íimbnk, w yn xayhl hy mkigrl, w mb mknahk, hy uby il dyubyñl cbmql
tygafaytli.

hymdbém hymql, gbyiqk nk ramqltak uby my nnycó yn hík hy nk fkqknnk
kdnkekhk, w, rkfayihl yn hbuby bik w xbw xbgrkm vygym khvytqahl k mb nkgkwl
qlmanlm góxl my rkfík hy kvyiat gli hli ubaolqy dktk vyigytny mai xkqktny
ia rytatny, lthyió uby my ubaqkmyi nlm rayttlm k nkm nkiekm, hagayihl k hli
ubaolqy uby il dytxaqík nk gtamqakihkh, hy uby én my dtygakfk, uby kubynnk
fkqknnk pbymy gli qkiql taymcl w dynactl hy nkm vahkm, w uby my gliqyiqkmy
gli uby ny hkfk gkxdl ptkigl yi mb qayttk, dbymql uby afk gliqtk yn hygtyql
hyn mkiql gliganal, uby dtlrífy nlm qknym hymkpílm, w il ubamaymy nnyvkt
dlt qlhl taclt kubyn qtkigy qki pbytqy.

hli ubaolqy haol uby mb yzgynyigak hamdbmaymy nkm glmkm hy kubyn iyclgal
glxl xám pbymy mytvahl; uby én ny lfyhygytík yi qlhl. nnyckhl, dbym, yn
qyxytlml hík, w rkfayihl xkihkhl yn hbuby uby hynkiqy hy nk dnkek hyn
gkmqannl my ragaymy bi ymdkgalml gkhkrknml, hlihy ymqbvaymyi nlm obygym hyn
gkxdl w nkm hbyñkm, xkhty w raok, hyxkihkiqym, rkfík kgbhahl hy qlhlm nlm
nbcktym w knhykm gatgbivygaikm aipaiaqk cyiqy, k vyt nk ilvyhkh hy kubynnk
fkqknnk; uby ibigk lqtk qkn il rkfíki vamql, ia líhl hygat yi kubynnk
qayttk nlm uby vavíki ia nlm uby rkfíki xbytql.

yn dtaxytl uby yiqtó yi yn gkxdl w ymqkgkhk pby yn xkymqtl hy nkm
gytyxliakm, uby qkiqyó yn gkxdl, w ny dkmyó qlhl, dltuby yi én il rbfaymy
kncúi yickñl, ia glmk yigbfaytqk hlihy my qtldyekmy w gkwymy; nbycl
yiqtktli nkm hbyñkm w my myiqktli yi mbm kmayiqlm, gbfaytqkm gli nlm xkiqlm
rkmqk nlm lolm w kbi rkmqk nlm dygrlm, gli xbymqtkm hy il dyubyñl
myiqaxayiql. dtymyiqy hli ubaolqy yi nk ymqkgkhk, hy knní k dlgl,
kglxdkñkhl hy xbgrkm qtlxdyqkm, kmlxó dlt bik dktqy hy nk dnkek, mlfty bi
dlhytlml gkfknnl, rbihaéihlnk qlhk, yn ctkihy nkgkwl qlmanlm, gknkhk nk
vamytk w qlhl yigkxftlikhl, gli bikm pbytqym w nbgayiqym ktxkm. yn gkfknnl
xlmqtkfk myt ptamói, kigrl w hy glnlt qlthannl; hy gkhk xkil w day ny
dyihík bik kttlfk hy nkik.

vyiík yn vknytlml glxfkqayiqy fayi aipltxkhl hyn hbuby mb myñlt hy góxl my
rkfík hy dltqkt gli yn vknytlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, khvytqahl uby yi
iaicbik xkiytk ny xkqkmy, mail uby dtlgbtkmy rbat yn dtaxyt yigbyiqtl dlt
ymgbmkt yn dynactl hy mb xbytqy, uby ymqkfk gaytql ma hy nnyil yi nnyil ny
yigliqtkmy. dkmyó nk dnkek, w, nnyckihl hlihy nkm hbyñkm ymqkfki, my dbml
kncúi qkiql k xatkt k nk uby dlt ymdlml ny dyhík. nnkxó yn xkymy hy gkxdl k
hli ubaolqy, uby wk my rkfík dtymyiqkhl yi nk dnkek, w obiql gli qlmanlm
rkfnó k nkm hbyñkm, dtycbiqáihlnym ma glimyiqíki uby vlnvaymy dlt mb
hytygrl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk. ynnkm haoytli uby mí, w uby qlhl nl uby
yi kubyn gkml ragaymy nl hkfki dlt fayi rygrl, dlt patxy w dlt vknyhytl.

wk yi ymqy qayxdl ymqkfki yn hbuby w nk hbubymk dbymqlm yi bik cknytík uby
gkík mlfty nk ymqkgkhk, qlhk nk gbkn ymqkfk gltlikhk hy aipaiaqk cyiqy, uby
ymdytkfk vyt yn tacbtlml qtkigy ibigk vamql. pby glihagaói hy nlm
glxfkqayiqym uby ma hli ubaolqy vyigík, mb gliqtktal my rkfík hy gkmkt gli
nk raok hy hlñk tlhtícbye; w ma én pbymy vyigahl, ubyhkfk nafty mb
gliqyihlt hy nk dknkftk uby my ny dyhík, mai hkt lqtk mkqampkgaói kncbik.

dktqaónym yn xkymqtl hy nkm gytyxliakm yn mln, w dbml k nlm hlm gkhk bil yi
yn dbymql hlihy rkfíki hy ymqkt. mliktli nlm kqkxfltym, nnyió yn katy yn
mli hy nkm qtlxdyqkm, qyxfnkfk hyfkol hy nlm daym nk qayttk; ymqkfki
mbmdyimlm nlm gltkeliym hy nk xatkiqy qbtfk, qyxayihl bilm w ymdytkihl
lqtlm yn fbyil l yn xkn mbgyml hy kubyn gkml. paiknxyiqy, hli ubaolqy,
yiglxyiháihlmy hy qlhl mb gltkeói k halm ibymqtl myñlt w k nk myñltk
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, ymqkfk kcbkthkihl uby my ny haymy myñkn dtygamk hy nk
kttyxyqahk; yxdytl, ibymqtl nkgkwl qyiík hapytyiqym dyimkxayiqlm: il
dyimkfk én mail yi nl uby kcltk haté:

dktygy myt uby, gbkihl ymqbvl xatkihl k mb yiyxack, ny dktygaó nk xám
rytxlmk xboyt uby rkfík vamql yi qlhk mb vahk, w yn iañl gycbyebynl, k
ubayi mbynyi nnkxkt hy lthaiktal kxlt dlt ymkm gknnym, il ubaml dythyt nk
lgkmaói uby my ny lptygaó hy qtabipkt hy bik knxk nkgkwbik w dliytnk yi nk
namqk hy mbm qtlpylm; w kmí, nnycáihlmy k én fliaqkxyiqy, mai uby ikhay ny
vaymy, ny yivkmó kn dlfty nkgkwl bik pnygrk hy hlm vktkm dlt yn nkhl
aeubaythl, w ny dkmó yn gltkeói hy dktqy k dktqy; w dúhlnl rkgyt fayi kn
mycbtl, dltuby yn kxlt ym aivamafny, w yiqtk w mkny dlt hl ubayty, mai uby
ikhay ny dahk gbyiqk hy mbm rygrlm.

hacl, dbym, uby, gbkihl haytli nk myñkn hy nk kttyxyqahk, ymqkfk ibymqtl
nkgkwl qtkimdltqkhl, dyimkihl yi nk rytxlmbtk hy nk uby wk rkfík rygrl
myñltk hy mb nafytqkh, w kmí, il kqyihaó kn mli hy nk qtlxdyqk, glxl rael
hli ubaolqy, uby, kdyikm nk rbfl líhl, gbkihl kttyxyqaó, w, k qlhl yn
glttyt uby dytxaqík tlgaikiqy, dktqaó gliqtk mb yiyxacl; w, vaéihlny dktqat
mb fbyi ymgbhytl mkigrl, haol k ctkihym vlgym:

-¡halm qy cbíy, ikqk w pnlt hy nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm! ¡halm qy hé nk
vaqltak, dbym nnyvkm nk tkeói hy qb dktqy!

w, kbiuby qlmanlm val vyiat gliqtk mí k hli ubaolqy, il my xlvaó bi dkml hy
mb dbymql; kiqym, gli ctkihym vlgym, nnkxó kn xkymy hy gkxdl, yn gbkn
vyiahl k vyt nl uby ubytík, ny haol:

-myñlt, ¿ymqk fkqknnk il my rkgy dltuby wl xy gkmy, l il xy gkmy, gli
kubynnk myñltk?

-kmí ym -ny pby tymdlihahl.

-dbym wl -haol yn nkgkwl- mlw qyxytlml hy xa gligayigak, w dlihtíknk yi
ctki gktcl ma dkmkmy khynkiqy yi ymqk fkqknnk; w kmí, hacl uby wl xy hlw
dlt vyigahl w uby ubaytl gkmktxy nbycl gli kubynnk myñltk.

ubyhó khxatkhl yn xkymy hy gkxdl hy nkm tkeliym hy qlmanlm; w, glxl ytk bil
hy nlm mkfahltym hy nk xáubaik hy kubyn gkml, il ny mbdl tymdlihyt dknkftk.
hyqúvlmy hli ubaolqy yi nk xaqkh hy mb gkttytk, vayihl uby mb yiyxacl il
ny kglxyqík. yn hbuby il mkfík nk lgkmaói dltuby il my dkmkfk khynkiqy yi
nk fkqknnk, dytl yn xkymy hy gkxdl ny pby k hygnktkt nl uby qlmanlm hygík,
hy nl uby ubyhó mbmdyiml w glnétagl yi ymqtyxl.

yi qkiql uby ymql dkmkfk, qlmanlm my nnycó khlihy hlñk tlhtícbye ymqkfk, w
haol k ctkihym vlgym:

-wl, myñltk, ubaytl gkmktxy gli vbymqtk raok, w il ubaytl kngkiekt dlt
dnyaqlm ia gliqayihkm nl uby dbyhl kngkiekt dlt dke w mai dynactl hy nk
xbytqy.

lwó ymql yn vknytlml hli ubaolqy, w haol:

-dbym ymql kmí ym, wl ubyhl nafty w mbynql hy xa dtlxymk: gámyimy yi rltk
fbyik, w, dbym halm ibymqtl myñlt my nk hal, mki dyhtl my nk fyihack.

yn hbuby rkfík fkokhl k nk dnkek hyn gkmqannl, w, nnycáihlmy k qlmanlm, ny
haol:

-¿ym vythkh, gkfknnytl, uby lm hkam dlt vyigahl, w uby, aimqackhl hy
vbymqtk qyxytlmk gligayigak, lm ubytéam gkmkt gli ymqk hligynnk?

-mí, myñlt -tymdlihaó qlmanlm.

-Én rkgy xbw fayi -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl dkiek-, dltuby nl uby rkm hy
hkt kn xbt, hknl kn ckql, w mkgktqy rk hy gbahkhl.

Ífkmy qlmanlm hymyinkekihl nk gynkhk, w tlckfk uby kdtaymk ny kwbhkmyi,
dltuby ny afki pknqkihl nlm ymdítaqbm hyn knayiql, w il dlhík vytmy
yigyttkhl qkiql qayxdl yi nk ymqtygryek hy kubyn kdlmyiql. ubaqátlimynk
kdtaymk, w ubyhó hymgbfaytql w dkqyiqy mb tlmqtl hy nkgkwl. vayihl nl gbkn
hlñk tlhtícbye w mb raok, hkihl ctkihym vlgym, haoytli:

-¡Émqy ym yickñl, yickñl ym émqy! ¡k qlmanlm, yn nkgkwl hyn hbuby xa myñlt,
ilm rki dbymql yi nbckt hy xa vythkhytl ymdlml! ¡obmqagak hy halm w hyn
tyw, hy qkiqk xknagak, dlt il hygat fynnkubytík!

-il vlm kgbaqéam, myñltkm -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby ia émqk ym xknagak ia ym
fynnkubytík; w ma nk ym, w il rk mahl nk gkbmk yn hbuby, mail nlm xknlm
yigkiqkhltym uby xy dytmacbyi, nlm gbknym, aivahalmlm hy uby wl kngkiekmy
nk cnltak hymqy vyigaxayiql, rki glivytqahl yn tlmqtl hy vbymqtl ymdlml yi
yn hy ymqy uby hygím uby ym nkgkwl hyn hbuby. qlxkh xa glimyol, w, k dymkt
hy nk xknagak hy xam yiyxaclm, gkmklm gli én, uby mai hbhk ym yn xamxl uby
vlm hymyáam kngkiekt dlt ymdlml.

yn hbuby, uby ymql lwó, ymqbvl dlt tlxdyt yi tamk qlhk mb gónytk, w haol:

-mli qki yzqtklthaiktakm nkm glmkm uby mbgyhyi kn myñlt hli ubaolqy uby
ymqlw dlt gtyyt uby ymqy xa nkgkwl il nl ym; dytl bmyxlm hymqy kthah w
xkñk: hankqyxlm yn gkmkxayiql ubaigy híkm, ma ubaytyi, w qyickxlm yigyttkhl
k ymqy dytmlikoy uby ilm qayiy hbhlmlm, yi nlm gbknym dlhtík myt uby
vlnvaymy k mb dtímqaik pacbtk; uby il rk hy hbtkt qkiql yn tkiglt uby nlm
yigkiqkhltym qayiyi kn myñlt hli ubaolqy, w xám, wéihlnym qki dlgl yi bmkt
ymqlm yxfynyglm w qtkimpltxkgaliym.

-¡lr myñlt! -haol mkigrl-, uby wk qayiyi ymqlm xknkihtaiym dlt bml w
glmqbxfty hy xbhkt nkm glmkm, hy bikm yi lqtkm, uby qlgki k xa kxl. bi
gkfknnytl uby vyigaó nlm híkm dkmkhlm, nnkxkhl yn hy nlm ymdyolm, ny
vlnvaytli yi nk pacbtk hyn fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl, ikqbtkn hy ibymqtl
dbyfnl w ctkihy kxacl ibymqtl, w k xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml nk rki
vbynql yi bik túmqagk nkftkhltk; w kmí, axkcail uby ymqy nkgkwl rk hy xltat
w vavat nkgkwl qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk.

k nl uby haol nk raok hy tlhtícbye:

-mékmy ubayi pbyty ymqy uby xy dahy dlt ymdlmk, uby wl my nl kctkhyegl; uby
xám ubaytl myt xboyt nycíqaxk hy bi nkgkwl uby il kxack w fbtnkhk hy bi
gkfknnytl, dbymql uby yn uby k xí xy fbtnó il nl ym.

yi tymlnbgaói, qlhlm ymqlm gbyiqlm w mbgymlm dktktli yi uby qlmanlm my
tyglcaymy, rkmqk vyt yi ubé dktkfk mb qtkimpltxkgaói; kgnkxktli qlhlm nk
vaqltak dlt hli ubaolqy, w nlm xám ubyhktli qtamqym w xynkigónaglm hy vyt
uby il my rkfíki rygrl dyhkelm nlm qki ymdytkhlm glxfkqayiqym, fayi kmí
glxl nlm xlgrkgrlm ubyhki qtamqym gbkihl il mkny yn krltgkhl uby ymdytki,
dltuby ny rk dythlikhl, l nk dktqy, l nk obmqagak. pbymy nk cyiqy,
vlnvaétlimy yn hbuby w hli ubaolqy kn gkmqannl, yigyttktli k qlmanlm,
ubyhktli hlñk tlhtícbye w mb raok gliqyiqímaxkm hy vyt uby, dlt bik vík l
dlt lqtk, kubyn gkml rkfík hy dktkt yi gkmkxayiql, w qlmanlm il ymdytkfk
xyilm.





gkdíqbnl nvaa. uby qtkqk hy góxl hli ubaolqy my hymdahaó hyn hbuby, w hy nl
uby ny mbgyhaó gli nk hamgtyqk w hymyivbynqk knqamahltk, hligynnk hy nk
hbubymk


wk ny dktygaó k hli ubaolqy uby ytk fayi mknat hy qkiqk lgalmahkh glxl nk
uby yi kubyn gkmqannl qyiík; uby my axkcaikfk myt ctkihy nk pknqk uby mb
dytmlik rkgík yi hyoktmy ymqkt yigyttkhl w dytyelml yiqty nlm aipaiaqlm
tycknlm w hynyaqym uby glxl k gkfknnytl kihkiqy kubynnlm myñltym ny rkgíki,
w dktygíkny uby rkfík hy hkt gbyiqk ymqtygrk kn gaynl hy kubynnk lgalmahkh
w yigyttkxayiql; w kmí, dahaó bi hík nagyigak k nlm hbubym dktk dktqatmy.
haétlimynk, gli xbymqtkm hy uby yi ctki xkiytk nym dymkfk hy uby nlm
hyokmy. hal nk hbubymk nkm gktqkm hy mb xboyt k mkigrl dkiek, yn gbkn nnltó
gli ynnkm, w haol:

-¿ubaéi dyimktk uby ymdytkiekm qki ctkihym glxl nkm uby yi yn dygrl hy xa
xboyt qytymk dkiek yicyihtktli nkm ibyvkm hy xa clfaytil rkfíki hy dktkt yi
vlnvytxy wl kcltk k nkm kttkmqtkhkm kvyiqbtkm hy xa kxl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk? gli qlhl ymql, xy gliqyiql hy vyt uby xa qytymk glttymdlihaó k myt
ubayi ym, yivakihl nkm fynnlqkm k nk hbubymk; uby, k il rkfétmynkm yivakhl,
ubyhkihl wl dymktlml, xy xlmqtktk ynnk hymkctkhygahk. nl uby xy glimbynk ym
uby ymqk háhavk il my ny dbyhy hkt ilxfty hy glrygrl, dltuby wk qyiík wl yn
clfaytil gbkihl ynnk nkm yivaó, w ymqá dbymql yi tkeói uby nlm uby tygafyi
kncúi fyiypagal, kbiuby myk gli iañytíkm, my xbymqtyi kctkhygahlm. yi
ypygql, wl yiqté hymibhl yi yn clfaytil w mkncl hymibhl hén; w kmí, dlhté
hygat gli mycbtk gligayigak, uby il ym dlgl: "hymibhl ikgí, hymibhl xy
rknnl: ia daythl ia ckil".

ymql dkmkfk yiqty mí mkigrl yn hík hy nk dktqahk; w, mknayihl hli ubaolqy,
rkfaéihlmy hymdyhahl nk ilgry kiqym hy nlm hbubym, bik xkñkik my dtymyiqó
ktxkhl yi nk dnkek hyn gkmqannl. xatáfkiny hy nlm glttyhltym qlhk nk cyiqy
hyn gkmqannl, w kmaxamxl nlm hbubym mknaytli k vytny. ymqkfk mkigrl mlfty
mb tbgal, gli mbm knpltokm, xknyqk w tydbymql, gliqyiqímaxl, dltuby yn
xkwlthlxl hyn hbuby, yn uby pby nk qtapknha, ny rkfík hkhl bi flnmagl gli
hlgayiqlm ymgbhlm hy ltl, dktk mbdnat nlm xyiymqytym hyn gkxail, w ymql kúi
il nl mkfík hli ubaolqy.

ymqkihl, glxl ubyhk hagrl, xatáihlny qlhlm, k hymrltk, yiqty nkm lqtkm
hbyñkm w hligynnkm hy nk hbubymk, uby ny xatkfki, kneó nk vle nk
hymyivbynqk w hamgtyqk knqamahltk, w yi mli nkmqaxytl haol:

   -ymgbgrk, xkn gkfknnytl;
   hyqéi bi dlgl nkm tayihkm;
   il pkqacbym nkm aokhkm
   hy qb xkn tycahk fymqak.
   xatk, pknml, uby il rbwkm
   hy kncbik mytdayiqy paytk,
   mail hy bik glthytannk
   uby ymqá xbw nyolm hy lvyok.
   qú rkm fbtnkhl, xlimqtbl rlttyihl,
   nk xám rytxlmk hligynnk
   uby hïkik val yi mbm xliqym,
   uby vyibm xató yi mbm mynvkm.
   gtbyn vatyil, pbcaqavl yiykm,
   fkttkfám qy kglxdkñy; knná qy kvyickm.
   qú nnyvkm, ¡nnyvkt axdíl!,
   yi nkm ckttkm hy qbm gyttkm
   nkm yiqtkñkm hy bik rbxanhy,
   glxl yikxltkhk, qaytik.
   nnévkmqy qtym qlgkhltym,
   w bikm nackm, hy bikm daytikm
   uby kn xátxln dbtl my acbknki
   yi namkm, fnkigkm w iyctkm.
   nnévkmqy hlm xan mbmdatlm,
   uby, k myt hy pbycl, dbhaytki
   kftkmkt k hlm xan qtlwkm,
   ma hlm xan qtlwkm rbfaytk.
   gtbyn vatyil, pbcaqavl yiykm,
   fkttkfám qy kglxdkñy; knná qy kvyickm.
   hy ymy mkigrl, qb ymgbhytl,
   nkm yiqtkñkm myki qki qytgkm
   w qki hbtkm, uby il mknck
   hy mb yigkiql hbngaiyk.
   hy nk gbndk uby qú qayiym
   nnyvy nk qtamqy nk dyik;
   uby obmqlm dlt dygkhltym
   qkn vye dkcki yi xa qayttk.
   qbm xám paikm kvyiqbtkm
   yi hymvyiqbtkm my vbynvki,
   yi mbyñlm qbm dkmkqayxdlm,
   yi lnvahlm qbm patxyekm.
   gtbyn vatyil, pbcaqavl yiykm,
   fkttkfám qy kglxdkñy; knná qy kvyickm.
   mykm qyiahl dlt pknml
   hymhy myvannk k xktgryik,
   hymhy ctkikhk rkmqk nlok,
   hy nlihtym k aicnkqyttk.
   ma obcktym kn tyaikhl,
   nlm gayiqlm, l nk dtaxytk,
   nlm tywym rbwki hy qa;
   kmym ia mayqym il vykm.
   ma qy gltqktym nlm gknnlm,
   mkicty nkm rytahkm vaytqki,
   w ubéhyiqy nlm tkacliym
   ma qy mkgktym nkm xbynkm.
   gtbyn vatyil, pbcaqavl yiykm,
   fkttkfám qy kglxdkñy; knná qy kvyickm.

yi qkiql uby, hy nk mbytqy uby my rk hagrl, my ubyokfk nk nkmqaxkhk
knqamahltk, nk ymqbvl xatkihl hli ubaolqy, w, mai tymdlihytnk dknkftk,
vlnvayihl yn tlmqtl k mkigrl, ny haol:

-dlt yn macnl hy qbm dkmkhlm, mkigrl xíl, qy gliobtl uby xy hackm bik
vythkh. haxy, ¿nnyvkm dlt vyiqbtk nlm qtym qlgkhltym w nkm nackm uby ymqk
yikxltkhk hligynnk hagy?

k nl uby mkigrl tymdlihaó:

-nlm qtym qlgkhltym mí nnyvl; dytl nkm nackm, glxl dlt nlm gyttlm hy Úfyhk.

ubyhó nk hbubymk khxatkhk hy nk hymyivlnqbtk hy knqamahltk, uby, kbiuby nk
qyiík dlt kqtyvahk, ctkgalmk w hymyivbynqk, il yi ctkhl uby my kqtyvaytk k
myxyokiqym hymyivlnqbtkm; w, glxl il ymqkfk khvytqahk hymqk fbtnk, gtygaó
xám mb khxatkgaói. yn hbuby ubaml typltekt yn hlikaty, w haol:

-il xy dktygy fayi, myñlt gkfknnytl, uby, rkfayihl tygyfahl yi ymqy xa
gkmqannl yn fbyi kglcaxayiql uby yi én my lm rk rygrl, lm rkwáam kqtyvahl k
nnyvktlm qtym qlgkhltym, dlt nl xyilm, ma dlt nl xám nkm nackm hy xa
hligynnk; aihagalm mli hy xkn dygrl w xbymqtkm uby il glttymdlihyi k
vbymqtk pkxk. vlnvyhny nkm nackm; ma il, wl lm hymkpíl k xltqkn fkqknnk,
mai qyiyt qyxlt uby xknkihtaiym yigkiqkhltym xy vbynvki ia xbhyi yn tlmqtl,
glxl rki rygrl yi yn hy qlmanlm xa nkgkwl, yn uby yiqtó gli vlm yi fkqknnk.

-il ubaytk halm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- uby wl hymyivkaiy xa ymdkhk gliqtk
vbymqtk anbmqtímaxk dytmlik, hy ubayi qkiqkm xytgyhym ry tygyfahl; nlm
qlgkhltym vlnvyté, dltuby hagy mkigrl uby nlm qayiy; nkm nackm ym
axdlmafny, dltuby ia wl nkm ry tygyfahl ia én qkxdlgl; w ma ymqk vbymqtk
hligynnk ubamayty xatkt mbm ymglihtaolm, k fbyi mycbtl uby nkm rknny. wl,
myñlt hbuby, okxám ry mahl nkhtói, ia nl dayiml myt yi qlhk xa vahk, glxl
halm il xy hyoy hy mb xkil. ymqk hligynnk rkfnk, glxl ynnk hagy, glxl
yikxltkhk, hy nl uby wl il ny qyicl gbndk; w kmí, il qyicl hy ubé dyhatny
dythói ia k ynnk ia k vbymqtk yzgynyigak, k ubayi mbdnagl xy qyick yi xyolt
ldaiaói, w xy hé hy ibyvl nagyigak dktk mycbat xa gkxail.

-hélmny halm qki fbyil -haol nk hbubymk-, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby mayxdty
lackxlm fbyikm ibyvkm hy vbymqtkm pygrbtíkm. w kihkh gli halm; uby,
xayiqtkm xám lm hyqyiéam, xám kbxyiqáam yn pbycl yi nlm dygrlm hy nkm
hligynnkm uby lm xatki; w k nk xík wl nk gkmqackté hy xlhl, uby hy kubí
khynkiqy il my hymxkihy gli nk vamqk ia gli nkm dknkftkm.

-bik il xám ubaytl uby xy ymgbgrym, ¡lr vknytlml hli ubaolqy! -haol
yiqligym knqamahltk-; w ym uby qy dahl dythói hyn nkqtlgaial hy nkm nackm,
dltuby, yi halm w yi xa áiaxk uby nkm qyicl dbymqkm, w ry gkíhl yi yn
hymgbahl hyn uby wyihl mlfty yn kmil, ny fbmgkfk.

-¿il nl haoy wl? -haol mkigrl-. ¡fliagl mlw wl dktk yigbftat rbtqlm! dbym,
k ubytytnlm rkgyt, hy dknyqk xy rkfík vyiahl nk lgkmaói yi xa clfaytil.

kfkoó nk gkfyek hli ubaolqy w rael tyvytyigak k nlm hbubym w k qlhlm nlm
gatgbimqkiqym, w, vlnvayihl nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy, macbaéihlny mkigrl
mlfty yn tbgal, my mknaó hyn gkmqannl, yihytyekihl mb gkxail k ektkclek.





gkdíqbnl nvaaa. uby qtkqk hy góxl xyibhyktli mlfty hli ubaolqy kvyiqbtkm
qkiqkm, uby il my hkfki vkckt bikm k lqtkm


gbkihl hli ubaolqy my val yi nk gkxdkñk tkmk, nafty w hymyxfktkekhl hy nlm
tyubayftlm hy knqamahltk, ny dktygaó uby ymqkfk yi mb gyiqtl, w uby nlm
ymdítaqbm my ny tyilvkfki dktk dtlmycbat hy ibyvl yn kmbxdql hy mbm
gkfknnytíkm, w, vlnvaéihlmy k mkigrl, ny haol:

-nk nafytqkh, mkigrl, ym bil hy nlm xám dtygalmlm hliym uby k nlm rlxftym
haytli nlm gaynlm; gli ynnk il dbyhyi acbknktmy nlm qymltlm uby yigayttk nk
qayttk ia yn xkt yigbfty; dlt nk nafytqkh, kmí glxl dlt nk rlitk, my dbyhy
w hyfy kvyiqbtkt nk vahk, w, dlt yn gliqtktal, yn gkbqavytal ym yn xkwlt
xkn uby dbyhy vyiat k nlm rlxftym. hacl ymql, mkigrl, dltuby fayi rkm vamql
yn tycknl, nk kfbihkigak uby yi ymqy gkmqannl uby hyokxlm ryxlm qyiahl;
dbym yi xyqkh hy kubynnlm fkiubyqym mkelikhlm w hy kubynnkm fyfahkm hy
iayvy, xy dktygík k xí uby ymqkfk xyqahl yiqty nkm ymqtygryekm hy nk
rkxfty, dltuby il nl clekfk gli nk nafytqkh uby nl clektk ma pbytki xílm;
uby nkm lfnackgaliym hy nkm tyglxdyimkm hy nlm fyiypagalm w xytgyhym
tygyfahkm mli kqkhbtkm uby il hyoki gkxdykt kn áiaxl nafty. ¡vyiqbtlml
kubén k ubayi yn gaynl hal bi dyhkel hy dki, mai uby ny ubyhy lfnackgaói hy
kctkhygytnl k lqtl uby kn xamxl gaynl!

-gli qlhl yml -haol mkigrl- uby vbymk xytgyh xy rk hagrl, il ym fayi uby my
ubyhy mai kctkhygaxayiql hy ibymqtk dktqy hlgayiqlm ymgbhlm hy ltl uby yi
bik flnmannk xy hal yn xkwlthlxl hyn hbuby, uby glxl dígqaxk w glipltqkqavl
nk nnyvl dbymqk mlfty yn gltkeói, dktk nl uby my lptygayty; uby il mayxdty
ryxlm hy rknnkt gkmqannlm hlihy ilm tycknyi, uby qkn vye qldktyxlm gli
kncbikm vyiqkm hlihy ilm kdknyyi.

yi ymqlm w lqtlm tkelikxayiqlm afki nlm kihkiqym, gkfknnytl w ymgbhytl,
gbkihl vaytli, rkfayihl kihkhl dlgl xám hy bik nycbk, uby yigaxk hy nk
wytfk hy bi dtkhannl vythy, yigaxk hy mbm gkdkm, ymqkfki glxayihl rkmqk bik
hlgyik hy rlxftym, vymqahlm hy nkftkhltym. obiql k mí qyiíki bikm glxl
máfkikm fnkigkm, gli uby gbftíki kncbik glmk uby hyfkol ymqkfk; ymqkfki
yxdaikhkm w qyihahkm, w hy qtygrl k qtygrl dbymqkm. nnycó hli ubaolqy k nlm
uby glxíki, w, mknbháihlnlm dtaxytl gltqémxyiqy, nym dtycbiqó uby ubé ytk
nl uby kubynnlm nayielm gbftíki. bil hynnlm ny tymdlihaó:

-myñlt, hyfkol hymqlm nayielm ymqái bikm axácaiym hy tynayvy w yiqkfnkhbtk
uby rki hy mytvat yi bi tyqkfnl uby rkgyxlm yi ibymqtk knhyk; nnyváxlmnkm
gbfaytqkm, dltuby il my hympnltyi, w yi rlxftlm, dltuby il my ubayftyi.

-ma mlam mytvahlm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, rlncktík hy vytnkm, dbym
axácaiym uby gli qkiql tygkql my nnyvki, mai hbhk hyfyi hy myt fbyikm.

-w ¡góxl ma nl mli! -haol lqtl-. ma il, hícknl nl uby gbymqk: uby yi vythkh
uby il rkw iaicbik uby il ymqé yi xám hy gaigbyiqk hbgkhlm; w, dltuby vyk
vbymqtk xytgyh ymqk vythkh, ymdyty vbymqtk xytgyh, w vytnk rk dlt vamqk hy
lolm.

w, nyvkiqáihlmy, hyoó hy glxyt w pby k ubaqkt nk gbfaytqk hy nk dtaxytk
axkcyi, uby xlmqtó myt nk hy mki oltcy dbymql k gkfknnl, gli bik mytdayiqy
yitlmgkhk k nlm daym w nk nkiek kqtkvymkhk dlt nk flgk, gli nk paytyek uby
mbyny daiqktmy. qlhk nk axkcyi dktygík bik kmgbk hy ltl, glxl mbyny
hygatmy. vaéihlnk hli ubaolqy, haol:

-ymqy gkfknnytl pby bil hy nlm xyoltym kihkiqym uby qbvl nk xanagak havaik:
nnkxómy hli mki oltcy, w pby khyxám hypyihyhlt hy hligynnkm. vykxlm ymqk
lqtk.

hymgbftaónk yn rlxfty, w dktygaó myt nk hy mki xktqíi dbymql k gkfknnl, uby
dktqík nk gkdk gli yn dlfty; w, kdyikm nk rbfl vamql hli ubaolqy, gbkihl
haol:

-ymqy gkfknnytl qkxfaéi pby hy nlm kvyiqbtytlm gtamqakilm, w gtyl uby pby
xám nafytkn uby vknayiqy, glxl nl dbyhym ygrkt hy vyt, mkigrl, yi uby ymqá
dktqayihl nk gkdk gli yn dlfty w ny hk nk xaqkh; w mai hbhk hyfík hy myt
yiqligym aivaytil, uby, ma il, én my nk haytk qlhk, mycúi ytk hy
gktaqkqavl.

-il hyfaó hy myt yml -haol mkigrl-, mail uby my hyfaó hy kqyiyt kn typtái
uby hagyi: uby dktk hkt w qyiyt, myml ym xyiymqyt.

taómy hli ubaolqy w dahaó uby ubaqkmyi lqtl nayiel, hyfkol hyn gbkn my
hymgbftaó nk axkcyi hyn dkqtói hy nkm ymdkñkm k gkfknnl, nk ymdkhk
yimkictyiqkhk, kqtldynnkihl xltlm w damkihl gkfyekm; w, yi vaéihlnk, haol
hli ubaolqy:

-Émqy mí uby ym gkfknnytl, w hy nkm ymgbkhtkm hy gtamql; émqy my nnkxk hli
mki haycl xkqkxltlm, bil hy nlm xám vknayiqym mkiqlm w gkfknnytlm uby qbvl
yn xbihl w qayiy kcltk yn gaynl.

nbycl hymgbftaytli lqtl nayiel, w dktygaó uby yigbftík nk gkíhk hy mki
dkfnl hyn gkfknnl kfkol, gli qlhkm nkm gatgbimqkigakm uby yi yn tyqkfnl hy
mb glivytmaói mbynyi daiqktmy. gbkihl ny vahl qki kn vavl, uby haoytki uby
gtamql ny rkfnkfk w dkfnl tymdlihík.

-Émqy -haol hli ubaolqy- pby yn xkwlt yiyxacl uby qbvl nk acnymak hy halm
ibymqtl myñlt yi mb qayxdl, w yn xkwlt hypyimlt mbwl uby qyihtá okxám:
gkfknnytl kihkiqy dlt nk vahk, w mkiql k day ubyhl dlt nk xbytqy,
qtkfkokhlt aigkimkfny yi nk vañk hyn myñlt, hlgqlt hy nkm cyiqym, k ubayi
matvaytli hy ymgbynkm nlm gaynlm w hy gkqyhtáqagl w xkymqtl uby ny yimyñkmy
yn xamxl oymbgtamql.

il rkfík xám axácaiym, w kmí, xkihó hli ubaolqy uby nkm vlnvaymyi k gbftat,
w haol k nlm uby nkm nnyvkfki:

-dlt fbyi kcüytl ry qyiahl, rytxkilm, rkfyt vamql nl uby ry vamql, dltuby
ymqlm mkiqlm w gkfknnytlm dtlpymktli nl uby wl dtlpyml, uby ym yn yoytgagal
hy nkm ktxkm; mail uby nk hapytyigak uby rkw yiqty xí w ynnlm ym uby ynnlm
pbytli mkiqlm w dynyktli k nl havail, w wl mlw dygkhlt w dynyl k nl rbxkil.
ynnlm gliubamqktli yn gaynl k pbytek hy ftkelm, dltuby yn gaynl dkhygy
pbytek, w wl rkmqk kcltk il mé nl uby gliubamql k pbytek hy xam qtkfkolm;
dytl ma xa hbngaiyk hyn qlflml mknaymy hy nlm uby dkhygy, xyoltáihlmy xa
vyiqbtk w khlfáihlmyxy yn obagal, dlhtík myt uby yigkxaikmy xam dkmlm dlt
xyolt gkxail hyn uby nnyvl.

-halm nl lack w yn dygkhl myk mlthl -haol mkigrl k ymqk lgkmaói.

khxatátlimy nlm rlxftym, kmí hy nk pacbtk glxl hy nkm tkeliym hy hli
ubaolqy, mai yiqyihyt nk xaqkh hy nl uby yi ynnkm hygat ubytík. kgkfktli hy
glxyt, gktcktli gli mbm axácaiym, w, hymdahaéihlmy hy hli ubaolqy,
macbaytli mb vakoy.

ubyhó mkigrl hy ibyvl glxl ma okxám rbfaytk glilgahl k mb myñlt, khxatkhl
hy nl uby mkfík, dktygaéihlny uby il hyfík hy rkfyt ramqltak yi yn xbihl ia
mbgyml uby il nl qbvaymy gaptkhl yi nk bñk w gnkvkhl yi nk xyxltak, w
híolny:

-yi vythkh, myñlt ibymqtkxl, uby ma ymql uby ilm rk mbgyhahl rlw my dbyhy
nnkxkt kvyiqbtk, ynnk rk mahl hy nkm xám mbkvym w hbngym uby yi qlhl yn
hamgbtml hy ibymqtk dytyctaikgaói ilm rk mbgyhahl: hynnk rkfyxlm mknahl mai
dknlm w mlftymknql kncbil, ia ryxlm ygrkhl xkil k nkm ymdkhkm, ia ryxlm
fkqahl nk qayttk gli nlm gbytdlm, ia ubyhkxlm rkxftayiqlm. fyihaql myk
halm, uby qkn xy rk hyokhl vyt gli xam dtldalm lolm.

-qú hagym fayi, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl rkm hy khvytqat uby il
qlhlm nlm qayxdlm mli bilm, ia glttyi hy bik xamxk mbytqy, w ymql uby yn
vbncl mbyny nnkxkt glxúixyiqy kcüytlm, uby il my pbihki mlfty ikqbtkn tkeói
kncbik, hyn uby ym hamgtyql rki hy myt qyiahlm w obeckt dlt fbyilm
kgliqygaxayiqlm. nyváiqkmy bil hymqlm kcltytlm dlt nk xkñkik, mkny hy mb
gkmk, yigbéiqtkmy gli bi ptkany hy nk lthyi hyn fayikvyiqbtkhl mki
ptkigamgl, w, glxl ma rbfaytk yigliqtkhl gli bi ctapl, vbynvy nkm ymdknhkm
w vbénvymy k mb gkmk. hyttáxkmyny kn lqtl xyihlek nk mkn yigaxk hy nk xymk,
w hyttáxkmyny k én nk xynkiglník dlt yn gltkeói, glxl ma ymqbvaymy lfnackhk
nk ikqbtknyek k hkt myñknym hy nkm vyiahytkm hymctkgakm gli glmkm qki hy
dlgl xlxyiql glxl nkm typytahkm. yn hamgtyql w gtamqakil il rk hy kihkt yi
dbiqannlm gli nl uby ubayty rkgyt yn gaynl. nnyck gadaói k Áptagk, qtldayek
yi mknqkihl yi qayttk, qaéiyinl dlt xkn kcüytl mbm mlnhkhlm; dytl én,
kftkeáihlmy gli yn mbynl, haol: ''il qy xy dlhtám rbat, Áptagk, dltuby qy
qyicl kmahk w yiqty xam ftkelm''. kmí uby, mkigrl, yn rkfyt yigliqtkhl gli
ymqkm axácaiym rk mahl dktk xí pynagímaxl kgliqygaxayiql.

-wl kmí nl gtyl -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w ubyttík uby vbymqtk xytgyh xy haoymy
ubé ym nk gkbmk dlt uby hagyi nlm ymdkñlnym gbkihl ubaytyi hkt kncbik
fkqknnk, aivlgkihl kubyn mki haycl xkqkxltlm: "¡mkiqakcl, w gayttk,
ymdkñk!" ¿ymqá dlt vyiqbtk ymdkñk kfaytqk, w hy xlhl uby ym xyiymqyt
gyttktnk, l ubé gytyxliak ym émqk?

-maxdnagímaxl ytym, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-; w xatk uby ymqy ctki
gkfknnytl hy nk gtbe fytxyok rámynl hkhl halm k ymdkñk dlt dkqtói w kxdktl
mbwl, ymdygaknxyiqy yi nlm tacbtlmlm qtkigym uby gli nlm xltlm nlm
ymdkñlnym rki qyiahl; w kmí, ny aivlgki w nnkxki glxl k hypyimlt mbwl yi
qlhkm nkm fkqknnkm uby kglxyqyi, w xbgrkm vygym ny rki vamql vamafnyxyiqy
yi ynnkm, hyttafkihl, kqtldynnkihl, hymqtbwyihl w xkqkihl nlm kcktyilm
ymgbkhtliym; w hymqk vythkh qy dbhaytk qtkyt xbgrlm yoyxdnlm uby yi nkm
vythkhytkm ramqltakm ymdkñlnkm my gbyiqki.

xbhó mkigrl dnáqagk, w haol k mb kxl:

-xktkvannkhl ymqlw, myñlt, hy nk hymyivlnqbtk hy knqamahltk, nk hligynnk hy
nk hbubymk: ftkvkxyiqy nk hyfy hy qyiyt rytahk w qtkmdkmkhk kubyn uby
nnkxki kxlt, uby hagyi uby ym bi tkdke gycbyebynl uby, gli ymqkt nkckñlml,
l, dlt xyolt hygat, mai vamqk, ma qlxk dlt fnkigl bi gltkeói, dlt dyubyñl
uby myk, ny kgaytqk w qtkmdkmk hy dktqy k dktqy gli mbm pnygrkm. ry líhl
hygat qkxfaéi uby yi nk vytcüyiek w tygkql hy nkm hligynnkm my hymdbiqki w
yxflqki nkm kxltlmkm mkyqkm, dytl yi ymqk knqamahltk xám dktygy uby my
kcbeki uby hymdbiqki.

-khvaytqy, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby yn kxlt ia xatk tymdyqlm ia
cbkthk qétxailm hy tkeói yi mbm hamgbtmlm, w qayiy nk xamxk glihagaói uby
nk xbytqy: uby kmí kglxyqy nlm knqlm kngáektym hy nlm tywym glxl nkm
rbxanhym grlekm hy nlm dkmqltym, w gbkihl qlxk yiqytk dlmymaói hy bik knxk,
nl dtaxytl uby rkgy ym ubaqktny yn qyxlt w nk vytcüyiek; w kmí, mai ynnk
hygnktó knqamahltk mbm hymylm, uby yicyihtktli yi xa dygrl kiqym glipbmaói
uby námqaxk.

-¡gtbynhkh ilqltak! -haol mkigrl-. ¡hymkctkhygaxayiql aikbhaql! wl hy xí mé
hygat uby xy taihaytk w kvkmknnktk nk xám xíiaxk tkeói kxltlmk mbwk.
¡rahydbqk, w ubé gltkeói hy xátxln, ubé yiqtkñkm hy ftligy w ubé knxk hy
ktckxkmk! dytl il dbyhl dyimkt ubé ym nl uby val ymqk hligynnk yi vbymqtk
xytgyh uby kmí nk taihaymy w kvkmknnkmy: ubé cknk, ubé ftíl, ubé hlikaty,
ubé tlmqtl, uby gkhk glmk dlt mí hémqkm, l qlhkm obiqkm, ny yikxltktli; uby
yi vythkh yi vythkh uby xbgrkm vygym xy dktl k xatkt k vbymqtk xytgyh hymhy
nk dbiqk hyn day rkmqk yn únqaxl gkfynnl hy nk gkfyek, w uby vyl xám glmkm
dktk ymdkiqkt uby dktk yikxltkt; w, rkfayihl wl qkxfaéi líhl hygat uby nk
rytxlmbtk ym nk dtaxytk w dtaigadkn dktqy uby yikxltk, il qyiayihl vbymqtk
xytgyh iaicbik, il mé wl hy ubé my yikxltó nk dlfty.

-khvaytqy, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby rkw hlm xkiytkm hy
rytxlmbtk: bik hyn knxk w lqtk hyn gbytdl; nk hyn knxk gkxdyk w my xbymqtk
yi yn yiqyihaxayiql, yi nk rliymqahkh, yi yn fbyi dtlgyhyt, yi nk
nafytknahkh w yi nk fbyik gtakiek, w qlhkm ymqkm dktqym gkfyi w dbyhyi
ymqkt yi bi rlxfty pyl; w gbkihl my dliy nk xatk yi ymqk rytxlmbtk, w il yi
nk hyn gbytdl, mbyny ikgyt yn kxlt gli íxdyqb w gli vyiqkokm. wl, mkigrl,
fayi vyl uby il mlw rytxlml, dytl qkxfaéi glilegl uby il mlw hampltxy; w
fámqkny k bi rlxfty hy fayi il myt xlimqtbl dktk myt fayi ubytahl, glxl
qyick nlm hlqym hyn knxk uby qy ry hagrl.

yi ymqkm tkeliym w dnáqagkm my afki yiqtkihl dlt bik mynvk uby pbytk hyn
gkxail ymqkfk, w k hymrltk, mai dyimkt yi ynnl, my rknnó hli ubaolqy
yityhkhl yiqty bikm tyhym hy ranl vythy, uby hymhy bilm átflnym k lqtlm
ymqkfki qyihahkm; w, mai dlhyt axkcaikt ubé dbhaymy myt kubynnl, haol k
mkigrl:

-dktégyxy, mkigrl, uby ymql hymqkm tyhym hyfy hy myt bik hy nkm xám ibyvkm
kvyiqbtkm uby dbyhk axkcaikt. uby xy xkqyi ma nlm yigkiqkhltym uby xy
dytmacbyi il ubaytyi yityhktxy yi ynnkm w hyqyiyt xa gkxail, glxl yi
vyickiek hy nk tacbtahkh uby gli knqamahltk ry qyiahl. dbym xáihlnym wl
uby, kbiuby ymqkm tyhym, ma glxl mli rygrkm hy ranl vythy pbytki hy
hbtímaxlm hakxkiqym, l xám pbytqym uby kubénnk gli uby yn gynlml halm hy
nlm ryttytlm yityhó k vyibm w k xktqy, kmí nk tlxdaytk glxl ma pbytk hy
obiglm xktailm l hy rankgrkm hy knclhói.

w, ubytayihl dkmkt khynkiqy w tlxdytnl qlhl, kn axdtlvaml my ny lptygaytli
hynkiqy, mknayihl hy yiqty bilm átflnym, hlm rytxlmímaxkm dkmqltkm; k nl
xyilm, vymqahkm glxl dkmqltkm, mail uby nlm dynnaglm w mkwkm ytki hy pail
ftlgkhl, hacl, uby nkm mkwkm ytki taubímaxlm pknhynnaiym hy qkfí hy ltl.
qtkíki nlm gkfynnlm mbynqlm dlt nkm ymdknhkm, uby yi tbfalm dlhíki glxdyqat
gli nlm tkwlm hyn xamxl mln; nlm gbknym my gltlikfki gli hlm cbatiknhkm hy
vythy nkbtyn w hy tlol kxktkiql qyoahkm. nk yhkh, kn dktygyt, ia fkokfk hy
nlm ubaigy ia dkmkfk hy nlm haye w lgrl.

vamqk pby émqk uby khxató k mkigrl, mbmdyihaó k hli ubaolqy, rael dktkt kn
mln yi mb gkttytk dktk vytnkm, w qbvl yi xktkvannlml manyigal k qlhlm
gbkqtl. yi pai, ubayi dtaxytl rkfnó pby bik hy nkm hlm ekcknkm, uby haol k
hli ubaolqy:

-hyqyiyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, yn dkml, w il tlxdáam nkm tyhym, uby il dktk
hkñl vbymqtl, mail dktk ibymqtl dkmkqayxdl, krí ymqái qyihahkm; w, dltuby
mé uby ilm rkféam hy dtycbiqkt dktk ubé my rki dbymql w ubaéi mlxlm, lm nl
ubaytl hygat yi ftyvym dknkftkm. yi bik knhyk uby ymqá rkmqk hlm nycbkm hy
kubí, hlihy rkw xbgrk cyiqy dtaigadkn w xbgrlm rahknclm w taglm, yiqty
xbgrlm kxaclm w dktayiqym my gligytqó uby gli mbm raolm, xboytym w raokm,
vygailm, kxaclm w dktayiqym, ilm vaiaémyxlm k rlnckt k ymqy maqal, uby ym
bil hy nlm xám kctkhkfnym hy qlhlm ymqlm gliqltilm, pltxkihl yiqty qlhlm
bik ibyvk w dkmqltan ktgkhak, vamqaéihlilm nkm hligynnkm hy ekcknkm w nlm
xkigyflm hy dkmqltym. qtkyxlm ymqbhakhkm hlm écnlckm, bik hyn pkxlml dlyqk
cktgankml, w lqtk hyn yzgynyiqímaxl gkxlym, yi mb xamxk nyicbk
dltqbcbymk, nkm gbknym rkmqk kcltk il ryxlm tydtymyiqkhl. kwyt pby yn
dtaxytl hík uby kubí nnyckxlm; qyiyxlm yiqty ymqlm tkxlm dnkiqkhkm kncbikm
qayihkm, uby hagyi my nnkxki hy gkxdkñk, yi yn xktcyi hy bi kfbihlml kttlwl
uby qlhlm ymqlm dtkhlm pytqanaek; qyihaxlm nk ilgry dkmkhk ymqkm tyhym hy
ymqlm átflnym dktk yickñkt nlm maxdnym dkoktannlm, uby, loykhlm gli ibymqtl
tbahl, vaiaytyi k hkt yi ynnkm. ma cbmqáam, myñlt, hy myt ibymqtl rbémdyh,
mytéam kckmkokhl nafytkn w gltqémxyiqy; dltuby dlt kcltk yi ymqy maqal il
rk hy yiqtkt nk dymkhbxfty ia nk xynkiglník.

gknnó w il haol xám. k nl uby tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy:

-dlt gaytql, rytxlmímaxk myñltk, uby il hyfaó hy ubyhkt xám mbmdyiml ia
khxatkhl kiqyói gbkihl val kn axdtlvaml fkñktmy yi nkm kcbkm k hakik, glxl
wl ry ubyhkhl kqóiaql yi vyt vbymqtk fynnyek. knkfl yn kmbxdql hy vbymqtlm
yiqtyqyiaxayiqlm, w yn hy vbymqtlm lptygaxayiqlm kctkhyegl; w, ma lm dbyhl
mytvat, gli mycbtahkh hy myt lfyhygahkm xy nl dlhéam xkihkt; dltuby il ym
émqk nk dtlpymaói xík, mail hy xlmqtktxy kctkhygahl w fayirygrlt gli qlhl
céiytl hy cyiqy, yi ymdygakn gli nk dtaigadkn uby vbymqtkm dytmlikm
tydtymyiqk; w, ma glxl ymqkm tyhym, uby hyfyi hy lgbdkt kncúi dyubyñl
ymdkgal, lgbdktki qlhk nk tyhlihye hy nk qayttk, fbmgktk wl ibyvlm xbihlm
dlt hl dkmkt mai tlxdytnkm; w dltuby hyam kncúi gtéhaql k ymqk xa
yzkcytkgaói, vyh uby lm nl dtlxyqy, dlt nl xyilm, hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,
ma ym uby rk nnyckhl k vbymqtlm líhlm ymqy ilxfty.

-¡kw, kxack hy xa knxk -haol yiqligym nk lqtk ekcknk-, w ubé vyiqbtk qki
ctkihy ilm rk mbgyhahl! ¿vym ymqy myñlt uby qyiyxlm hynkiqy? dbym ráclqy
mkfyt uby ym yn xám vknayiqy, w yn xám yikxltkhl, w yn xám glxyhahl uby
qayiy yn xbihl, ma il ym uby ilm xayiqy w ilm yickñk bik ramqltak uby hy
mbm rkekñkm kihk axdtymk w wl ry nyíhl. wl kdlmqkté uby ymqy fbyi rlxfty
uby vayiy glimacl ym bi qkn mkigrl dkiek, mb ymgbhytl, k gbwkm ctkgakm il
rkw iaicbikm uby my ny acbknyi.

-kmí ym nk vythkh -haol mkigrl-: uby wl mlw ymy ctkgalml w ymy ymgbhytl uby
vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, w ymqy myñlt ym xa kxl, yn xamxl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk ramqltakhl w typytahl.

-¡kw! -haol nk lqtk-. mbdnaubéxlmny, kxack, uby my ubyhy; uby ibymqtlm
dkhtym w ibymqtlm rytxkilm cbmqktái aipaiaql hynnl, uby qkxfaéi ry líhl wl
hygat hy mb vknlt w hy mbm ctkgakm nl xamxl uby qú xy rkm hagrl, w, mlfty
qlhl, hagyi hén uby ym yn xám patxy w xám nykn yikxltkhl uby my mkfy, w uby
mb hkxk ym bik qkn hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, k ubayi yi qlhk ymdkñk nk hki nk
dknxk hy nk rytxlmbtk.

-gli tkeói my nk hki -haol hli ubaolqy-, ma wk il nl dliy yi hbhk vbymqtk
mai acbkn fynnyek. il lm gkiméam, myñltkm, yi hyqyiytxy, dltuby nkm
dtygamkm lfnackgaliym hy xa dtlpymaói il xy hyoki tydlmkt yi iaicúi gkfl.

nnycó, yi ymql, khlihy nlm gbkqtl ymqkfki bi rytxkil hy bik hy nkm hlm
dkmqltkm, vymqahl kmaxamxl hy dkmqlt, gli nk taubyek w cknkm uby k nkm hy
nkm ekcknkm glttymdlihík; gliqátliny ynnkm uby yn uby gli ynnkm ymqkfk ytk
yn vknytlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, w yn lqtl, mb ymgbhytl mkigrl, hy
ubayi qyiík én wk ilqagak, dlt rkfyt nyíhl mb ramqltak. lptygaómyny yn
cknnkthl dkmqlt, dahaóny uby my vaiaymy gli én k mbm qayihkm; rúflnl hy
gligyhyt hli ubaolqy, w kmí nl rael.

nnycó, yi ymql, yn loyl, nnyiátlimy nkm tyhym hy dkoktannlm hapytyiqym uby,
yickñkhlm hy nk glnlt hy nkm tyhym, gkíki yi yn dynactl hy uby afki
rbwyihl. obiqátlimy yi kubyn maqal xám hy qtyaiqk dytmlikm, qlhkm
faekttkxyiqy hy dkmqltym w dkmqltkm vymqahkm, w yi bi aimqkiqy ubyhktli
yiqytkhkm hy ubaéiym ytki hli ubaolqy w mb ymgbhytl, hy uby il dlgl
gliqyiql tygafaytli, dltuby wk qyiíki hén ilqagak dlt mb ramqltak.
kgbhaytli k nkm qayihkm, rknnktli nkm xymkm dbymqkm, tagkm, kfbihkiqym w
naxdakm; rlitktli k hli ubaolqy háihlny yn dtaxyt nbckt yi ynnkm; xatáfkiny
qlhlm, w khxatáfkimy hy vytny.

paiknxyiqy, knekhlm nlm xkiqynym, gli ctki tydlml kneó hli ubaolqy nk vle,
w haol:

-yiqty nlm dygkhlm xkwltym uby nlm rlxftym glxyqyi, kbiuby kncbilm hagyi
uby ym nk mlfytfak, wl hacl uby ym yn hymkctkhygaxayiql, kqyiaéihlxy k nl
uby mbyny hygatmy: uby hy nlm hymkctkhygahlm ymqá nnyil yn aipaytil. ymqy
dygkhl, yi gbkiql xy rk mahl dlmafny, ry dtlgbtkhl wl rbat hymhy yn
aimqkiqy uby qbvy bml hy tkeói; w ma il dbyhl dkckt nkm fbyikm lftkm uby xy
rkgyi gli lqtkm lftkm, dlicl yi mb nbckt nlm hymylm hy rkgytnkm, w gbkihl
émqlm il fkmqki, nkm dbfnagl; dltuby ubayi hagy w dbfnagk nkm fbyikm lftkm
uby tygafy, qkxfaéi nkm tyglxdyimktk gli lqtkm, ma dbhaytk; dltuby, dlt nk
xkwlt dktqy, nlm uby tygafyi mli aipytaltym k nlm uby hki; w kmí, ym halm
mlfty qlhlm, dltuby ym hkhlt mlfty qlhlm w il dbyhyi glttymdlihyt nkm
háhavkm hyn rlxfty k nkm hy halm gli acbknhkh, dlt aipaiaqk hamqkigak; w
ymqk ymqtygryek w gltqyhkh, yi gaytql xlhl, nk mbdny yn kctkhygaxayiql. wl,
dbym, kctkhygahl k nk xytgyh uby kubí my xy rk rygrl, il dbhayihl
glttymdlihyt k nk xamxk xyhahk, gliqyiaéihlxy yi nlm ymqtygrlm níxaqym hy
xa dlhytíl, lptyegl nl uby dbyhl w nl uby qyicl hy xa glmygrk; w kmí, hacl
uby mbmqyiqkté hlm híkm ikqbtknym yi xyqkh hy ymy gkxail tykn uby vk k
ektkclek, uby ymqkm myñltkm ekcknkm gliqtkrygrkm uby kubí ymqái mli nkm xám
rytxlmkm hligynnkm w xám gltqymym uby rkw yi yn xbihl, yzgyqkhl mónl k nk
mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, úiagk myñltk hy xam dyimkxayiqlm, gli dke myk
hagrl hy gbkiqlm w gbkiqkm xy ymgbgrki.

lwyihl nl gbkn, mkigrl, uby gli ctkihy kqyigaói ny rkfík ymqkhl ymgbgrkihl,
hkihl bik ctki vle, haol:

-¿ym dlmafny uby rkwk yi yn xbihl dytmlikm uby my kqtyvki k hygat w k obtkt
uby ymqy xa myñlt ym nlgl? hacki vbymqtkm xytgyhym, myñltym dkmqltym: ¿rkw
gbtk hy knhyk, dlt hamgtyql w dlt ymqbhakiqy uby myk, uby dbyhk hygat nl
uby xa kxl rk hagrl, ia rkw gkfknnytl kihkiqy, dlt xám pkxk uby qyick hy
vknayiqy, uby dbyhk lptygyt nl uby xa kxl kubí rk lptygahl?

vlnvaómy hli ubaolqy k mkigrl, w, yigyihahl yn tlmqtl w glnétagl, ny haol:

-¿ym dlmafny, ¡lr mkigrl!, uby rkwk yi qlhl yn ltfy kncbik dytmlik uby hack
uby il ytym qliql, kplttkhl hy nl xamxl, gli il mé ubé tafyqym hy xknagalml
w hy fynnkgl? ¿ubaéi qy xyqy k qa yi xam glmkm, w yi kvytacbkt ma mlw
hamgtyql l xkokhytl? gknnk w il xy tydnaubym, mail yimannk, ma ymqá
hymyimannkhl tlgaikiqy: vkxlm k dliyt yi ypygql xa lptygaxayiql, uby, gli
nk tkeói uby vk hy xa dktqy, dbyhym hkt dlt vyigahlm k qlhlm gbkiqlm
ubamaytyi gliqtkhygatnk.

w, gli ctki pbtak w xbymqtkm hy yilol, my nyvkiqó hy nk mannk, hyokihl
khxatkhlm k nlm gatgbimqkiqym, rkgaéihlnym hbhkt ma ny dlhíki qyiyt dlt
nlgl l dlt gbythl. paiknxyiqy, rkfaéihlny dytmbkhahl uby il my dbmaymy yi
qkn hyxkihk, uby ynnlm hkfki dlt fayi glilgahk mb kctkhygahk vlnbiqkh w uby
il ytki xyiymqyt ibyvkm hyxlmqtkgaliym dktk glilgyt mb áiaxl vknytlml, dbym
fkmqkfki nkm uby yi nk ramqltak hy mbm rygrlm my typytíki, gli qlhl ymql,
mknaó hli ubaolqy gli mb aiqyigaói; w, dbymql mlfty tlgaikiqy, yxftkekihl
mb ymgbhl w qlxkihl mb nkiek, my dbml yi nk xaqkh hy bi tykn gkxail uby il
nyolm hyn vythy dtkhl ymqkfk. macbaóny mkigrl mlfty mb tbgal, gli qlhk nk
cyiqy hyn dkmqltkn tyfkñl, hymylmlm hy vyt yi ubé dktkfk mb kttlckiqy w
ibigk vamql lptygaxayiql.

dbymql, dbym, hli ubaolqy yi xaqkh hyn gkxail -glxl lm ry hagrl-, rataó yn
katy gli myxyokiqym dknkftkm:

-¡lr vlmlqtlm, dkmkoytlm w vakihkiqym, gkfknnytlm, ymgbhytlm, cyiqy hy k
day w hy k gkfknnl uby dlt ymqy gkxail dkmáam, l rkféam hy dkmkt yi ymqlm
hlm híkm macbayiqym! mkfyh uby hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, gkfknnytl kihkiqy,
ymqá kubí dbymql dktk hypyihyt uby k qlhkm nkm rytxlmbtkm w gltqymíkm hyn
xbihl yzgyhyi nkm uby my yigayttki yi nkm iaipkm rkfaqkhltkm hymqlm dtkhlm
w flmubym, hyokihl k bi nkhl k nk myñltk hy xa knxk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.
dlt yml, yn uby pbyty hy dktygyt gliqtktal, kgbhk, uby kubí ny ymdytl.

hlm vygym tydaqaó ymqkm xamxkm tkeliym, w hlm vygym il pbytli líhkm hy
iaicúi kvyiqbtytl; dytl nk mbytqy, uby mbm glmkm afk yigkxaikihl hy xyolt
yi xyolt, lthyió uby hy knní k dlgl my hymgbftaymy dlt yn gkxail
xbgryhbxfty hy rlxftym hy k gkfknnl, w xbgrlm hynnlm gli nkiekm yi nkm
xkilm, gkxaikihl qlhlm kdañkhlm, hy qtldyn w k ctki dtaymk. il nlm rbfaytli
fayi vamql nlm uby gli hli ubaolqy ymqkfki, gbkihl, vlnvayihl nkm ymdknhkm,
my kdktqktli fayi nyolm hyn gkxail, dltuby glilgaytli uby ma ymdytkfki nym
dlhík mbgyhyt kncúi dynactl; mónl hli ubaolqy, gli aiqtédahl gltkeói, my
ymqbvl ubyhl, w mkigrl dkiek my ymgbhó gli nkm kigkm hy tlgaikiqy.

nnycó yn qtldyn hy nlm nkigytlm, w bil hynnlm, uby vyiík xám hynkiqy, k
ctkihym vlgym glxyieó k hygat k hli ubaolqy:

-¡kdátqkqy, rlxfty hyn hakfnl, hyn gkxail, uby qy rktái dyhkelm ymqlm
qltlm!

-¡yk, gkiknnk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dktk xí il rkw qltlm uby vkncki,
kbiuby myki hy nlm xám ftkvlm uby gtík oktkxk yi mbm tafytkm! glipymkh,
xknkihtaiym, kmí k gktck gyttkhk, uby ym vythkh nl uby wl kubí ry
dbfnagkhl; ma il, glixacl mlam yi fkqknnk.

il qbvl nbckt hy tymdlihyt yn vkubytl, ia hli ubaolqy ny qbvl hy hymvaktmy,
kbiuby ubamaytk; w kmí, yn qtldyn hy nlm qltlm ftkvlm w yn hy nlm xkimlm
gkfymqtlm, gli nk xbnqaqbh hy nlm vkubytlm w lqtkm cyiqym uby k yigyttkt
nlm nnyvkfki k bi nbckt hlihy lqtl hík rkfíki hy glttytmy, dkmktli mlfty
hli ubaolqy, w mlfty mkigrl, tlgaikiqy w yn tbgal, hkihl gli qlhlm ynnlm yi
qayttk, ygráihlny k tlhkt dlt yn mbynl. ubyhó xlnahl mkigrl, ymdkiqkhl hli
ubaolqy, kdlttykhl yn tbgal w il xbw gkqónagl tlgaikiqy; dytl, yi pai, my
nyvkiqktli qlhlm, w hli ubaolqy, k ctki dtaymk, qtldyekihl kubí w gkwyihl
knní, glxyieó k glttyt qtkm nk vkgkhk, hagayihl k vlgym:

-¡hyqyiylm w ymdytkh, gkiknnk xknkihtaik, uby bi mlnl gkfknnytl lm ymdytk,
yn gbkn il qayiy glihagaói ia ym hy dktygyt hy nlm uby hagyi uby kn yiyxacl
uby rbwy, rkgytny nk dbyiqy hy dnkqk!

dytl il dlt yml my hyqbvaytli nlm kdtymbtkhlm glttyhltym, ia ragaytli xám
gkml hy mbm kxyikekm uby hy nkm ibfym hy kiqkñl. hyqúvlny yn gkimkigal k
hli ubaolqy, w, xám yilokhl uby vyickhl, my myiqó yi yn gkxail, ymdytkihl k
uby mkigrl, tlgaikiqy w yn tbgal nnyckmyi. nnycktli, vlnvaytli k mbfat kxl
w xlel, w, mai vlnvyt k hymdyhatmy hy nk ktgkhak paicahk l gliqtkrygrk, w
gli xám vytcüyiek uby cbmql, macbaytli mb gkxail.





gkdíqbnl naz. hlihy my gbyiqk hyn yzqtklthaiktal mbgyml, uby my dbyhy
qyiyt dlt kvyiqbtk, uby ny mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy


kn dlnvl w kn gkimkigal uby hli ubaolqy w mkigrl mkgktli hyn
hymglxyhaxayiql hy nlm qltlm, mlglttaó bik pbyiqy gnktk w naxdak uby yiqty
bik ptymgk ktflnyhk rknnktli, yi yn xktcyi hy nk gbkn, hyokihl naftym, mai
oáubaxk w ptyil, kn tbgal w k tlgaikiqy, nlm hlm kmyihytykhlm kxl w xlel my
myiqktli. kgbhaó mkigrl k nk tydlmqytík hy mb knpltokm, w hynnkm mkgó hy nl
uby én mlník nnkxkt glihbxal; yiobkcómy nk flgk, nkvómy hli ubaolqy yn
tlmqtl, gli gbwl typtacytal glftktli knayiql nlm ymdítaqbm hymknyiqkhlm. il
glxík hli ubaolqy, hy dbtl dymktlml, ia mkigrl il lmkfk qlgkt k nlm
xkioktym uby hynkiqy qyiík, hy dbtl glxyhahl, w ymdytkfk k uby mb myñlt
ragaymy nk mknvk; dytl, vayihl uby, nnyvkhl hy mbm axkcaikgaliym, il my
kglthkfk hy nnyvkt yn dki k nk flgk, il kftaó nk mbwk, w, kqtldynnkihl dlt
qlhl céiytl hy gtakiek, glxyieó k yxfkbnkt yi yn ymqóxkcl yn dki w ubyml
uby my ny lptygík.

-glxy, mkigrl kxacl -haol hli ubaolqy-, mbmqyiqk nk vahk, uby xám uby k xí
qy axdltqk, w héokxy xltat k xí k xkilm hy xam dyimkxayiqlm w k pbytekm hy
xam hymctkgakm. wl, mkigrl, ikgí dktk vavat xbtayihl, w qú dktk xltat
glxayihl; w, dltuby vykm uby qy hacl vythkh yi ymql, glimahétkxy axdtyml yi
ramqltakm, pkxlml yi nkm ktxkm, glxyhahl yi xam kggaliym, tymdyqkhl hy
dtíigadym, mlnagaqkhl hy hligynnkm; kn gkfl kn gkfl, gbkihl ymdytkfk
dknxkm, qtabiplm w gltlikm, ctkioykhkm w xytygahkm dlt xam vknytlmkm
rkekñkm, xy ry vamql ymqk xkñkik damkhl w kglgykhl w xlnahl hy nlm daym hy
kiaxknym aixbihlm w mlygym. ymqk glimahytkgaói xy yxflqk nlm hayiqym,
yiqltdygy nkm xbynkm, w yiqlxygy nkm xkilm, w ubaqk hy qlhl yi qlhl nk
ckik hyn glxyt, hy xkiytk uby dayiml hyoktxy xltat hy rkxfty: xbytqy nk xám
gtbyn hy nkm xbytqym.

-hymk xkiytk -haol mkigrl, mai hyokt hy xkmgkt kdtaymk- il kdtlfktá vbymqtk
xytgyh kubyn typtái uby hagyi: "xbytk xktqk, w xbytk rktqk". wl, k nl
xyilm, il dayiml xkqktxy k xí xamxl; kiqym dayiml rkgyt glxl yn ekdkqytl,
uby qatk yn gbytl gli nlm hayiqym rkmqk uby ny rkgy nnyckt hlihy én ubayty;
wl qatkté xa vahk glxayihl rkmqk uby nnycby kn pai uby ny qayiy hyqytxaikhl
yn gaynl; w mydk, myñlt, uby il rkw xkwlt nlgbtk uby nk uby qlgk yi ubytyt
hymymdytktmy glxl vbymqtk xytgyh, w gtékxy, w hymdbém hy glxahl, égrymy k
hltxat bi dlgl mlfty nlm glngrliym vythym hymqkm wytfkm, w vytá glxl gbkihl
hymdaytqy my rknnk kncl xám knavakhl.

ríelnl kmí hli ubaolqy, dktygaéihlny uby nkm tkeliym hy mkigrl xám ytki hy
panómlpl uby hy xyiqygkql, w híolny:

-ma qú, ¡lr mkigrl!, ubamaymym rkgyt dlt xí nl uby wl krltk qy haté, mytíki
xam knavalm xám gaytqlm w xam dymkhbxftym il qki ctkihym; w ym uby,
xayiqtkm wl hbytxl, lfyhygayihl qbm glimyolm, qú qy hymvakmym bi dlgl nyolm
hy kubí, w gli nkm tayihkm hy tlgaikiqy, ygrkihl kn katy qbm gktiym, qy
haymym qtygayiqlm l gbkqtlgayiqlm kelqym k fbyik gbyiqk hy nlm qtym xan w
qkiqlm uby qy rkm hy hkt dlt yn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk; uby ym námqaxk il
dyubyñk uby kubynnk dlfty myñltk ymqé yigkiqkhk dlt qb hymgbahl w
iycnacyigak.

-rkw xbgrl uby hygat yi yml -haol mkigrl-. hbtxkxlm, dlt krltk, yiqtkxflm,
w hymdbém, halm haol nl uby mytá. mydk vbymqtk xytgyh uby ymql hy kelqktmy
bi rlxfty k mkicty ptík ym glmk tygak, w xám ma gkyi nlm kelqym mlfty bi
gbytdl xkn mbmqyiqkhl w dylt glxahl: qyick dkgayigak xa myñltk hbngaiyk,
uby, gbkihl xyilm my gkqy, xy vytá rygrl bik gtafk, hy kelqym; w rkmqk nk
xbytqy, qlhl ym vahk; ubaytl hygat uby kúi wl nk qyicl, obiql gli yn hymyl
hy gbxdnat gli nl uby ry dtlxyqahl.

kctkhygaéihlmynl hli ubaolqy, glxaó kncl, w mkigrl xbgrl, w ygrátlimy k
hltxat yiqtkxflm, hyokihl k mb knfyhtíl w mai lthyi kncbik dkgyt hyn
kfbihlmk wytfk hy uby kubyn dtkhl ymqkfk nnyil k nlm hlm gliqaiblm
glxdkñytlm w kxaclm tlgaikiqy w yn tbgal. hymdytqktli kncl qkthy, vlnvaytli
k mbfat w k mycbat mb gkxail, háihlmy dtaymk dktk nnyckt k bik vyiqk uby,
kn dktygyt, bik nycbk hy knní my hymgbftík. hacl uby ytk vyiqk dltuby hli
ubaolqy nk nnkxó kmí, pbytk hyn bml uby qyiík hy nnkxkt k qlhkm nkm vyiqkm
gkmqannlm.

nnycktli, dbym, k ynnk; dtycbiqktli kn rbémdyh ma rkfík dlmkhk. pbynym
tymdlihahl uby mí, gli qlhk nk glxlhahkh w tycknl uby dbhaytk rknnkt yi
ektkclek. kdyátlimy w tyglcaó mkigrl mb tydlmqytík yi bi kdlmyiql, hy ubayi
yn rbémdyh ny hal nk nnkvy; nnyvó nkm fymqakm k nk gkfknnytaek, ygrónym mbm
dayimlm, mknaó k vyt nl uby hli ubaolqy, uby ymqkfk myiqkhl mlfty bi dlwl,
ny xkihkfk, hkihl dktqagbnktym ctkgakm kn gaynl hy uby k mb kxl il ny
rbfaymy dktygahl gkmqannl kubynnk vyiqk.

nnycómy nk rltk hyn gyikt; tyglcaétlimy k mb ymqkigak; dtycbiqó mkigrl kn
rbémdyh uby ubé qyiík dktk hktnym hy gyikt. k nl uby yn rbémdyh tymdlihaó
uby mb flgk mytík xyhahk; w kmí, uby dahaymy nl uby ubamaymy: uby hy nkm
dkoktagkm hyn katy, hy nkm kvym hy nk qayttk w hy nlm dymgkhlm hyn xkt
ymqkfk dtlvyíhk kubynnk vyiqk.

-il ym xyiymqyt qkiql -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby gli bi dkt hy dlnnlm uby ilm
kmyi qyihtyxlm nl mbpagayiqy, dltuby xa myñlt ym hynagkhl w glxy dlgl, w wl
il mlw qtkckiqói yi hyxkmík.

tymdlihaóny yn rbémdyh uby il qyiík dlnnlm, dltuby nlm xankilm nlm qyiíki
kmlnkhlm.

-dbym xkihy yn myñlt rbémdyh -haol mkigrl- kmkt bik dlnnk uby myk qaytik.

-¿dlnnk? ¡xa dkhty! -tymdlihaó yn rbémdyh-. yi vythkh yi vythkh uby yivaé
kwyt k nk gabhkh k vyihyt xám hy gaigbyiqk; dytl, pbytk hy dlnnkm, dahk
vbymqtk xytgyh nl uby ubamayty.

-hymk xkiytk -haol mkigrl-, il pknqktá qytiytk l gkftaql.

-yi gkmk, dlt krltk -tymdlihaó yn rbémdyh-, il nl rkw, dltuby my rk
kgkfkhl; dytl nk myxkik uby vayiy nl rkftá hy mlftk.

-¡xyhtkhlm ymqkxlm gli yml! -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. wl dlihté uby my vayiyi k
tymbxatmy qlhkm ymqkm pknqkm yi nkm mlftkm uby hyfy hy rkfyt hy qlgail w
rbyvlm.

-¡dlt halm -tymdlihaó yn rbémdyh-, uby ym cyiqan tynyiqy yn uby xa rbémdyh
qayiy!, dbym ryny hagrl uby ia qyicl dlnnkm ia cknnaikm, w ¿ubayty uby
qyick rbyvlm? hamgbttk, ma ubamayty, dlt lqtkm hynagkhyekm, w héoymy hy
dyhat cknnaikm.

-tymlnváxlilm, gbytdl hy xí -haol mkigrl-, w híckxy paiknxyiqy nl uby
qayiy, w héoymy hy hamgbttaxayiqlm, myñlt rbémdyh.

haol yn vyiqytl:

-nl uby tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy qyicl mli hlm bñkm hy vkgk uby dktygyi xkilm
hy qytiytk, l hlm xkilm hy qytiytk uby dktygyi bñkm hy vkgk; ymqái glgahkm
gli mbm cktfkielm, gyflnnkm w qlgail, w nk rltk hy krltk ymqái hagayihl:
''¡glxéxy! ¡glxéxy!''

-dlt xíkm nkm xktgl hymhy kubí -haol mkigrl-; w ikhay nkm qluby, uby wl nkm
dkckté xyolt uby lqtl, dltuby dktk xí iaicbik lqtk glmk dbhaytk ymdytkt hy
xám cbmql, w il my xy hktík ikhk uby pbymyi xkilm, glxl pbymyi bñkm.

-ikhay nkm qlgktá -haol yn vyiqytl-, dltuby lqtlm rbémdyhym uby qyicl, hy
dbtl dtaigadknym, qtkyi glimacl glgaiytl, hymdyimytl w tydlmqytík.

-ma dlt dtaigadknym vk -haol mkigrl-, iaicbil xám uby xa kxl; dytl yn
lpagal uby én qtky il dytxaqy hymdyimkm ia flqannytíkm: krí ilm qyihyxlm yi
xaqkh hy bi dtkhl w ilm rktqkxlm hy fynnlqkm l hy iímdytlm.

ymqk pby nk dnáqagk uby mkigrl qbvl gli yn vyiqytl, mai ubytyt mkigrl dkmkt
khynkiqy yi tymdlihytny; uby wk ny rkfík dtycbiqkhl ubé lpagal l ubé
yoytgagal ytk yn hy mb kxl.

nnycómy, dbym, nk rltk hyn gyikt, tyglcaómy k mb ymqkigak hli ubaolqy,
qtbol yn rbémdyh nk lnnk, kmí glxl ymqkfk, w myiqómy k gyikt xbw hy
dtldómaql. dktygy myt uby yi lqtl kdlmyiql uby obiql kn hy hli ubaolqy
ymqkfk, uby il ny havahík xám uby bi mbqan qkfauby, lwó hygat hli ubaolqy:

-dlt vahk hy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli oytóiaxl, uby yi qkiql uby qtky nk
gyik nykxlm lqtl gkdíqbnl hy nk mycbihk dktqy hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk.

kdyikm lwó mb ilxfty hli ubaolqy, gbkihl my dbml yi day, w gli líhl knytql
ymgbgró nl uby hén qtkqkfki, w lwó uby yn qkn hli oytóiaxl typytahl
tymdlihaó:

-¿dktk ubé ubayty vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli obki, uby nykxlm ymqlm
hamdktkqym? w yn uby rbfayty nyíhl nk dtaxytk dktqy hy nk ramqltak hy hli
ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk il ym dlmafny uby dbyhk qyiyt cbmql yi nyyt ymqk
mycbihk.

-gli qlhl yml -haol yn hli obki-, mytá fayi nyytnk, dbym il rkw naftl qki
xknl uby il qyick kncbik glmk fbyik. nl uby k xí yi émqy xám hymdnkgy ym
uby daiqk k hli ubaolqy wk hymyikxltkhl hy hbngaiyk hyn qlflml.

lwyihl nl gbkn hli ubaolqy, nnyil hy atk w hy hymdygrl, kneó nk vle w haol:

-ubayiubaytk uby haoyty uby hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk rk lnvahkhl, ia dbyhy
lnvahkt, k hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, wl ny rkté yiqyihyt gli ktxkm acbknym uby
vk xbw nyolm hy nk vythkh; dltuby nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml ia dbyhy
myt lnvahkhk, ia yi hli ubaolqy dbyhy gkfyt lnvahl: mb fnkmói ym nk
patxyek, w mb dtlpymaói, yn cbkthktnk gli mbkvahkh w mai rkgytmy pbytek
kncbik.

-¿ubaéi ym yn uby ilm tymdlihy? -tymdlihaytli hyn lqtl kdlmyiql.

-¿ubaéi rk hy myt -tymdlihaó mkigrl- mail yn xamxl hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, uby rktá fbyil gbkiql rk hagrl, w kbi gbkiql haoyty?; uby kn fbyi
dkckhlt il ny hbynyi dtyihkm.

kdyikm rbfl hagrl ymql mkigrl, gbkihl yiqtktli dlt nk dbytqk hy mb kdlmyiql
hlm gkfknnytlm, uby qknym nl dktygíki, w bil hynnlm ygrkihl nlm ftkelm kn
gbynnl hy hli ubaolqy, ny haol:

-ia vbymqtk dtymyigak dbyhy hymxyiqat vbymqtl ilxfty, ia vbymqtl ilxfty
dbyhy il kgtyhaqkt vbymqtk dtymyigak: mai hbhk, vlm, myñlt, mlam yn
vythkhytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, iltqy w nbgytl hy nk kihkiqy
gkfknnytík, k hymdygrl w dymkt hyn uby rk ubytahl bmbtdkt vbymqtl ilxfty w
kiaubankt vbymqtkm rkekñkm, glxl nl rk rygrl yn kbqlt hymqy naftl uby kubí
lm yiqtycl.

w, dliaéihlny bi naftl yi nkm xkilm, uby qtkík mb glxdkñytl, ny qlxó hli
ubaolqy, w, mai tymdlihyt dknkftk, glxyieó k rloyktny, w hy knní k bi dlgl
my ny vlnvaó, hagayihl:

-yi ymql dlgl uby ry vamql ry rknnkhl qtym glmkm yi ymqy kbqlt hacikm hy
tydtyryimaói. nk dtaxytk ym kncbikm dknkftkm uby ry nyíhl yi yn dtónlcl; nk
lqtk, uby yn nyicbkoy ym ktkcliém, dltuby qkn vye ymgtafy mai ktqígbnlm, w
nk qytgytk, uby xám ny glipatxk dlt aciltkiqy, ym uby wyttk w my hymvík hy
nk vythkh yi nl xám dtaigadkn hy nk ramqltak; dltuby kubí hagy uby nk xboyt
hy mkigrl dkiek xa ymgbhytl my nnkxk xkta cbqaéttye, w il nnkxk qkn, mail
qytymk dkiek; w ubayi yi ymqk dktqy qki dtaigadkn wyttk, fayi my dlhtá
qyxyt uby wyttk yi qlhkm nkm hyxám hy nk ramqltak.

k ymql haol mkigrl:

-¡hlilmk glmk hy ramqltakhlt! ¡dlt gaytql, fayi hyfy hy ymqkt yi yn gbyiql
hy ibymqtlm mbgymlm, dbym nnkxk k qytymk dkiek, xa xboyt, xkta cbqaéttye!
qltiy k qlxkt yn naftl, myñlt, w xaty ma kihl wl dlt krí w ma xy rk xbhkhl
yn ilxfty.

-dlt nl uby ry líhl rkfnkt, kxacl -haol hli oytóiaxl-, mai hbhk hyféam hy
myt mkigrl dkiek, yn ymgbhytl hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy.

-mí mlw -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w xy dtygal hynnl.

-dbym k py -haol yn gkfknnytl- uby il lm qtkqk ymqy kbqlt xlhytil gli nk
naxdayek uby yi vbymqtk dytmlik my xbymqtk: díiqklm glxyhlt, w maxdny, w il
ikhk ctkgalml, w xbw lqtl hyn mkigrl uby yi nk dtaxytk dktqy hy nk ramqltak
hy vbymqtl kxl my hymgtafy.

-halm my nl dythliy -haol mkigrl-. hyoátkxy yi xa taigói, mai kglthktmy hy
xí, dltuby ubayi nkm mkfy nkm qkñy, w fayi my ymqá mki dyhtl yi tlxk.

nlm hlm gkfknnytlm dahaytli k hli ubaolqy my dkmkmy k mb ymqkigak k gyikt
gli ynnlm, uby fayi mkfíki uby yi kubynnk vyiqk il rkfík glmkm
dytqyiygayiqym dktk mb dytmlik. hli ubaolqy, uby mayxdty pby glxyhahl,
glihygyigaó gli mb hyxkihk w gyió gli ynnlm; ubyhómy mkigrl gli nk lnnk gli
xytl xazql axdytal; myiqómy yi gkfygytk hy xymk, w gli én yn vyiqytl, uby
il xyilm uby mkigrl ymqkfk hy mbm xkilm w hy mbm bñkm kpagalikhl.

yi yn hamgbtml hy nk gyik dtycbiqó hli obki k hli ubaolqy ubé ibyvkm qyiík
hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml: ma my rkfík gkmkhl, ma ymqkfk dktahk l
dtyñkhk, l ma, ymqkihl yi mb yiqytyek, my kglthkfk -cbkthkihl mb rliymqahkh
w fbyi hygltl- hy nlm kxltlmlm dyimkxayiqlm hyn myñlt hli ubaolqy. k nl uby
én tymdlihaó:

-hbngaiyk my ymqá yiqytk, w xam dyimkxayiqlm, xám patxym uby ibigk; nkm
glttymdlihyigakm, yi mb myubyhkh kiqacbk; mb rytxlmbtk, yi nk hy bik mlye
nkftkhltk qtkimpltxkhk.

w nbycl nym pby gliqkihl dbiql dlt dbiql yn yigkiql hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk,
w nl uby ny rkfík mbgyhahl yi nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm, gli nk lthyi uby yn
mkfal xytníi ny rkfík hkhl dktk hymyigkiqktnk, uby pby nk hy nlm kelqym hy
mkigrl.

mbxl pby yn gliqyiql uby nlm hlm gkfknnytlm tygafaytli hy lít gliqkt k hli
ubaolqy nlm ymqtkñlm mbgymlm hy mb ramqltak, w kmí ubyhktli khxatkhlm hy
mbm hamdktkqym glxl hyn ynyckiqy xlhl gli uby nlm gliqkfk. kubí ny qyiíki
dlt hamgtyql, w knní my nym hymnaekfk dlt xyiqygkql, mai mkfyt hyqytxaiktmy
ubé ctkhl ny hktíki yiqty nk hamgtygaói w nk nlgbtk.

kgkfó hy gyikt mkigrl, w, hyokihl rygrl yubam kn vyiqytl, my dkmó k nk
ymqkigak hy mb kxl; w, yi yiqtkihl, haol:

-uby xy xkqyi, myñltym, ma yn kbqlt hymqy naftl uby vbymkm xytgyhym qayiyi
ubayty uby il glxkxlm fbyikm xackm obiqlm; wl ubyttík uby, wk uby xy nnkxk
glxanói, glxl vbymkm xytgyhym hagyi, il xy nnkxkmy qkxfaéi flttkgrl.

-mí nnkxk -haol hli oytóiaxl-, dytl il xy kgbythl yi ubé xkiytk, kbiuby mé
uby mli xknmlikiqym nkm tkeliym, w khyxám, xyiqatlmkm, mycúi wl ygrl hy vyt
yi nk pamlilxík hyn fbyi mkigrl uby ymqá dtymyiqy.

-gtékixy vbymkm xytgyhym -haol mkigrl- uby yn mkigrl w yn hli ubaolqy hymk
ramqltak hyfyi hy myt lqtlm uby nlm uby kihki yi kubynnk uby glxdbml gahy
rkxyqy fyiyicyna, uby mlxlm ilmlqtlm: xa kxl, vknayiqy, hamgtyql w
yikxltkhl; w wl, maxdny ctkgalml, w il glxyhlt ia flttkgrl.

-wl kmí nl gtyl -haol hli obki-; w ma pbytk dlmafny, my rkfík hy xkihkt uby
iaicbil pbytk lmkhl k qtkqkt hy nkm glmkm hyn ctki hli ubaolqy, ma il pbymy
gahy rkxyqy, mb dtaxyt kbqlt, fayi kmí glxl xkihó knyokihtl uby iaicbil
pbymy lmkhl k tyqtkqktny mail kdynym.

-tyqtáqyxy yn uby ubamayty -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl il xy xknqtkqy; uby
xbgrkm vygym mbyny gkytmy nk dkgayigak gbkihl nk gktcki hy aiobtakm.

-iaicbik -haol hli obki- my ny dbyhy rkgyt kn myñlt hli ubaolqy hy ubayi én
il my dbyhk vyickt, ma il nk tydktk yi yn ymgbhl hy mb dkgayigak, uby, k xa
dktygyt, ym pbytqy w ctkihy.

yi ymqkm w lqtkm dnáqagkm my dkmó ctki dktqy hy nk ilgry; w, kbiuby hli
obki ubamaytk uby hli ubaolqy nywytk xám hyn naftl, dlt vyt nl uby
hamgkiqkfk, il nl dbhaytli kgkfkt gli én, hagayihl uby én nl hkfk dlt nyíhl
w nl glipatxkfk dlt qlhl iygal, w uby il ubytík, ma kgkml nnyckmy k ilqagak
hy mb kbqlt uby ny rkfík qyiahl yi mbm xkilm, my knyctkmy gli dyimkt uby ny
rkfík nyíhl; dbym hy nkm glmkm lfmgyikm w qltdym, nlm dyimkxayiqlm my rki
hy kdktqkt, gbkiql xám nlm lolm. dtycbiqátliny uby khóihy nnyvkfk
hyqytxaikhl mb vakoy. tymdlihaó uby k ektkclek, k rknnktmy yi nkm obmqkm
hyn ktiém, uby yi kubynnk gabhkh mbynyi rkgytmy qlhlm nlm kñlm. híolny
hli obki uby kubynnk ibyvk ramqltak gliqkfk glxl hli ubaolqy, myk ubayi
my ubamayty, my rkfík rknnkhl yi ynnk yi bik mltqaok, pknqk hy aivyigaói,
dlfty hy nyqtkm, dlftímaxk hy naftykm, kbiuby tagk hy maxdnagahkhym.

-dlt yn xamxl gkml -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, il dlihté nlm daym yi ektkclek,
w kmí mkgkté k nk dnkek hyn xbihl nk xyiqatk hymy ramqltakhlt xlhytil, w
ygrktái hy vyt nkm cyiqym glxl wl il mlw yn hli ubaolqy uby én hagy.

-rktá xbw fayi -haol hli oytóiaxl-; w lqtkm obmqkm rkw yi fktgynlik, hlihy
dlhtá yn myñlt hli ubaolqy xlmqtkt mb vknlt.

-kmí nl dayiml rkgyt -haol hli ubaolqy-; w vbymkm xytgyhym xy hyi nagyigak,
dbym wk ym rltk dktk atxy kn nygrl, w xy qyicki w dlicki yi yn iúxytl hy
mbm xkwltym kxaclm w mytvahltym.

-w k xí qkxfaéi -haol mkigrl-: ubaeá myté fbyil dktk kncl.

gli ymql my hymdahaytli, w hli ubaolqy w mkigrl my tyqatktli k mb kdlmyiql,
hyokihl k hli obki w k hli oytóiaxl khxatkhlm hy vyt nk xyegnk uby rkfík
rygrl hy mb hamgtygaói w hy mb nlgbtk; w vythkhytkxyiqy gtywytli uby émqlm
ytki nlm vythkhytlm hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, w il nlm uby hymgtafík mb kbqlt
ktkcliém.

xkhtbcó hli ubaolqy, w, hkihl clndym kn qkfauby hyn lqtl kdlmyiql, my
hymdahaó hy mbm rbémdyhym. dkcó mkigrl kn vyiqytl xkciípagkxyiqy, w
kglimyoóny uby knkfkmy xyilm nk dtlvamaói hy mb vyiqk, l nk qbvaymy xám
dtlvyíhk.





gkdíqbnl nz. hy nl uby mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy wyihl k fktgynlik


ytk ptymgk nk xkñkik, w hkfk xbymqtkm hy mytnl kmaxymxl yn hík yi uby hli
ubaolqy mknaó hy nk vyiqk, aipltxáihlmy dtaxytl gbán ytk yn xám hytygrl
gkxail dktk at k fktgynlik mai qlgkt yi ektkclek: qkn ytk yn hymyl uby
qyiík hy mkgkt xyiqatlml kubyn ibyvl ramqltakhlt uby qkiql hygíki uby ny
vaqbdytkfk.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby yi xám hy myam híkm il ny mbgyhaó glmk hacik hy dliytmy
yi ymgtaqbtk, kn gkfl hy nlm gbknym, wyihl pbytk hy gkxail, ny qlxó nk
ilgry yiqty bikm ymdymkm yigaikm l kngltilubym; uby yi ymql il cbkthk nk
dbiqbknahkh gahy rkxyqy uby yi lqtkm glmkm mbyny.

kdyátlimy hy mbm fymqakm kxl w xlel, w, kglxlháihlmy k nlm qtliglm hy nlm
átflnym, mkigrl, uby rkfík xytyihkhl kubyn hík, my hyoó yiqtkt hy tlihói
dlt nkm dbytqkm hyn mbyñl; dytl hli ubaolqy, k ubayi hymvynkfki mbm
axkcaikgaliym xbgrl xám uby nk rkxfty, il dlhík dyckt mbm lolm; kiqym afk w
vyiík gli yn dyimkxayiql dlt xan céiytlm hy nbcktym. wk ny dktygík rknnktmy
yi nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm; wk vyt ftaigkt w mbfat mlfty mb dlnnaik k nk
glivytqahk yi nkftkhltk hbngaiyk; wk uby ny mlikfki yi nlm líhlm nkm
dknkftkm hyn mkfal xytníi uby ny typytíki nkm glihagaliym w hanacyigakm uby
my rkfíki hy rkgyt w qyiyt yi yn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk. hymymdytáfkmy hy
vyt nk pnloyhkh w gktahkh dlgk hy mkigrl mb ymgbhytl, dbym, k nl uby gtyík,
mlnlm gaigl kelqym my rkfík hkhl, iúxytl hymacbkn w dyubyñl dktk nlm
aipaiaqlm uby ny pknqkfki; w hymql tygafaó qkiqk dymkhbxfty w yilol, uby
rael ymqy hamgbtml:

-ma ibhl clthakil gltqó yn xkcil knyokihtl, hagayihl: ''qkiql xliqk gltqkt
glxl hymkqkt'', w il dlt yml hyoó hy myt biavytmkn myñlt hy qlhk nk kmak,
ia xám ia xyilm dlhtík mbgyhyt krltk yi yn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk, ma wl
kelqkmy k mkigrl k dymkt mbwl; uby ma nk glihagaói hymqy tyxyhal ymqá yi
uby mkigrl tygafk nlm qtym xan w qkiqlm kelqym, ¿ubé my xy hk k xí uby my
nlm hé én, l uby my nlm hé lqtl, dbym nk mbmqkigak ymqá yi uby én nlm
tygafk, nnycbyi dlt hl nnycktyi?

gli ymqk axkcaikgaói my nnycó k mkigrl, rkfayihl dtaxytl qlxkhl nkm tayihkm
hy tlgaikiqy, w kglxlháhlnkm yi xlhl uby dbhaymy kelqktny gli ynnkm,
glxyieóny k ubaqkt nkm gaiqkm, uby ym ldaiaói uby il qyiík xám uby nk
hynkiqytk, yi uby my mbmqyiqkfki nlm ctycbymglm; dytl, kdyikm rbfl nnyckhl,
gbkihl mkigrl hymdytqó yi qlhl mb kgbythl, w haol:

-¿ubé ym ymql? ¿ubaéi xy qlgk w hymyigaiqk?

-wl mlw -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby vyicl k mbdnat qbm pknqkm w k tyxyhakt
xam qtkfkolm: véiclqy k kelqkt, mkigrl, w k hymgktckt, yi dktqy, nk hybhk k
uby qy lfnackmqy. hbngaiyk dytygy; qú vavym yi hymgbahl; wl xbytl hymykihl;
w kmí, hymkqágkqy dlt qb vlnbiqkh, uby nk xík ym hy hktqy yi ymqk mlnyhkh,
dlt nl xyilm, hlm xan kelqym.

-yml il -haol mkigrl-; vbymk xytgyh my ymqé ubyhl; ma il, dlt halm
vythkhytl uby ilm rki hy lít nlm mlthlm. nlm kelqym k uby wl xy lfnacbé rki
hy myt vlnbiqktalm, w il dlt pbytek, w krltk il qyicl ckik hy kelqktxy;
fkmqk uby hlw k vbymk xytgyh xa dknkftk hy vkdbnktxy w xlmubyktxy gbkihl yi
vlnbiqkh xy vaiayty.

-il rkw hyoktnl k qb gltqymík, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby ytym hbtl
hy gltkeói, w, kbiuby vannkil, fnkihl hy gktiym.

w kmí, dtlgbtkfk w dbcikfk dlt hymyinkektny. vayihl nl gbkn mkigrl dkiek,
my dbml yi day, w, kttyxyqayihl k mb kxl, my kftkeó gli én k ftkel dktqahl,
w, ygráihlny bik ekigkhannk, hal gli én yi yn mbynl flgk kttafk; dúmlny
nk tlhannk hytygrk mlfty yn dygrl, w gli nkm xkilm ny qyiík nkm xkilm, hy
xlhl uby ia ny hyokfk tlhykt ia knyiqkt. hli ubaolqy ny hygík:

-¿góxl, qtkahlt? ¿gliqtk qb kxl w myñlt ikqbtkn qy hymxkihkm? ¿gli ubayi qy
hk mb dki qy kqtyvym?

-ia ubaql tyw, ia dlicl tyw -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, mail kwúhlxy k xí, uby mlw
xa myñlt. vbymk xytgyh xy dtlxyqk uby my ymqktá ubyhl, w il qtkqktá hy
kelqktxy dlt kcltk, uby wl ny hyokté nafty w hymyxfktkekhl; hlihy il,

kubí xltatám, qtkahlt,

yiyxacl hy hlñk mkigrk.

dtlxyqaómynl hli ubaolqy, w obtó dlt vahk hy mbm dyimkxayiqlm il qlgktny yi
yn dynl hy nk tldk, w uby hyoktík yi qlhk mb vlnbiqkh w knfyhtíl yn
kelqktmy gbkihl ubamaymy.

nyvkiqómy mkigrl, w hymvaómy hy kubyn nbckt bi fbyi ymdkgal; w, wyihl k
kttaxktmy k lqtl átfln, maiqaó uby ny qlgkfki yi nk gkfyek, w, knekihl nkm
xkilm, qldó gli hlm daym hy dytmlik, gli ekdkqlm w gknekm. qyxfnó hy xayhl;
kgbhaó k lqtl átfln, w mbgyhaóny nl xymxl. hal vlgym nnkxkihl k hli ubaolqy
uby ny pkvltygaymy. ríelnl kmí hli ubaolqy, w, dtycbiqáihlny ubé ny rkfík
mbgyhahl w hy ubé qyiík xayhl, ny tymdlihaó mkigrl uby qlhlm kubynnlm
átflnym ymqkfki nnyilm hy daym w hy daytikm rbxkikm. qyiqónlm hli ubaolqy,
w gkwó nbycl yi nk gbyiqk hy nl uby dlhík myt, w híolny k mkigrl:

-il qayiym hy ubé qyiyt xayhl, dltuby ymqlm daym w daytikm uby qayiqkm w il
vyym, mai hbhk mli hy kncbilm pltkoahlm w fkihlnytlm uby yi ymqlm átflnym
ymqái krltgkhlm; uby dlt kubí nlm mbyny krltgkt nk obmqagak gbkihl nlm
glcy, hy vyaiqy yi vyaiqy w hy qtyaiqk yi qtyaiqk; dlt hlihy xy hlw k
yiqyihyt uby hyfl hy ymqkt gytgk hy fktgynlik.

w kmí ytk nk vythkh glxl én nl rkfík axkcaikhl.

kn dktygyt knektli nlm lolm, w vaytli nlm tkgaxlm hy kubynnlm átflnym, uby
ytki gbytdlm hy fkihlnytlm. wk, yi ymql, kxkiygík, w ma nlm xbytqlm nlm
rkfíki ymdkiqkhl, il xyilm nlm kqtafbnktli xám hy gbktyiqk fkihlnytlm vavlm
uby hy axdtlvaml nym tlhyktli, hagaéihlnym yi nyicbk gkqknkik uby
ymqbvaymyi ubyhlm, w my hyqbvaymyi, rkmqk uby nnyckmy mb gkdaqái.

rknnómy hli ubaolqy k day, mb gkfknnl mai ptyil, mb nkiek kttaxkhk k bi
átfln, w, paiknxyiqy, mai hypyimk kncbik; w kmí, qbvl dlt fayi hy gtbekt
nkm xkilm y aignaikt nk gkfyek, cbktháihlmy dktk xyolt mkeói w glwbiqbtk.

kgbhaytli nlm fkihlnytlm k ymdbnckt kn tbgal, w k il hyoktny iaicbik glmk
hy gbkiqkm yi nkm knpltokm w nk xknyqk qtkík; w kvíilny fayi k mkigrl uby
yi bik vyiqtytk uby qyiík gyñahk vyiíki nlm ymgbhlm hyn hbuby w nlm uby
rkfíki mkgkhl hy mb qayttk, w, gli qlhl yml, kubynnk fbyik cyiqy ny
ymgkthktk w ny xatktk rkmqk nl uby yiqty yn gbytl w nk gktiy qbvaytk
ymglihahl, ma il nnycktk yi kubynnk mkeói mb gkdaqái, yn gbkn xlmqtó myt hy
rkmqk yhkh hy qtyaiqk w gbkqtl kñlm, tlfbmql, xám uby hy xyhakik
dtldltgaói, hy xatkt ctkvy w glnlt xltyik. vyiík mlfty bi dlhytlml gkfknnl,
vymqahk nk kgytkhk glqk, w gli gbkqtl damqlnyqym -uby yi kubynnk qayttk my
nnkxki dyhtyñknym- k nlm nkhlm. val uby mbm ymgbhytlm, uby kmí nnkxki k nlm
uby kihki yi kubyn yoytgagal, afki k hymdlokt k mkigrl dkiek; xkihónym uby
il nl ragaymyi, w pby nbycl lfyhygahl; w kmí my ymgkdó nk vyiqtytk.
khxatóny vyt nkiek kttaxkhk kn átfln, ymgbhl yi yn mbynl, w k hli ubaolqy
ktxkhl w dyimkqavl, gli nk xám qtamqy w xynkigónagk pacbtk uby dbhaytk
pltxkt nk xamxk qtamqyek. nnycómy k én hagaéihlny:

-il ymqéam qki qtamqy, fbyi rlxfty, dltuby il rkféam gkíhl yi nkm xkilm hy
kncúi gtbyn lmatam, mail yi nkm hy tluby cbaiktq, uby qayiyi xám hy
glxdkmavkm uby hy tacbtlmkm.

-il ym xa qtamqyek -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- rkfyt gkíhl yi qb dlhyt, ¡lr
vknytlml tluby, gbwk pkxk il rkw níxaqym yi nk qayttk uby nk yigayttyi!,
mail dlt rkfyt mahl qkn xa hymgbahl, uby xy rkwki glcahl qbm mlnhkhlm mai
yn ptyil, ymqkihl wl lfnackhl, mycúi nk lthyi hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, uby
dtlpyml, k vavat gliqail knytqk, mayihl k qlhkm rltkm gyiqaiynk hy xí
xamxl; dltuby qy rkcl mkfyt, ¡lr ctki tluby!, uby ma xy rknnktki mlfty xa
gkfknnl, gli xa nkiek w gli xa ymgbhl, il nym pbytk xbw págan tyihatxy,
dltuby wl mlw hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, kubyn uby hy mbm rkekñkm qayiy
nnyil qlhl yn ltfy.

nbycl tluby cbaiktq glilgaó uby nk yipytxyhkh hy hli ubaolqy qlgkfk xám yi
nlgbtk uby yi vknyiqík, w, kbiuby kncbikm vygym ny rkfík líhl ilxftkt,
ibigk qbvl dlt vythkh mbm rygrlm, ia my dbhl dytmbkhat k uby myxyokiqy
rbxlt tyaikmy yi gltkeói hy rlxfty; w rlncómy yi ymqtyxl hy rkfytny
yigliqtkhl, dktk qlgkt hy gytgk nl uby hy nyolm hén rkfík líhl; w kmí, ny
haol:

-vknytlml gkfknnytl, il lm hymdygréam ia qyicáam k maiaymqtk pltqbik émqk
yi uby lm rknnáam, uby dlhík myt uby yi ymqlm qtldayelm vbymqtk qltgahk
mbytqy my yihytyekmy; uby yn gaynl, dlt ymqtkñlm w ibigk vamqlm tlhylm, hy
nlm rlxftym il axkcaikhlm, mbyny nyvkiqkt nlm gkíhlm w yitaubygyt nlm
dlftym.

wk ny afk k hkt nkm ctkgakm hli ubaolqy, gbkihl maiqaytli k mbm ymdknhkm bi
tbahl glxl hy qtldyn hy gkfknnlm, w il ytk mail bi mlnl, mlfty yn gbkn
vyiík k qlhk pbtak bi xkigyfl, kn dktygyt hy rkmqk vyaiqy kñlm, vymqahl hy
hkxkmgl vythy, gli dkmkxkilm hy ltl, ctycbymglm w mknqkyxfktgk, gli
mlxftytl qytgakhl, k nk vknlik, flqkm yigytkhkm w obmqkm, ymdbynkm, hkck w
ymdkhk hltkhkm, bik ymgldyqk dyubyñk yi nkm xkilm w hlm damqlnkm k nlm
nkhlm. kn tbahl vlnvaó tluby nk gkfyek w val ymqk rytxlmk pacbtk, nk gbkn,
yi nnyckihl k én, haol:

-yi qb fbmgk vyiík, ¡lr vknytlml tluby!, dktk rknnkt yi qa, ma il tyxyhal,
k nl xyilm knaval yi xa hymhagrk; w, dlt il qyiytqy mbmdyiml, dltuby mé uby
il xy rkm glilgahl, ubaytl hygatqy ubaéi mlw: w mlw gnkbhak oytóiaxk, raok
hy maxói pltqy, qb maicbnkt kxacl w yiyxacl dktqagbnkt hy gnkbubyn
qlttynnkm, uby kmaxamxl nl ym qbwl, dlt myt bil hy nlm hy qb gliqtktal
fkihl; w wk mkfym uby ymqy qlttynnkm qayiy bi raol uby hli vagyiqy
qlttynnkm my nnkxk, l, k nl xyilm, my nnkxkfk il rk hlm rltkm. Émqy, dbym,
dlt kftyvakt yn gbyiql hy xa hymvyiqbtk, qy haté yi ftyvym dknkftkm nk uby
xy rk gkbmkhl. valxy, tyubyftóxy, ymgbgrény, yikxltéxy, k rbtql hy xa
dkhty; dltuby il rkw xboyt, dlt tyqatkhk uby ymqé w tygkqkhk uby myk, k
ubayi il ny mlfty qayxdl dktk dliyt yi yoygbgaói w ypygql mbm kqtldynnkhlm
hymylm. paiknxyiqy, én xy dtlxyqaó hy myt xa ymdlml, w wl ny ha nk dknkftk
hy myt mbwk, mai uby yi lftkm dkmámyxlm khynkiqy. mbdy kwyt uby, lnvahkhl
hy nl uby xy hyfík, my gkmkfk gli lqtk, w uby ymqk xkñkik afk k hymdlmktmy,
ibyvk uby xy qbtfó yn myiqahl w kgkfó nk dkgayigak; w, dlt il ymqkt xa
dkhty yi yn nbckt, ny qbvy wl hy dliytxy yi yn qtkoy uby vyym, w
kdtymbtkihl yn dkml k ymqy gkfknnl, kngkigé k hli vagyiqy lftk hy bik nycbk
hy kubí; w, mai dliytxy k hkt ubyokm ia k lít hamgbndkm, ny hamdkté ymqkm
ymgldyqkm, w, dlt kñkhahbtk, ymqkm hlm damqlnkm; w, k nl uby gtyl, ny hyfí
hy yigyttkt xám hy hlm fknkm yi yn gbytdl, kftaéihlny dbytqkm dlt hlihy
yivbynqk yi mb mkicty mknaymy xa rlitk. knní ny hyol yiqty mbm gtakhlm, uby
il lmktli ia dbhaytli dliytmy yi mb hypyimk. vyicl k fbmgktqy dktk uby xy
dkmym k ptkigak, hlihy qyicl dktayiqym gli ubayi vavk, w kmaxymxl k tlcktqy
hypayihkm k xa dkhty, dltuby nlm xbgrlm hy hli vagyiqy il my kqtyvki k
qlxkt yi én hymkpltkhk vyickiek.

tluby, khxatkhl hy nk cknnkthík, faekttík, fbyi qknny w mbgyml hy nk
rytxlmk gnkbhak, ny haol:

-vyi, myñltk, w vkxlm k vyt ma ym xbytql qb yiyxacl, uby hymdbém vytyxlm nl
uby xám qy axdltqkty.

hli ubaolqy, uby ymqkfk ymgbgrkihl kqyiqkxyiqy nl uby gnkbhak rkfík hagrl w
nl uby tluby cbaiktq tymdlihaó, haol:

-il qayiy ikhay dktk ubé qlxkt qtkfkol yi hypyihyt k ymqk myñltk, uby nl
qlxl wl k xa gktcl: hyixy xa gkfknnl w xam ktxkm, w ymdétyixy kubí, uby wl
até k fbmgkt k ymy gkfknnytl, w, xbytql l vavl, ny rkté gbxdnat nk dknkftk
dtlxyqahk k qkiqk fynnyek.

-ikhay hbhy hy ymql -haol mkigrl-, dltuby xa myñlt qayiy xbw fbyik xkil
dktk gkmkxyiqytl, dbym il rk xbgrlm híkm uby rael gkmkt k lqtl uby qkxfaéi
iyckfk k lqtk hligynnk mb dknkftk; w ma il pbytk dltuby nlm yigkiqkhltym
uby ny dytmacbyi ny xbhktli mb vythkhytk pacbtk yi nk hy bi nkgkwl, émqk
pbytk nk rltk uby wk nk qkn hligynnk il nl pbytk.

tluby, uby kqyihík xám k dyimkt yi yn mbgyml hy nk rytxlmk gnkbhak uby yi
nkm tkeliym hy kxl w xlel, il nkm yiqyihaó; w, xkihkihl k mbm ymgbhytlm uby
vlnvaymyi k mkigrl qlhl gbkiql ny rkfíki ubaqkhl hyn tbgal, xkiháihlnym
kmaxymxl uby my tyqatkmyi k nk dktqy hlihy kubynnk ilgry rkfíki ymqkhl
knlokhlm, w nbycl my dktqaó gli gnkbhak k qlhk dtaymk k fbmgkt kn rytahl, l
xbytql, hli vagyiqy. nnycktli kn nbckt hlihy ny yigliqtó gnkbhak, w il
rknnktli yi én mail tygaéi hyttkxkhk mkicty; dytl, qyihayihl nk vamqk dlt
qlhkm dktqym, hymgbftaytli dlt bi tygbymql kttafk kncbik cyiqy, w haétlimy
k yiqyihyt, glxl ytk nk vythkh, uby hyfík myt hli vagyiqy, k ubayi mbm
gtakhlm, l xbytql l vavl, nnyvkfki, l dktk gbtktny, l dktk yiqyttktny;
haétlimy dtaymk k kngkiektnlm, uby, glxl afki hy ymdkgal, gli pkganahkh nl
ragaytli.

rknnktli k hli vagyiqy yi nlm ftkelm hy mbm gtakhlm, k ubayi gli gkimkhk w
hyfanaqkhk vle tlckfk uby ny hyokmyi knní xltat, dltuby yn hlnlt hy nkm
rytahkm il glimyiqík uby xám khynkiqy dkmkmy.

kttloátlimy hy nlm gkfknnlm gnkbhak w tluby, nnycátlimy k én, qyxaytli nlm
gtakhlm nk dtymyigak hy tluby, w gnkbhak my qbtfó yi vyt nk hy hli vagyiqy;
w kmí, yiqty yiqytiygahk w tacbtlmk, my nnycó k én, w kmaéihlny hy nkm
xkilm, ny haol:

-ma qú xy haytkm émqkm, glipltxy k ibymqtl gligaytql, ibigk qú qy vaytkm yi
ymqy dkml.

kftaó nlm gkma gyttkhlm lolm yn rytahl gkfknnytl, w, glilgayihl k gnkbhak,
ny haol:

-fayi vyl, rytxlmk w yickñkhk myñltk, uby qú rkm mahl nk uby xy rkm xbytql:
dyik il xytygahk ia hyfahk k xam hymylm, gli nlm gbknym, ia gli xam lftkm,
okxám ubamy ia mbdy lpyihytqy.

-nbycl, ¿il ym vythkh -haol gnkbhak- uby afkm ymqk xkñkik k hymdlmktqy gli
nyliltk, nk raok hyn tagl fknvkmqtl?

-il, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó hli vagyiqy-; xa xknk pltqbik qy hyfaó hy nnyvkt
ymqkm ibyvkm, dktk uby, gynlmk, xy ubaqkmym nk vahk, nk gbkn, dbym nk hyol
yi qbm xkilm w yi qbm ftkelm, qyicl xa mbytqy dlt vyiqbtlmk. w, dktk
kmycbtktqy hymqk vythkh, kdtayqk nk xkil w tygífyxy dlt ymdlml, ma
ubamaytym, uby il qyicl lqtk xkwlt mkqampkgaói uby hktqy hyn kctkval uby
dayimkm uby hy xí rkm tygyfahl.

kdtyqóny nk xkil gnkbhak, w kdtyqómyny k ynnk yn gltkeói, hy xkiytk uby
mlfty nk mkicty w dygrl hy hli vagyiqy my ubyhó hymxkwkhk, w k én ny qlxó
bi xltqkn dktkmamxl. glipbml ymqkfk tluby, w il mkfík ubé rkgytmy.
kgbhaytli nlm gtakhlm k fbmgkt kcbk uby ygrktnym yi nlm tlmqtlm, w
qtboétlink, gli uby my nlm fkñktli. vlnvaó hy mb hymxkwl gnkbhak, dytl il
hy mb dktkmamxl hli vagyiqy, dltuby my ny kgkfó nk vahk. vamql nl gbkn hy
gnkbhak, rkfaéihlmy yiqytkhl uby wk mb hbngy ymdlml il vavík, tlxdaó nlm
katym gli mbmdatlm, rataó nlm gaynlm gli ubyokm, xknqtkqó mbm gkfynnlm,
yiqtycáihlnlm kn vayiql, kpyó mb tlmqtl gli mbm dtldakm xkilm, gli qlhkm
nkm xbymqtkm hy hlnlt w myiqaxayiql uby hy bi nkmqaxkhl dygrl dbhaytki
axkcaiktmy.

-¡lr gtbyn y aiglimahytkhk xboyt -hygík-, gli ubé pkganahkh qy xlvamqy k
dliyt yi yoygbgaói qki xkn dyimkxayiql! ¡lr pbytek tkfalmk hy nlm gynlm, k
ubé hymymdytkhl pai glihbgím k ubayi lm hk kglcahk yi mb dygrl! ¡lr ymdlml
xíl, gbwk hymhagrkhk mbytqy, dlt myt dtyihk xík, qy rk nnyvkhl hyn qánkxl k
nk mydbnqbtk!

qknym w qki qtamqym ytki nkm ubyokm hy gnkbhak, uby mkgktli nkm náctaxkm hy
nlm lolm hy tluby, il kglmqbxftkhlm k vytqytnkm yi iaicbik lgkmaói.
nnltkfki nlm gtakhlm, hymxkwáfkmy k gkhk dkml gnkbhak, w qlhl kubyn
gatgbaql dktygík gkxdl hy qtamqyek w nbckt hy hymctkgak. paiknxyiqy, tluby
cbaiktq lthyió k nlm gtakhlm hy hli vagyiqy uby nnyvkmyi mb gbytdl kn nbckt
hy mb dkhty, uby ymqkfk knní gytgk, dktk uby ny haymyi mydbnqbtk. gnkbhak
haol k tluby uby ubyttík atmy k bi xlikmqytal hlihy ytk kfkhymk bik qík
mbwk, yi yn gbkn dyimkfk kgkfkt nk vahk, hy lqtl xyolt ymdlml w xám yqytil
kglxdkñkhk. knkfóny tluby mb fbyi dtldómaql, lptygaómyny hy kglxdkñktnk
rkmqk hlihy ubamaymy, w hy hypyihyt k mb dkhty hy nlm dktayiqym w hy qlhl
yn xbihl, ma lpyihytny ubamaymy. il ubaml mb glxdkñík gnkbhak, yi iaicbik
xkiytk, w, kctkhygayihl mbm lptygaxayiqlm gli nkm xyoltym tkeliym uby mbdl,
my hymdyhaó hén nnltkihl. nlm gtakhlm hy hli vagyiqy nnyvktli mb gbytdl, w
tluby my vlnvaó k nlm mbwlm, w ymqy pai qbvaytli nlm kxltym hy gnkbhak
oytóiaxk. dytl, ¿ubé xbgrl, ma qyoaytli nk qtkxk hy mb nkxyiqkfny ramqltak
nkm pbytekm aivyigafnym w tacbtlmkm hy nlm gynlm?

rknnó tluby cbaiktq k mbm ymgbhytlm yi nk dktqy hlihy nym rkfík lthyikhl, w
k hli ubaolqy yiqty ynnlm, mlfty tlgaikiqy, rkgaéihlnym bik dnáqagk yi uby
nym dytmbkhík hyokmyi kubyn xlhl hy vavat qki dynactlml, kmí dktk yn knxk
glxl dktk yn gbytdl; dytl, glxl nlm xám ytki ckmgliym, cyiqy túmqagk w
hymfktkqkhk, il nym yiqtkfk fayi nk dnáqagk hy hli ubaolqy. nnyckhl uby pby
tluby, dtycbiqó k mkigrl dkiek ma ny rkfíki vbynql w tymqaqbahl nkm knrkokm
w dtymykm uby nlm mbwlm hyn tbgal ny rkfíki ubaqkhl. mkigrl tymdlihaó uby
mí, mail uby ny pknqkfki qtym qlgkhltym, uby vkníki qtym gabhkhym.

-¿ubé ym nl uby hagym, rlxfty? -haol bil hy nlm dtymyiqym-, uby wl nlm
qyicl, w il vknyi qtym tyknym.

-kmí ym -haol hli ubaolqy-, dytl ymqíxknlm xa ymgbhytl yi nl uby rk hagrl,
dlt rkfétxynlm hkhl ubayi xy nlm hal.

xkihómynlm vlnvyt kn dbiql tluby cbaiktq, w, xkihkihl dliyt nlm mbwlm yi
knk, xkihó qtkyt knní hynkiqy qlhlm nlm vymqahlm, olwkm, w haiytlm, w qlhl
kubynnl uby hymhy nk únqaxk tydktqagaói rkfíki tlfkhl; w, rkgayihl
ftyvyxyiqy yn qkiqyl, vlnvayihl nl il tydktqafny w tyhbgaéihlnl k haiytlm,
nl tydktqaó dlt qlhk mb glxdkñík, gli qkiqk nycknahkh w dtbhyigak uby il
dkmó bi dbiql ia hyptkbhó ikhk hy nk obmqagak hamqtafbqavk. rygrl ymql, gli
nl gbkn qlhlm ubyhktli gliqyiqlm, mkqampygrlm w dkckhlm, haol tluby k hli
ubaolqy:

-ma il my cbkthkmy ymqk dbiqbknahkh gli émqlm, il my dlhtík vavat gli
ynnlm.

k nl uby haol mkigrl:

-mycúi nl uby kubí ry vamql, ym qki fbyik nk obmqagak, uby ym iygymktak uby
my bmy kbi yiqty nlm xymxlm nkhtliym.

lwónl bi ymgbhytl, w yiktflnó yn xlgrl hy bi ktgkfbe, gli yn gbkn, mai
hbhk, ny kftaytk nk gkfyek k mkigrl, ma tluby cbaiktq il ny haytk vlgym uby
my hyqbvaymy. dkmxómy mkigrl, w dtldbml hy il hymglmyt nlm nkfalm yi qkiql
uby yiqty kubynnk cyiqy ymqbvaymy.

nnycó, yi ymql, bil l kncbilm hy kubynnlm ymgbhytlm uby ymqkfki dbymqlm dlt
gyiqaiynkm dlt nlm gkxailm dktk vyt nk cyiqy uby dlt ynnlm vyiík w hkt
kvaml k mb xkwlt hy nl uby dkmkfk, w émqy haol:

-myñlt, il nyolm hy kubí, dlt yn gkxail uby vk k fktgynlik, vayiy bi ctki
qtldyn hy cyiqy.

k nl uby tymdlihaó tluby:

-¿rkm ygrkhl hy vyt ma mli hy nlm uby ilm fbmgki, l hy nlm uby ilmlqtlm
fbmgkxlm?

-il, mail hy nlm uby fbmgkxlm -tymdlihaó yn ymgbhytl.

-dbym mknah qlhlm -tydnagó tluby-, w qtkéhxynlm kubí nbycl, mai uby my lm
ymgkdy iaicbil.

ragaétlinl kmí, w, ubyháihlmy mlnlm hli ubaolqy, mkigrl w tluby, kcbkthktli
k vyt nl uby nlm ymgbhytlm qtkíki; w, yi ymqy yiqtyqkiql, haol tluby k hli
ubaolqy:

-ibyvk xkiytk hy vahk ny hyfy hy dktygyt kn myñlt hli ubaolqy nk ibymqtk,
ibyvkm kvyiqbtkm, ibyvlm mbgymlm, w qlhlm dynactlmlm; w il xy xktkvannl uby
kmí ny dktyegk, dltuby tyknxyiqy ny glipayml uby il rkw xlhl hy vavat xám
aiubayql ia xám mlftymknqkhl uby yn ibymqtl. k xí xy rki dbymql yi én il mé
ubé hymylm hy vyickiek, uby qayiyi pbytek hy qbtfkt nlm xám mlmyckhlm
gltkeliym; wl, hy xa ikqbtkn, mlw glxdkmavl w fayi aiqyigalikhl; dytl, glxl
qyicl hagrl, yn ubytyt vyicktxy hy bi kctkval uby my xy rael, kmí hk gli
qlhkm xam fbyikm aignaikgaliym yi qayttk, uby dytmyvytl yi ymqy ymqkhl, k
hymdygrl w dymkt hy nl uby yiqayihl; w, glxl bi kfamxl nnkxk k lqtl w bi
dygkhl k lqtl dygkhl, rkimy ymnkflikhl nkm vyickiekm hy xkiytk uby il mónl
nkm xíkm, dytl nkm koyikm qlxl k xa gktcl; dytl halm ym mytvahl hy uby,
kbiuby xy vyl yi nk xaqkh hyn nkfytaiql hy xam glipbmaliym, il daythl nk
ymdytkiek hy mknat hén k dbytql mycbtl.

khxatkhl ubyhó hli ubaolqy hy lít rkfnkt k tluby qki fbyikm w gligytqkhkm
tkeliym, dltuby én my dyimkfk uby, yiqty nlm hy lpagalm myxyokiqym hy
tlfkt, xkqkt w mknqykt il dlhík rkfyt kncbil uby qbvaymy fbyi hamgbtml, w
tymdlihaóny:

-myñlt tluby, yn dtaigadal hy nk mknbh ymqá yi glilgyt nk yipytxyhkh w yi
ubytyt qlxkt yn yipytxl nkm xyhagaikm uby yn xéhagl ny lthyik: vbymqtk
xytgyh ymqá yipytxl, glilgy mb hlnyigak, w yn gaynl, l halm, dlt xyolt
hygat, uby ym ibymqtl xéhagl, ny kdnagktá xyhagaikm uby ny mkiyi, nkm
gbknym mbynyi mkikt dlgl k dlgl w il hy tydyiqy w dlt xankctl; w xám, uby
nlm dygkhltym hamgtyqlm ymqái xám gytgk hy yixyihktmy uby nlm maxdnym; w,
dbym vbymqtk xytgyh rk xlmqtkhl yi mbm tkeliym mb dtbhyigak, il rkw mail
qyiyt fbyi áiaxl w ymdytkt xyoltík hy nk yipytxyhkh hy mb gligayigak; w ma
vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty krlttkt gkxail w dliytmy gli pkganahkh yi yn hy mb
mknvkgaói, véickmy glixacl, uby wl ny yimyñkté k myt gkfknnytl kihkiqy,
hlihy my dkmki qkiqlm qtkfkolm w hymvyiqbtkm uby, qlxáihlnkm dlt
dyiaqyigak, yi hlm dknyqkm ny dlihtái yi yn gaynl.

taómy tluby hyn glimyol hy hli ubaolqy, k ubayi, xbhkihl dnáqagk, gliqó yn
qtácagl mbgyml hy gnkbhak oytóiaxk, hy uby ny dymó yi ymqtyxl k mkigrl, uby
il ny rkfík dktygahl xkn nk fynnyek, hymyivlnqbtk w ftíl hy nk xlek.

nnycktli, yi ymql, nlm ymgbhytlm hy nk dtymk, qtkwyihl glimacl hlm
gkfknnytlm k gkfknnl, w hlm dytyctailm k day, w bi glgry hy xboytym gli
rkmqk myam gtakhlm, uby k day w k gkfknnl nkm kglxdkñkfki, gli lqtlm hlm
xlelm hy xbnkm uby nlm gkfknnytlm qtkíki. glcaétlinlm nlm ymgbhytlm yi
xyhal, cbkthkihl vyigahlm w vyigyhltym ctki manyigal, ymdytkihl k uby yn
ctki tluby cbaiktq rkfnkmy, yn gbkn dtycbiqó k nlm gkfknnytlm uby ubaéi
ytki w khóihy afki, w ubé haiytl nnyvkfki. bil hynnlm ny tymdlihaó:

-myñlt, ilmlqtlm mlxlm hlm gkdaqkiym hy aipkiqytík ymdkñlnk; qyiyxlm
ibymqtkm glxdkñíkm yi iádlnym w vkxlm k yxfktgktilm yi gbkqtl cknytkm, uby
hagyi ymqái yi fktgynlik gli lthyi hy dkmkt k maganak; nnyvkxlm rkmqk
hlgayiqlm l qtygayiqlm ymgbhlm, gli uby, k ibymqtl dktygyt, vkxlm taglm w
gliqyiqlm, dbym nk ymqtygryek lthaiktak hy nlm mlnhkhlm il dytxaqy xkwltym
qymltlm.

dtycbiqó tluby k nlm dytyctailm nl xymxl uby k nlm gkdaqkiym; pbyny
tymdlihahl uby afki k yxfktgktmy dktk dkmkt k tlxk, w uby yiqty yiqtkxflm
dlhíki nnyvkt rkmqk mymyiqk tyknym. ubaml mkfyt qkxfaéi ubaéi afk yi yn
glgry, w khóihy, w yn haiytl uby nnyvkfki; w bil hy nlm hy k gkfknnl haol:

-xa myñltk hlñk cbalxkt hy ubañliym, xboyt hyn tycyiqy hy nk vagktík hy
iádlnym, gli bik raok dyubyñk, bik hligynnk w bik hbyñk, mli nkm uby vki yi
yn glgry; kglxdkñáxlmnk myam gtakhlm, w nlm haiytlm mli myamgayiqlm
ymgbhlm.

-hy xlhl -haol tluby cbaiktq-, uby wk qyiyxlm kubí ilvygayiqlm ymgbhlm w
mymyiqk tyknym; xam mlnhkhlm hyfyi hy myt rkmqk mymyiqk; xítymy k góxl ny
gkfy k gkhk bil, dltuby wl mlw xkn gliqkhlt.

lwyihl hygat ymql nlm mknqykhltym, nyvkiqktli nk vle, hagayihl:

-¡vavk tluby cbaiktq xbgrlm kñlm, k dymkt hy nlm nnkhtym uby mb dythagaói
dtlgbtki!

xlmqtktli kpnacatmy nlm gkdaqkiym, yiqtamqygaómy nk myñltk tycyiqk, w il my
rlncktli ikhk nlm dytyctailm, vayihl nk glipamgkgaói hy mbm fayiym. qúvlnlm
kmí bi tkql mbmdyimlm tluby, dytl il ubaml uby dkmkmy khynkiqy mb qtamqyek,
uby wk my dlhík glilgyt k qatl hy ktgkfbe, w, vlnvaéihlmy k nlm gkdaqkiym,
haol:

-vbymkm xytgyhym, myñltym gkdaqkiym, dlt gltqymík, myki mytvahlm hy
dtymqktxy mymyiqk ymgbhlm, w nk myñltk tycyiqk lgryiqk, dktk gliqyiqkt
ymqk ymgbkhtk uby xy kglxdkñk, dltuby yn kfkh, hy nl uby gkiqk wkiqk, w
nbycl dbéhyimy at mb gkxail nafty w hymyxfktkekhkxyiqy, gli bi mknvlglihbql
uby wl nym hkté, dktk uby, ma qldktyi lqtkm hy kncbikm ymgbkhtkm xíkm uby
qyicl havahahkm dlt ymqlm gliqltilm, il nym rkcki hkñl; uby il ym xa
aiqyigaói hy kctkvakt k mlnhkhlm ia k xboyt kncbik, ymdygaknxyiqy k nkm uby
mli dtaigadknym.

aipaiaqkm w fayi hagrkm pbytli nkm tkeliym gli uby nlm gkdaqkiym
kctkhygaytli k tluby mb gltqymík w nafytknahkh, uby, dlt qkn nk qbvaytli,
yi hyoktnym mb xamxl haiytl. nk myñltk hlñk cbalxkt hy ubañliym my ubaml
kttlokt hyn glgry dktk fymkt nlm daym w nkm xkilm hyn ctki tluby, dytl én
il nl glimaiqaó yi iaicbik xkiytk; kiqym ny dahaó dythói hyn kctkval uby ny
rkgík, pltekhl hy gbxdnat gli nkm lfnackgaliym dtygamkm hy mb xkn lpagal.
xkihó nk myñltk tycyiqk k bi gtakhl mbwl haymy nbycl nlm lgryiqk ymgbhlm
uby ny rkfíki tydktqahl, w wk nlm gkdaqkiym rkfíki hymyxflnmkhl nlm
mymyiqk. afki nlm dytyctailm k hkt qlhk mb xamytak, dytl tluby nym haol uby
my ymqbvaymyi ubyhlm, w vlnvaéihlmy k nlm mbwlm, nym haol:

-hymqlm ymgbhlm hlm qlgki k gkhk bil, w mlftki vyaiqy: nlm haye my hyi k
ymqlm dytyctailm, w nlm lqtlm haye k ymqy fbyi ymgbhytl, dltuby dbyhk hygat
fayi hy ymqk kvyiqbtk.

w, qtkwéihlny khytyel hy ymgtafat, hy uby mayxdty kihkfk dtlvyíhl, tluby
nym hal dlt ymgtaql bi mknvlglihbql dktk nlm xkwltknym hy mbm ymgbkhtkm, w,
hymdahaéihlmy hynnlm, nlm hyoó at naftym, w khxatkhlm hy mb ilfnyek, hy mb
cknnkthk hamdlmagaói w ymqtkñl dtlgyhyt, qyiaéihlny xám dlt bi knyokihtl
xkcil uby dlt nkhtói glilgahl. bil hy nlm ymgbhytlm haol yi mb nyicbk
ckmglik w gkqknkik:

-ymqy ibymqtl gkdaqái xám ym dktk ptkhy uby dktk fkihlnytl: ma hy kubí
khynkiqy ubamayty xlmqtktmy nafytkn méknl gli mb rkgayihk w il gli nk
ibymqtk.

il nl haol qki dkml yn hymvyiqbtkhl uby hyokmy hy lítnl tluby, yn gbkn,
ygrkihl xkil k nk ymdkhk, ny kftaó nk gkfyek gkma yi hlm dktqym,
hagaéihlny:

-hymqk xkiytk gkmqacl wl k nlm hymnyicbkhlm w kqtyvahlm.

dkmxátlimy qlhlm, w iaicbil ny lmó hygat dknkftk: qkiqk ytk nk lfyhayigak
uby ny qyiíki.

kdktqómy tluby k bik dktqy w ymgtafaó bik gktqk k bi mb kxacl, k fktgynlik,
háihlny kvaml glxl ymqkfk glimacl yn pkxlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, kubyn
gkfknnytl kihkiqy hy ubayi qkiqkm glmkm my hygíki; w uby ny rkgík mkfyt uby
ytk yn xám ctkgalml w yn xám yiqyihahl rlxfty hyn xbihl, w uby hy knní k
gbkqtl híkm, uby ytk yn hy mki obki fkbqamqk, my ny dlihtík yi xaqkh hy nk
dnkwk hy nk gabhkh, ktxkhl hy qlhkm mbm ktxkm, mlfty tlgaikiqy, mb gkfknnl,
w k mb ymgbhytl mkigrl mlfty bi kmil, w uby haymy ilqagak hymql k mbm
kxaclm nlm iakttlm, dktk uby gli én my mlnkekmyi; uby én ubamaytk uby
gktygaytki hymqy cbmql nlm gkhynnm, mbm gliqtktalm, dytl uby ymql ytk
axdlmafny, k gkbmk uby nkm nlgbtkm w hamgtygaliym hy hli ubaolqy w nlm
hlikatym hy mb ymgbhytl mkigrl dkiek il dlhíki hyokt hy hkt cbmql cyiytkn k
qlhl yn xbihl. hymdkgró ymqkm gktqkm gli bil hy mbm ymgbhytlm, uby, xbhkihl
yn qtkoy hy fkihlnytl yi yn hy bi nkftkhlt, yiqtó yi fktgynlik w nk hal k
ubayi afk.





gkdíqbnl nza. hy nl uby ny mbgyhaó k hli ubaolqy yi nk yiqtkhk hy
fktgynlik, gli lqtkm glmkm uby qayiyi xám hy nl vythkhytl uby hy nl
hamgtyql


qtym híkm w qtym ilgrym ymqbvl hli ubaolqy gli tluby, w ma ymqbvaytk
qtygayiqlm kñlm, il ny pknqktk ubé xatkt w khxatkt yi yn xlhl hy mb vahk:
kubí kxkiygíki, kgbnná glxíki; bikm vygym rbíki, mai mkfyt hy ubaéi, w
lqtkm ymdytkfki, mai mkfyt k ubaéi. hltxíki yi day, aiqyttlxdayihl yn
mbyñl, xbháihlmy hy bi nbckt k lqtl. qlhl ytk dliyt ymdíkm, ymgbgrkt
gyiqaiynkm, mldnkt nkm gbythkm hy nlm ktgkfbgym, kbiuby qtkíki dlglm,
dltuby qlhlm my mytvíki hy dyhtyñknym. tluby dkmkfk nkm ilgrym kdktqkhl hy
nlm mbwlm, yi dktqym w nbcktym hlihy ynnlm il dbhaymyi mkfyt hóihy ymqkfk;
dltuby nlm xbgrlm fkihlm uby yn vamlttyw hy fktgynlik rkfík ygrkhl mlfty mb
vahk ny qtkíki aiubayql w qyxytlml, w il my lmkfk pakt hy iaicbil, qyxayihl
uby nlm xamxlm mbwlm, l ny rkfíki hy xkqkt, l yiqtyckt k nk obmqagak: vahk,
dlt gaytql, xamytkfny w yipkhlmk.

yi pai, dlt gkxailm hymbmkhlm, dlt kqkolm w myihkm yigbfaytqkm, dktqaytli
tluby, hli ubaolqy w mkigrl gli lqtlm myam ymgbhytlm k fktgynlik. nnycktli
k mb dnkwk nk vímdytk hy mki obki yi nk ilgry, w, kftkekihl tluby k hli
ubaolqy w k mkigrl, k ubayi hal nlm haye ymgbhlm dtlxyqahlm, uby rkmqk
yiqligym il my nlm rkfík hkhl, nlm hyoó, gli xan lptygaxayiqlm uby hy nk
bik k nk lqtk dktqy my ragaytli.

vlnvaómy tluby; ubyhómy hli ubaolqy ymdytkihl yn hík, kmí, k gkfknnl, glxl
ymqkfk, w il qkthó xbgrl gbkihl glxyieó k hymgbftatmy dlt nlm fkngliym hyn
ltayiqy nk pke hy nk fnkigk kbtltk, knyctkihl nkm wytfkm w nkm pnltym, yi
nbckt hy knyctkt yn líhl; kbiuby kn xymxl aimqkiqy knyctktli qkxfaéi yn
líhl yn mli hy xbgrkm grataxíkm w kqkfknym, tbahl hy gkmgkfynym, ''¡qtkdk,
qtkdk, kdktqk, kdktqk!'' hy glttyhltym, uby, kn dktygyt, hy nk gabhkh
mkníki. hal nbckt nk kbtltk kn mln, uby, bi tlmqtl xkwlt uby yn hy bik
tlhynk, dlt yn xám fkol rltaeliqy, dlgl k dlgl, my afk nyvkiqkihl.

qyihaytli hli ubaolqy w mkigrl nk vamqk dlt qlhkm dktqym: vaytli yn xkt,
rkmqk yiqligym hynnlm il vamql; dktygaónym ymdkgalmímaxl w nktcl, rktql xám
uby nkm nkcbikm hy tbahytk, uby yi nk xkigrk rkfíki vamql; vaytli nkm
cknytkm uby ymqkfki yi nk dnkwk, nkm gbknym, kfkqayihl nkm qayihkm, my
hymgbftaytli nnyikm hy pnáxbnkm w cknnkthyqym, uby qtyxlnkfki kn vayiql w
fymkfki w fkttíki yn kcbk; hyiqtl mlikfki gnktaiym, qtlxdyqkm w grataxíkm,
uby gytgk w nyolm nnyikfki yn katy hy mbkvym w fynaglmlm kgyiqlm.
glxyiektli k xlvytmy w k rkgyt xlhl hy ymgktkxbek dlt nkm mlmyckhkm kcbkm,
glttymdlihaéihlnym gkma kn xamxl xlhl aipaiaqlm gkfknnytlm uby hy nk gabhkh
mlfty rytxlmlm gkfknnlm w gli vamqlmkm naftykm mkníki. nlm mlnhkhlm hy nkm
cknytkm hamdktkfki aipaiaqk ktqannytík, k ubayi tymdlihíki nlm uby ymqkfki
yi nkm xbtknnkm w pbytqym hy nk gabhkh, w nk ktqannytík ctbymk gli
ymdkiqlml ymqtbyihl tlxdík nlm vayiqlm, k ubayi tymdlihíki nlm gkñliym hy
gtboík hy nkm cknytkm. yn xkt knycty, nk qayttk olgbihk, yn katy gnktl,
mónl qkn vye qbtfal hyn rbxl hy nk ktqannytík, dktygy uby afk aipbihayihl w
yicyihtkihl cbmql múfaql yi qlhkm nkm cyiqym.

il dlhík axkcaikt mkigrl góxl dbhaymyi qyiyt qkiqlm daym kubynnlm fbnqlm
uby dlt yn xkt my xlvíki. yi ymql, nnycktli glttayihl, gli ctaqk, nananíym
w knckektk, nlm hy nkm naftykm khlihy hli ubaolqy mbmdyiml w kqóiaql
ymqkfk, w bil hynnlm, uby ytk yn kvamkhl hy tluby, haol yi knqk vle k hli
ubaolqy:

-fayi myk vyiahl k ibymqtk gabhkh yn ymdyol, yn pktln, nk ymqtynnk w yn
iltqy hy qlhk nk gkfknnytík kihkiqy, hlihy xám nktckxyiqy my gliqayiy. fayi
myk vyiahl, hacl, yn vknytlml hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk: il yn pknml, il yn
pagqagal, il yn kdógtapl uby yi pknmkm ramqltakm ymqlm híkm ilm rki
xlmqtkhl, mail yn vythkhytl, yn nyckn w yn payn uby ilm hymgtafaó gahy
rkxyqy fyiyicyna, pnlt hy nlm ramqltakhltym.

il tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy dknkftk, ia nlm gkfknnytlm ymdytktli k uby nk
tymdlihaymy, mail, vlnvaéihlmy w tyvlnvaéihlmy gli nlm hyxám uby nlm
mycbíki, glxyiektli k rkgyt bi tyvbynql gktkgln kn hyttyhlt hy hli ubaolqy;
yn gbkn, vlnvaéihlmy k mkigrl, haol:

-Émqlm fayi ilm rki glilgahl: wl kdlmqkté uby rki nyíhl ibymqtk ramqltak w
kbi nk hyn ktkcliém tygaéi axdtymk.

vlnvaó lqtk vye yn gkfknnytl uby rkfnó k hli ubaolqy, w híolny:

-vbymk xytgyh, myñlt hli ubaolqy, my vyick gli ilmlqtlm, uby qlhlm mlxlm
mbm mytvahltym w ctkihym kxaclm hy tluby cbaiktq.

k nl uby hli ubaolqy tymdlihaó:

-ma gltqymíkm yicyihtki gltqymíkm, nk vbymqtk, myñlt gkfknnytl, ym raok l
dktayiqk xbw gytgkik hy nkm hyn ctki tluby. nnyvkhxy hl ubamaétyhym, uby wl
il qyihté lqtk vlnbiqkh uby nk vbymqtk, w xám ma nk ubytéam lgbdkt yi
vbymqtl mytvagal.

gli dknkftkm il xyilm glxyhahkm uby émqkm ny tymdlihaó yn gkfknnytl, w,
yigyttáihlny qlhlm yi xyhal, kn mli hy nkm grataxíkm w hy nlm kqkfknym, my
yigkxaiktli gli én k nk gabhkh, kn yiqtkt hy nk gbkn, yn xknl, uby qlhl nl
xknl lthyik, w nlm xbgrkgrlm, uby mli xám xknlm uby yn xknl, hlm hynnlm
qtkvaymlm w kqtyvahlm my yiqtktli dlt qlhk nk cyiqy, w, knekihl yn bil hy
nk glnk hyn tbgal w yn lqtl nk hy tlgaikiqy, nym dbmaytli w yigkoktli
myihlm xkilolm hy knakckm. maiqaytli nlm dlftym kiaxknym nkm ibyvkm
ymdbynkm, w, kdtyqkihl nkm glnkm, kbxyiqktli mb hamcbmql, hy xkiytk uby,
hkihl xan gltglvlm, haytli gli mbm hbyñlm yi qayttk. hli ubaolqy, glttahl w
kptyiqkhl, kgbhaó k ubaqkt yn dnbxkoy hy nk glnk hy mb xkqknlqy, w mkigrl,
yn hy mb tbgal. ubamaytki nlm uby cbakfki k hli ubaolqy gkmqackt yn
kqtyvaxayiql hy nlm xbgrkgrlm, w il pby dlmafny, dltuby my yigyttktli yiqty
xám hy lqtlm xan uby nlm mycbíki.

vlnvaytli k mbfat hli ubaolqy w mkigrl; gli yn xamxl kdnkbml w xúmagk
nnycktli k nk gkmk hy mb cbík, uby ytk ctkihy w dtaigadkn, yi pai, glxl hy
gkfknnytl tagl; hlihy ny hyoktyxlm dlt kcltk, dltuby kmí nl ubayty gahy
rkxyqy.





gkdíqbnl nzaa. uby qtkqk hy nk kvyiqbtk hy nk gkfyek yigkiqkhk, gli lqtkm
iañytíkm uby il dbyhyi hyokt hy gliqktmy


hli kiqlial xltyil my nnkxkfk yn rbémdyh hy hli ubaolqy, gkfknnytl tagl w
hamgtyql, w kxacl hy rlncktmy k nl rliymql w kpkfny, yn gbkn, vayihl yi mb
gkmk k hli ubaolqy, kihkfk fbmgkihl xlhlm glxl, mai mb dytobagal, mkgkmy k
dnkek mbm nlgbtkm; dltuby il mli fbtnkm nkm uby hbynyi, ia rkw dkmkqayxdlm
uby vkncki ma mli gli hkñl hy qytgytl. nl dtaxytl uby rael pby rkgyt
hymktxkt k hli ubaolqy w mkgktny k vamqkm gli kubyn mb ymqtygrl w kgkxbekhl
vymqahl -glxl wk lqtkm vygym ny ryxlm hymgtaql w daiqkhl- k bi fkngói uby
mkník k bik gknny hy nkm xám dtaigadknym hy nk gabhkh, k vamqk hy nkm
cyiqym w hy nlm xbgrkgrlm, uby glxl k xlik ny xatkfki. glttaytli hy ibyvl
hynkiqy hén nlm hy nkm naftykm, glxl ma dktk én mlnl, il dktk knyctkt kubyn
pymqavl hík, my nkm rbfaytki dbymql; w mkigrl ymqkfk gliqyiqímaxl, dlt
dktygytny uby my rkfík rknnkhl, mai mkfyt góxl ia góxl il, lqtkm flhkm hy
gkxkgrl, lqtk gkmk glxl nk hy hli haycl hy xatkihk w lqtl gkmqannl glxl yn
hyn hbuby.

glxaytli kubyn hík gli hli kiqlial kncbilm hy mbm kxaclm, rlitkihl qlhlm w
qtkqkihl k hli ubaolqy glxl k gkfknnytl kihkiqy, hy nl gbkn, rbygl w
dlxdlml, il gkfík yi mí hy gliqyiql. nlm hlikatym hy mkigrl pbytli qkiqlm,
uby hy mb flgk kihkfki glxl glnckhlm qlhlm nlm gtakhlm hy gkmk w qlhlm
gbkiqlm ny líki. ymqkihl k nk xymk, haol hli kiqlial k mkigrl:

-kgá qyiyxlm ilqagak, fbyi mkigrl, uby mlam qki kxacl hy xkiokt fnkigl w hy
knflihacbannkm, uby, ma lm mlftki, nkm cbktháam yi yn myil dktk yn lqtl
hík.

-il, myñlt, il ym kmí -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby qyicl xám hy naxdal uby hy
clnlml, w xa myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby ymqá hynkiqy, mkfy fayi uby gli bi dbñl
hy fynnlqkm, l hy ibygym, ilm mlnyxlm dkmkt yiqtkxflm lgrl híkm. vythkh ym
uby ma qkn vye xy mbgyhy uby xy hyi nk vkubannk, glttl gli nk mlcbannk;
ubaytl hygat uby glxl nl uby xy hki, w bml hy nlm qayxdlm glxl nlm rknnl; w
ubayiubaytk uby rbfayty hagrl uby wl mlw glxyhlt kvyiqkokhl w il naxdal,
qéickmy dlt hagrl uby il kgaytqk; w hy lqtk xkiytk haoytk ymql ma il xatktk
k nkm fktfkm rlitkhkm uby ymqái k nk xymk.

-dlt gaytql -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby nk dktmaxliak w naxdayek gli uby mkigrl
glxy my dbyhy ymgtafat w ctkfkt yi náxaikm hy ftligy, dktk uby ubyhy yi
xyxltak yqytik hy nlm macnlm vyiahytlm. vythkh ym uby, gbkihl én qayiy
rkxfty, dktygy kncl qtkcói, dltuby glxy kdtaymk w xkmgk k hlm gkttannlm;
dytl nk naxdayek mayxdty nk qayiy yi mb dbiql, w yi yn qayxdl uby pby
clfytikhlt kdtyihaó k glxyt k nl xynaihtlml: qkiql, uby glxík gli qyiyhlt
nkm bvkm w kbi nlm ctkilm hy nk ctkikhk.

-¡góxl! -haol hli kiqlial-. ¿clfytikhlt rk mahl mkigrl?

-mí -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, w hy bik íimbnk nnkxkhk nk fktkqktak. haye híkm nk
clfytié k dyhat hy flgk; yi ynnlm dythí yn mlmaycl, w kdtyihí k hymdtygakt
qlhlm nlm clfaytilm hyn xbihl; mkní rbwyihl hynnk, gkí yi bik gbyvk, hlihy
xy qbvy dlt xbytql, hy nk gbkn mkní vavl dlt xankctl.

gliqó hli ubaolqy dlt xyibhl qlhl yn mbgyml hyn clfaytil hy mkigrl, gli uby
hal ctki cbmql k nlm lwyiqym.

nyvkiqkhlm nlm xkiqynym, w qlxkihl hli kiqlial dlt nk xkil k hli ubaolqy,
my yiqtó gli én yi bi kdktqkhl kdlmyiql, yi yn gbkn il rkfík lqtk glmk hy
khltil uby bik xymk, kn dktygyt hy okmdy, uby mlfty bi day hy nl xymxl my
mlmqyiík, mlfty nk gbkn ymqkfk dbymqk, kn xlhl hy nkm gkfyekm hy nlm
yxdytkhltym tlxkilm, hy nlm dygrlm kttafk, bik uby myxyokfk myt hy ftligy.
dkmyómy hli kiqlial gli hli ubaolqy dlt qlhl yn kdlmyiql, tlhykihl xbgrkm
vygym nk xymk, hymdbém hy nl gbkn haol:

-kcltk, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby ymqlw yiqytkhl uby il ilm lwy w ymgbgrk
kncbil, w ymqá gyttkhk nk dbytqk, ubaytl gliqkt k vbymqtk xytgyh bik hy nkm
xám tktkm kvyiqbtkm, l, dlt xyolt hygat, ilvyhkhym uby axkcaiktmy dbyhyi,
gli glihagaói uby nl uby k vbymqtk xytgyh haoyty nl rk hy hydlmaqkt yi nlm
únqaxlm tyqtyqym hyn mygtyql.

-kmí nl obtl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w kbi ny ygrkté bik nlmk yigaxk, dktk
xám mycbtahkh; dltuby ubaytl uby mydk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli kiqlial
-uby wk mkfík mb ilxfty-, uby ymqá rkfnkihl gli ubayi, kbiuby qayiy líhlm
dktk lít, il qayiy nyicbk dktk rkfnkt; kmí uby, gli mycbtahkh dbyhy vbymqtk
xytgyh qtkmnkhkt nl uby qayiy yi mb dygrl yi yn xíl w rkgyt gbyiqk uby nl
rk kttlokhl yi nlm kfamxlm hyn manyigal.

-yi pyy hy ymk dtlxymk -tymdlihaó hli kiqlial-, ubaytl dliyt k vbymqtk
xytgyh yi khxatkgaói gli nl uby vayty w lwyty, w hktxy k xí kncúi knaval hy
nk dyik uby xy gkbmk il qyiyt gli ubayi glxbiagkt xam mygtyqlm, uby il mli
dktk paktmy hy qlhlm.

mbmdyiml ymqkfk hli ubaolqy, ymdytkihl yi ubé rkfíki hy dktkt qkiqkm
dtyvyigaliym. yi ymql, qlxáihlny nk xkil hli kiqlial, my nk dkmyó dlt nk
gkfyek hy ftligy w dlt qlhk nk xymk, w dlt yn day hy okmdy mlfty uby my
mlmqyiík, w nbycl haol:

-ymqk gkfyek, myñlt hli ubaolqy, rk mahl rygrk w pkftagkhk dlt bil hy nlm
xkwltym yigkiqkhltym w rygragytlm uby rk qyiahl yn xbihl, uby gtyl ytk
dlnkgl hy ikgaói w hagídbnl hyn pkxlml ymglqannl, hy ubayi qkiqkm
xktkvannkm my gbyiqki; yn gbkn ymqbvl kubí yi xa gkmk, w dlt dtygal hy xan
ymgbhlm uby ny ha, nkftó ymqk gkfyek, uby qayiy dtldayhkh w vatqbh hy
tymdlihyt k gbkiqkm glmkm kn líhl ny dtycbiqktyi. cbkthó tbxflm, daiqó
gktágqytym, lfmytvó kmqtlm, xató dbiqlm, w, paiknxyiqy, nk mkgó gli nk
dytpygaói uby vytyxlm xkñkik, dltuby nlm vaytiym ymqá xbhk, w rlw, uby nl
ym, ilm rk hy rkgyt ymdytkt rkmqk xkñkik. yi ymqy qayxdl dlhtá vbymqtk
xytgyh dtyvyiatmy hy nl uby ubyttá dtycbiqkt, uby dlt ymdytayigak mé uby
hagy vythkh yi gbkiql tymdlihy.

khxatkhl ubyhó hli ubaolqy hy nk vatqbh w dtldayhkh hy nk gkfyek, w ymqbvl
dlt il gtyyt k hli kiqlial; dytl, dlt vyt gbái dlgl qayxdl rkfík dktk rkgyt
nk yzdytayigak, il ubaml hygatny lqtk glmk mail uby ny kctkhygík yn rkfytny
hymgbfaytql qki ctki mygtyql. mknaytli hyn kdlmyiql, gyttó nk dbytqk hli
kiqlial gli nnkvy, w pbétlimy k nk mknk, hlihy nlm hyxám gkfknnytlm
ymqkfki. yi ymqy qayxdl nym rkfík gliqkhl mkigrl xbgrkm hy nkm kvyiqbtkm w
mbgymlm uby k mb kxl rkfíki kgliqygahl.

kubynnk qkthy mkgktli k dkmykt k hli ubaolqy, il ktxkhl, mail hy túk,
vymqahl bi fknkihtái hy dkñl nylikhl, uby dbhaytk rkgyt mbhkt yi kubyn
qayxdl kn xamxl wynl. lthyiktli gli mbm gtakhlm uby yiqtyqbvaymyi k mkigrl
hy xlhl uby il ny hyokmyi mknat hy gkmk. afk hli ubaolqy, il mlfty
tlgaikiqy, mail mlfty bi ctki xkgrl hy dkml nnkil, w xbw fayi khytyekhl.
dbmaétliny yn fknkihtái, w yi nkm ymdknhkm, mai uby nl vaymy, ny glmaytli
bi dktckxail, hlihy ny ymgtafaytli gli nyqtkm ctkihym: Émqy ym hli ubaolqy
hy nk xkigrk. yi glxyiekihl yn dkmyl, nnyvkfk yn téqbnl nlm lolm hy gbkiqlm
vyiíki k vytny, w glxl nyíki: Émqy ym hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, khxatáfkmy
hli ubaolqy hy vyt uby gbkiqlm ny xatkfki ny ilxftkfki w glilgíki; w,
vlnvaéihlmy k hli kiqlial, uby afk k mb nkhl, ny haol:

-ctkihy ym nk dtyttlckqavk uby yigayttk yi mí nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, dbym
rkgy glilgahl w pkxlml kn uby nk dtlpymk dlt qlhlm nlm qétxailm hy nk
qayttk; ma il, xaty vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli kiqlial, uby rkmqk nlm
xbgrkgrlm hymqk gabhkh, mai ibigk rkfytxy vamql, xy glilgyi.

-kmí ym, myñlt hli ubaolqy -tymdlihaó hli kiqlial-, uby, kmí glxl yn pbycl
il dbyhy ymqkt ymglihahl w yigyttkhl, nk vatqbh il dbyhy hyokt hy myt
glilgahk, w nk uby my kngkiek dlt nk dtlpymaói hy nkm ktxkm tymdnkihygy w
gkxdyk mlfty qlhkm nkm lqtkm.

kgkygaó, dbym, uby, wyihl hli ubaolqy gli yn kdnkbml uby my rk hagrl, bi
gkmqynnkil uby nywó yn téqbnl hy nkm ymdknhkm, kneó nk vle, hagayihl:

-¡vánckqy yn hakfnl dlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk! ¿góxl uby rkmqk kubí rkm
nnyckhl, mai rkfytqy xbytql nlm aipaiaqlm dknlm uby qayiym k gbymqkm? qb
ytym nlgl, w ma nl pbytkm k mlnkm w hyiqtl hy nkm dbytqkm hy qb nlgbtk,
pbytk xyilm xkn; dytl qayiym dtldayhkh hy vlnvyt nlglm w xyiqygkqlm k
gbkiqlm qy qtkqki w glxbiagki; ma il, xítyinl dlt ymqlm myñltym uby qy
kglxdkñki. vbénvyqy, xyiqygkql, k qb gkmk, w xatk dlt qb rkgayihk, dlt qb
xboyt w qbm raolm, w héokqy hymqkm vkgayhkhym uby qy gktglxyi yn myml w qy
hymikqki yn yiqyihaxayiql.

-rytxkil -haol hli kiqlial-, mycbah vbymqtl gkxail, w il hyam glimyolm k
ubayi il lm nlm dahy. yn myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk ym xbw gbythl, w
ilmlqtlm, uby ny kglxdkñkxlm, il mlxlm iygalm; nk vatqbh my rk hy rlitkt
hlihyubaytk uby my rknnkty, w kihkh yi rltk xknk, w il lm xyqáam hlihy il
lm nnkxki.

-dkthaye, vbymk xytgyh qayiy tkeói -tymdlihaó yn gkmqynnkil-, uby kglimyokt
k ymqy fbyi rlxfty ym hkt glgym gliqtk yn kcbaoói; dytl, gli qlhl yml, xy
hk xbw ctki námqaxk uby yn fbyi aicyial uby hagyi uby qayiy yi qlhkm nkm
glmkm ymqy xyiqygkql my ny hymkcüy dlt nk gkikn hy mb kihkiqy gkfknnytík; w
nk yirltkxknk uby vbymk xytgyh haol, myk dktk xí w dktk qlhlm xam
hymgyihayiqym ma hy rlw xám, kbiuby vavaymy xám kñlm uby xkqbmknéi, hayty
glimyol k ikhay, kbiuby xy nl dahk.

kdktqómy yn glimyoytl; macbaó khynkiqy yn dkmyl; dytl pby qkiqk nk dtaymk
uby nlm xbgrkgrlm w qlhk nk cyiqy qyiík nywyihl yn téqbnl, uby my ny rbfl
hy ubaqkt hli kiqlial, glxl uby ny ubaqkfk lqtk glmk.

nnycó nk ilgry, vlnvaétlimy k gkmk; rbfl mktkl hy hkxkm, dltuby nk xboyt hy
hli kiqlial, uby ytk bik myñltk dtaigadkn w knycty, rytxlmk w hamgtyqk,
glivahó k lqtkm mbm kxackm k uby vaiaymyi k rlitkt k mb rbémdyh w k cbmqkt
hy mbm ibigk vamqkm nlgbtkm. vaiaytli kncbikm, gyiómy ymdnéihahkxyiqy w
glxyieómy yn mktkl gkma k nkm haye hy nk ilgry. yiqty nkm hkxkm rkfík hlm
hy cbmql dígktl w fbtnlikm, w, gli myt xbw rliymqkm, ytki kncl
hymglxdbymqkm, dlt hkt nbckt uby nkm fbtnkm knyctkmyi mai yipkhl. Émqkm
haytli qkiqk dtaymk yi mkgkt k hkiekt k hli ubaolqy, uby ny xlnaytli, il
mónl yn gbytdl, dytl yn áiaxk. ytk glmk hy vyt nk pacbtk hy hli ubaolqy,
nktcl, qyihahl, pnkgl, kxktannl, ymqtygrl yi yn vymqahl, hymkatkhl, w,
mlfty qlhl, il ikhk nacytl. tyubyftáfkiny glxl k rbtql nkm hkxamynkm, w én,
qkxfaéi glxl k rbtql, nkm hymhyñkfk; dytl, vaéihlmy kdtyqkt hy tyubayftlm,
kneó nk vle w haol:

-pbcaqy, dktqym khvytmky!: hyokhxy yi xa mlmaycl, dyimkxayiqlm xkn vyiahlm.
knná lm kvyiah, myñltkm, gli vbymqtlm hymylm, uby nk uby ym tyaik hy nlm
xílm, nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, il glimayiqy uby iaicbilm lqtlm uby
nlm mbwlm xy kvkmknnyi w taihki.

w, hagayihl ymql, my myiqó yi xaqkh hy nk mknk, yi yn mbynl, xlnahl w
ubyftkiqkhl hy qki fkankhlt yoytgagal. rael hli kiqlial uby ny nnyvkmyi yi
dyml k mb nygrl, w yn dtaxytl uby kmaó hén pby mkigrl, hagaéihlny:

-¡iltk yi qkn, myñlt ibymqtl kxl, nl rkféam fkankhl! ¿dyimáam uby qlhlm nlm
vknayiqym mli hkiekhltym w qlhlm nlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm fkanktaiym? hacl
uby ma nl dyimáam, uby ymqáam yickñkhl; rlxfty rkw uby my kqtyvytá k xkqkt
k bi cackiqy kiqym uby rkgyt bik gkftalnk. ma rbfaétkhym hy ekdkqykt, wl
mbdnaytk vbymqtk pknqk, uby ekdkqyl glxl bi catapknqy; dytl yi nl hyn
hkiekt, il hlw dbiqkhk.

gli ymqkm w lqtkm tkeliym hal uby tyít mkigrl k nlm hyn mktkl, w hal gli mb
kxl yi nk gkxk, kttldáihlny dktk uby mbhkmy nk ptaknhkh hy mb fkany.

lqtl hík ny dktygaó k hli kiqlial myt fayi rkgyt nk yzdytayigak hy nk
gkfyek yigkiqkhk, w gli hli ubaolqy, mkigrl w lqtlm hlm kxaclm, gli nkm hlm
myñltkm uby rkfíki xlnahl k hli ubaolqy yi yn fkany, uby kubynnk dtldak
ilgry my rkfíki ubyhkhl gli nk xboyt hy hli kiqlial, my yigyttó yi nk
ymqkigak hlihy ymqkfk nk gkfyek. gliqónym nk dtldayhkh uby qyiík,
yigktcónym yn mygtyql w híolnym uby kubén ytk yn dtaxytl hík hlihy my rkfík
hy dtlfkt nk vatqbh hy nk qkn gkfyek yigkiqkhk; w ma il ytki nlm hlm kxaclm
hy hli kiqlial, iaicbik lqtk dytmlik mkfík yn fbmanam hyn yigkiql, w kbi ma
hli kiqlial il my ny rbfaytk hymgbfaytql dtaxytl k mbm kxaclm, qkxfaéi
ynnlm gkwytki yi nk khxatkgaói yi uby nlm hyxám gkwytli, mai myt dlmafny
lqtk glmk: gli qkn qtkek w qkn lthyi ymqkfk pkftagkhk.

yn dtaxytl uby my nnycó kn líhl hy nk gkfyek pby yn xamxl hli kiqlial, w
híolny yi vle mbxamk, dytl il qkiql uby hy qlhlm il pbymy yiqyihahk:

-haxy, gkfyek, dlt nk vatqbh uby yi qa my yigayttk: ¿ubé dyimkxayiqlm qyicl
wl kcltk?

w nk gkfyek ny tymdlihaó, mai xlvyt nlm nkfalm, gli vle gnktk w hamqaiqk,
hy xlhl uby pby hy qlhlm yiqyihahk, ymqk tkeói:

-wl il obecl hy dyimkxayiqlm.

lwyihl nl gbkn, qlhlm ubyhktli kqóiaqlm, w xám vayihl uby yi qlhl yn
kdlmyiql ia kn hyttyhlt hy nk xymk il rkfík dytmlik rbxkik uby tymdlihyt
dbhaymy.

-¿gbáiqlm ymqkxlm kubí? -qltió k dtycbiqkt hli kiqlial.

w pbyny tymdlihahl dlt yn dtldal qyilt, dkml:

-ymqáam qú w qb xboyt, gli hlm kxaclm qbwlm, w hlm kxackm hynnk, w bi
gkfknnytl pkxlml nnkxkhl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, w bi mb ymgbhytl uby
mkigrl dkiek qayiy dlt ilxfty.

¡kubí mí uby pby yn khxatktmy hy ibyvl, kubí mí uby pby yn ytaektmy nlm
gkfynnlm k qlhlm hy dbtl ymdkiql! w, kdktqáihlmy hli kiqlial hy nk gkfyek,
haol:

-ymql xy fkmqk dktk hktxy k yiqyihyt uby il pba yickñkhl hyn uby qy xy
vyihaó, ¡gkfyek mkfak, gkfyek rkfnkhltk, gkfyek tymdlihlik w khxatkfny
gkfyek! nnycby lqtl w dtycúiqyny nl uby ubamayty.

w, glxl nkm xboytym hy lthaiktal mli dtymbtlmkm w kxackm hy mkfyt, nk
dtaxytk uby my nnycó pby bik hy nkm hlm kxackm hy nk xboyt hy hli kiqlial,
w nl uby ny dtycbiqó pby:

-haxy, gkfyek, ¿ubé rkté wl dktk myt xbw rytxlmk?

w pbyny tymdlihahl:

-mé xbw rliymqk.

-il qy dtycbiql xám -haol nk dtycbiqkiqk.

nnycó nbycl nk glxdkñytk, w haol:

-ubyttík mkfyt, gkfyek, ma xa xktahl xy ubayty fayi, l il.

w tymdlihaétliny:

-xatk nkm lftkm uby qy rkgy, w ygrktnl rkm hy vyt.

kdktqómy nk gkmkhk hagayihl:

-ymqk tymdbymqk il qyiík iygymahkh hy dtycbiqk, dltuby, yi ypygql, nkm
lftkm uby my rkgyi hygnktki nk vlnbiqkh uby qayiy yn uby nkm rkgy.

nbycl nnycó bil hy nlm hlm kxaclm hy hli kiqlial, w dtycbiqóny:

-¿ubaéi mlw wl?

w pbyny tymdlihahl:

-qú nl mkfym.

-il qy dtycbiql yml -tymdlihaó yn gkfknnytl-, mail uby xy hackm ma xy
glilgym qú.

-mí glilegl -ny tymdlihaytli-, uby ytym hli dyhtl iltae.

-il ubaytl mkfyt xám, dbym ymql fkmqk dktk yiqyihyt, ¡lr gkfyek!, uby nl
mkfym qlhl.

w, kdktqáihlmy, nnycó yn lqtl kxacl w dtycbiqóny:

-haxy, gkfyek, ¿ubé hymylm qayiy xa raol yn xkwltkecl?

-wk wl ry hagrl -ny tymdlihaytli- uby wl il obecl hy hymylm, dytl, gli qlhl
yml, qy mé hygat uby nlm uby qb raol qayiy mli hy yiqyttktqy.

-yml ym -haol yn gkfknnytl-: nl uby vyl dlt nlm lolm, gli yn hyhl nl
myñknl.

w il dtycbiqó xám. nnycómy nk xboyt hy hli kiqlial, w haol:

-wl il mé, gkfyek, ubé dtycbiqktqy; mónl ubyttík mkfyt hy qa ma clekté
xbgrlm kñlm hy fbyi xktahl.

w tymdlihaétliny:

-mí clektám, dltuby mb mknbh w mb qyxdnkiek yi yn vavat dtlxyqyi xbgrlm
kñlm hy vahk, nk gbkn xbgrlm mbynyi kgltqkt dlt mb hymqyxdnkiek.

nnycómy nbycl hli ubaolqy, w haol:

-haxy qú, yn uby tymdlihym: ¿pby vythkh l pby mbyñl nl uby wl gbyiql uby xy
dkmó yi nk gbyvk hy xliqymailm? ¿mytái gaytqlm nlm kelqym hy mkigrl xa
ymgbhytl? ¿qyihtá ypyql yn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk?

-k nl hy nk gbyvk -tymdlihaytli- rkw xbgrl uby hygat: hy qlhl qayiy; nlm
kelqym hy mkigrl atái hy ymdkgal, yn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk nnycktá k
hyfahk yoygbgaói.

-il ubaytl mkfyt xám -haol hli ubaolqy-; uby glxl wl vyk k hbngaiyk
hymyigkiqkhk, rkté gbyiqk uby vayiyi hy clndy qlhkm nkm vyiqbtkm uby
kgytqkty k hymykt.

yn únqaxl dtycbiqkiqy pby mkigrl, w nl uby dtycbiqó pby:

-¿dlt vyiqbtk, gkfyek, qyihté lqtl clfaytil? ¿mknhté hy nk ymqtygryek hy
ymgbhytl? ¿vlnvyté k vyt k xa xboyt w k xam raolm?

k nl uby ny tymdlihaytli:

-clfytiktám yi qb gkmk; w ma vbynvym k ynnk, vytám k qb xboyt w k qbm
raolm; w, hyokihl hy mytvat, hyoktám hy myt ymgbhytl.

-¡fbyil, dkt halm! -haol mkigrl dkiek-. ymql wl xy nl haoytk: il haoytk xám
yn dtlpyqk dytlctbnnl.

-fymqak -haol hli ubaolqy-, ¿ubé ubaytym uby qy tymdlihki? ¿il fkmqk uby
nkm tymdbymqkm uby ymqk gkfyek rk hkhl glttymdlihki k nl uby my ny
dtycbiqk?

-mí fkmqk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dytl ubamaytk wl uby my hygnktktk xám w xy
haoytk xám.

gli ymql my kgkfktli nkm dtycbiqkm w nkm tymdbymqkm, dytl il my kgkfó nk
khxatkgaói yi uby qlhlm ubyhktli, yzgydql nlm hlm kxaclm hy hli kiqlial,
uby yn gkml mkfíki. yn gbkn ubaml gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna hygnktkt nbycl, dlt
il qyiyt mbmdyiml kn xbihl, gtywyihl uby kncúi rygragytl w yzqtklthaiktal
xamqytal yi nk qkn gkfyek my yigyttkfk; w kmí, hagy uby hli kiqlial xltyil,
k axaqkgaói hy lqtk gkfyek uby val yi xkhtah, pkftagkhk dlt bi ymqkxdytl,
rael émqk yi mb gkmk, dktk yiqtyqyiytmy w mbmdyihyt k nlm aciltkiqym; w nk
páftagk ytk hy ymqk mbytqy: nk qkfnk hy nk xymk ytk hy dknl, daiqkhk w
fktiaekhk glxl okmdy, w yn day mlfty uby my mlmqyiík ytk hy nl xymxl, gli
gbkqtl ckttkm hy ácbank uby hén mkníki, dktk xkwlt patxyek hyn dyml. nk
gkfyek, uby dktygík xyhknnk w pacbtk hy yxdytkhlt tlxkil, w hy glnlt hy
ftligy, ymqkfk qlhk rbygk, w ia xám ia xyilm nk qkfnk hy nk xymk, yi uby my
yigkokfk qki obmqkxyiqy, uby iaicbik myñkn hy obiqbtk my dktygík. yn day hy
nk qkfnk ytk kimaxymxl rbygl, uby tymdlihík k nk cktckiqk w dygrlm hy nk
gkfyek, w qlhl ymql vyiík k tymdlihyt k lqtl kdlmyiql uby hyfkol hy nk
ymqkigak hy nk gkfyek ymqkfk. dlt qlhl ymqy rbygl hy day, xymk, cktckiqk w
dygrlm hy nk xyhknnk w pacbtk typytahk my yigkxaikfk bi gkñói hy rlok hy
nkqk, xbw obmql, uby hy ikhay dlhík myt vamql. yi yn kdlmyiql hy kfkol
glttymdlihayiqy kn hy kttafk my dliík yn uby rkfík hy tymdlihyt, dyckhk nk
flgk gli yn xymxl gkñói, hy xlhl uby, k xlhl hy gytfkqkik, afk nk vle hy
kttafk kfkol w hy kfkol kttafk, yi dknkftkm ktqagbnkhkm w gnktkm; w hy ymqk
xkiytk il ytk dlmafny glilgyt yn yxfbmqy. bi mlftail hy hli kiqlial,
ymqbhakiqy kcbhl w hamgtyql, pby yn tymdlihayiqy; yn gbkn, ymqkihl kvamkhl
hy mb myñlt qíl hy nlm uby rkfíki hy yiqtkt gli én yi kubyn hík yi yn
kdlmyiql hy nk gkfyek, ny pby págan tymdlihyt gli dtymqyek w dbiqbknahkh k
nk dtaxytk dtycbiqk; k nkm hyxám tymdlihaó dlt glioyqbtkm, w, glxl
hamgtyql, hamgtyqkxyiqy. w hagy xám gahy rkxyqy: uby rkmqk haye l hlgy híkm
hbtó ymqk xktkvannlmk xáubaik; dytl uby, havbncáihlmy dlt nk gabhkh uby hli
kiqlial qyiík yi mb gkmk bik gkfyek yigkiqkhk, uby k gbkiqlm ny dtycbiqkfki
tymdlihík, qyxayihl il nnyckmy k nlm líhlm hy nkm hymdaytqkm gyiqaiynkm hy
ibymqtk py, rkfayihl hygnktkhl yn gkml k nlm myñltym aiubamahltym, ny
xkihktli uby nl hymragaymy w il dkmkmy xám khynkiqy, dltuby yn vbncl
aciltkiqy il my ymgkihknaekmy; dytl yi nk ldaiaói hy hli ubaolqy w hy
mkigrl dkiek, nk gkfyek ubyhó dlt yigkiqkhk w dlt tymdlihlik, xám k
mkqampkgaói hy hli ubaolqy uby hy mkigrl.

nlm gkfknnytlm hy nk gabhkh, dlt glxdnkgyt k hli kiqlial w dlt kckmkokt k
hli ubaolqy w hkt nbckt k uby hymgbftaymy mbm mkihygym, lthyiktli hy glttyt
mltqaok hy knní k myam híkm; uby il qbvl ypygql dlt nk lgkmaói uby my hatá
khynkiqy. halny ckik k hli ubaolqy hy dkmykt nk gabhkh k nk nnkik w k day,
qyxayihl uby, ma afk k gkfknnl, ny rkfíki hy dytmycbat nlm xlgrkgrlm, w
kmí, én w mkigrl, gli lqtlm hlm gtakhlm uby hli kiqlial ny hal, mknaytli k
dkmyktmy.

mbgyhaó, dbym, uby, wyihl dlt bik gknny, kneó nlm lolm hli ubaolqy, w val
ymgtaql mlfty bik dbytqk, gli nyqtkm xbw ctkihym: kubí my axdtaxyi naftlm;
hy nl uby my gliqyiqó xbgrl, dltuby rkmqk yiqligym il rkfík vamql yxdtyiqk
kncbik, w hymykfk mkfyt góxl pbymy. yiqtó hyiqtl, gli qlhl mb
kglxdkñkxayiql, w val qatkt yi bik dktqy, glttycat yi lqtk, glxdliyt yi
émqk, yixyihkt yi kubénnk, w, paiknxyiqy, qlhk kubynnk xáubaik uby yi nkm
yxdtyiqkm ctkihym my xbymqtk. nnycáfkmy hli ubaolqy k bi gkoói w dtycbiqkfk
ubé ytk kubénnl uby knní my rkgík; háfkiny gbyiqk nlm lpagaknym, khxatáfkmy
w dkmkfk khynkiqy. nnycó yi lqtkm k bil, w dtycbiqóny ubé ytk nl uby rkgík.
yn lpagakn ny tymdlihaó:

-myñlt, ymqy gkfknnytl uby kubí ymqá -w yimyñóny k bi rlxfty hy xbw fbyi
qknny w dktygyt w hy kncbik ctkvyhkh- rk qtkhbgahl bi naftl qlmgkil yi
ibymqtk nyicbk gkmqynnkik, w ymqlwny wl glxdliayihl, dktk hktny k nk
ymqkxdk.

-¿ubé qíqbnl qayiy yn naftl? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-k nl uby yn kbqlt tymdlihaó:

-myñlt, yn naftl, yi qlmgkil, my nnkxk ny fkckqyny.

-w ¿ubé tymdlihy ny fkckqyny yi ibymqtl gkmqynnkil? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-ny fkckqyny -haol yn kbqlt- ym glxl ma yi gkmqynnkil haoémyxlm nlm
obcbyqym; w, kbiuby ymqy naftl ym yi yn ilxfty rbxanhy, gliqayiy w
yigayttk yi mí glmkm xbw fbyikm w mbmqkigaknym.

-wl -haol hli ubaolqy- mé kncúi qkiql hy yn qlmgkil, w xy dtygal hy gkiqkt
kncbikm ymqkigakm hyn ktalmql. dytl híckxy vbymk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, w il
hacl ymql dltuby ubaytl yzkxaikt yn aicyial hy vbymqtk xytgyh, mail dlt
gbtalmahkh il xám: ¿rk rknnkhl yi mb ymgtaqbtk kncbik vye ilxftkt dañkqk?

-mí, xbgrkm vygym -tymdlihaó yn kbqlt.

-w ¿góxl nk qtkhbgy vbymqtk xytgyh yi gkmqynnkil? -dtycbiqó hli ubaolqy.

-¿góxl nk rkfík hy qtkhbgat -tydnagó yn kbqlt-, mail hagayihl lnnk?

-¡gbytdl hy qkn -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ubé khynkiqy ymqá vbymk xytgyh yi yn
qlmgkil ahalxk! wl kdlmqkté bik fbyik kdbymqk uby khlihy hack yi yn qlmgkil
dakgry, hagy vbymk xytgyh yi yn gkmqynnkil dnkgy; w khlihy hack daù, hagy
xám, w yn mb hygnktk gli kttafk, w yn caù gli kfkol.

-mí hygnktl, dlt gaytql -haol yn kbqlt-, dltuby émkm mli mbm dtldakm
glttymdlihyigakm.

-lmkté wl obtkt -haol hli ubaolqy- uby il ym vbymk xytgyh glilgahl yi yn
xbihl, yiyxacl mayxdty hy dtyxakt nlm pnltahlm aicyialm ia nlm nlkfnym
qtkfkolm. ¡ubé hy rkfanahkhym rkw dythahkm dlt krí! ¡ubé hy aicyialm
kttaiglikhlm! ¡ubé hy vatqbhym xyilmdtygakhkm! dytl, gli qlhl ymql, xy
dktygy uby yn qtkhbgat hy bik nyicbk yi lqtk, glxl il myk hy nkm tyaikm hy
nkm nyicbkm, ctayck w nkqaik, ym glxl ubayi xatk nlm qkdagym pnkxyiglm dlt
yn tyvém, uby, kbiuby my vyyi nkm pacbtkm, mli nnyikm hy ranlm uby nkm
ymgbtygyi, w il my vyyi gli nk nambtk w qye hy nk rke; w yn qtkhbgat hy
nyicbkm páganym, ia ktcbwy aicyial ia ynlgbgaói, glxl il ny ktcbwy yn uby
qtkmnkhk ia yn uby gldak bi dkdyn hy lqtl dkdyn. w il dlt ymql ubaytl
aipytat uby il myk nlkfny ymqy yoytgagal hyn qtkhbgat; dltuby yi lqtkm
glmkm dyltym my dlhtík lgbdkt yn rlxfty, w uby xyilm dtlvygrl ny qtboymyi.
pbytk hymqk gbyiqk vki nlm hlm pkxlmlm qtkhbgqltym: yn bil, yn hlgqlt
gtamqófkn hy pacbytlk, yi mb dkmqlt pahl, w yn lqtl, hli obki hy oábtacba,
yi mb kxaiqk, hlihy pynaexyiqy dliyi yi hbhk gbán ym nk qtkhbgaói l gbán yn
ltacaikn. dytl híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh: ymqy naftl, ¿axdtíxymy dlt mb gbyiqk,
l qayiy wk vyihahl yn dtavanycal k kncúi naftytl?

-dlt xa gbyiqk nl axdtaxl -tymdlihaó yn kbqlt-, w dayiml ckikt xan hbgkhlm,
dlt nl xyilm, gli ymqk dtaxytk axdtymaói, uby rk hy myt hy hlm xan gbytdlm,
w my rki hy hymdkgrkt k myam tyknym gkhk bil, yi hkgk nkm dkokm.

-¡fayi ymqá vbymk xytgyh yi nk gbyiqk! -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-. fayi dktygy
uby il mkfy nkm yiqtkhkm w mknahkm hy nlm axdtymltym, w nkm
glttymdlihyigakm uby rkw hy bilm k lqtlm; wl ny dtlxyql uby, gbkihl my vyk
gktckhl hy hlm xan gbytdlm hy naftlm, vyk qki xlnahl mb gbytdl, uby my
ymdkiqy, w xám ma yn naftl ym bi dlgl kvayml w il ikhk dagkiqy.

-dbym, ¿ubé? -haol yn kbqlt-. ¿ubayty vbymk xytgyh uby my nl hé k bi
naftytl, uby xy hé dlt yn dtavanycal qtym xktkvyhím, w kúi dayimk uby xy
rkgy xytgyh yi hátxynlm? wl il axdtaxl xam naftlm dktk kngkiekt pkxk yi yn
xbihl, uby wk yi én mlw glilgahl dlt xam lftkm: dtlvygrl ubaytl, uby mai én
il vkny bi gbkqtíi nk fbyik pkxk.

-halm ny hé k vbymk xytgyh fbyik xkihytygrk -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy.

w dkmó khynkiqy k lqtl gkoói, hlihy val uby ymqkfki glttacayihl bi dnaycl
hy bi naftl uby my aiqaqbnkfk nbe hyn knxk; w,yi vaéihlny, haol:

-ymqlm qknym naftlm, kbiuby rkw xbgrlm hymqy céiytl, mli nlm uby my hyfyi
axdtaxat, dltuby mli xbgrlm nlm dygkhltym uby my bmki, w mli xyiymqyt
aipaiaqkm nbgym dktk qkiqlm hymknbxftkhlm.

dkmó khynkiqy w val uby kmaxymxl ymqkfki glttacayihl lqtl naftl; w,
dtycbiqkihl mb qíqbnl, ny tymdlihaytli uby my nnkxkfk nk mycbihk dktqy hyn
aicyialml rahkncl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, glxdbymqk dlt bi qkn vygail hy
qlthymannkm.

-wk wl qyicl ilqagak hymqy naftl -haol hli ubaolqy-, w yi vythkh w yi xa
gligayigak uby dyimé uby wk ymqkfk ubyxkhl w rygrl dlnvlm, dlt
axdytqaiyiqy; dytl mb mki xktqíi my ny nnycktá, glxl k gkhk dbytgl, uby nkm
ramqltakm paicahkm qkiql qayiyi hy fbyikm w hy hynyaqkfnym gbkiql my nnycki
k nk vythkh l nk myxyokiek hynnk, w nkm vythkhytkm qkiql mli xyoltym gbkiql
mli xám vythkhytkm.

w, hagayihl ymql, gli xbymqtkm hy kncúi hymdygrl, my mknaó hy nk yxdtyiqk.
w kubyn xymxl hík lthyió hli kiqlial hy nnyvktny k vyt nkm cknytkm uby yi
nk dnkwk ymqkfki, hy uby mkigrl my tyclgaoó xbgrl, k gkbmk uby yi mb vahk
nkm rkfík vamql. kvamó hli kiqlial kn gbkqtknfl hy nkm cknytkm glxl kubynnk
qkthy rkfík hy nnyvkt k vytnkm k mb rbémdyh yn pkxlml hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, hy ubayi wk yn gbkqtknfl w qlhlm nlm vygailm hy nk gabhkh qyiíki
ilqagak; w nl uby ny mbgyhaó yi ynnkm my hatá yi yn macbayiqy gkdíqbnl.





gkdíqbnl nzaaa. hy nl xkn uby ny kvail k mkigrl dkiek gli nk vamaqk hy nkm
cknytkm, w nk ibyvk kvyiqbtk hy nk rytxlmk xltamgk


ctkihym ytki nlm hamgbtmlm uby hli ubaolqy rkgík mlfty nk tymdbymqk hy nk
yigkiqkhk gkfyek, mai uby iaicbil hynnlm haymy yi yn yxfbmqy, w qlhlm
dktkfki gli nk dtlxymk, uby én qbvl dlt gaytql, hyn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk.
knní afk w vyiík, w my knyctkfk yiqty mí xamxl, gtywyihl uby rkfík hy vyt
dtymql mb gbxdnaxayiql; w mkigrl, kbiuby kflttygík yn myt clfytikhlt, glxl
ubyhk hagrl, qlhkvík hymykfk vlnvyt k xkihkt w k myt lfyhygahl; uby ymqk
xknk vyiqbtk qtky glimacl yn xkihl, kbiuby myk hy fbtnkm.

yi tymlnbgaói, kubynnk qkthy hli kiqlial xltyil, mb rbémdyh, w mbm hlm
kxaclm, gli hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, pbytli k nkm cknytkm. yn gbkqtknfl, uby
ymqkfk kvamkhl hy mb fbyik vyiahk, dlt vyt k nlm hlm qki pkxlmlm ubaolqy w
mkigrl, kdyikm nnycktli k nk xktaik, gbkihl qlhkm nkm cknytkm kfkqaytli
qayihk, w mliktli nkm grataxíkm; kttloktli nbycl yn ymubapy kn kcbk,
gbfaytql hy taglm qkdyqym w hy knxlrkhkm hy qytgaldynl gktxymí, w, yi
dliayihl uby dbml nlm daym yi én hli ubaolqy, hamdktó nk gkdaqkik yn gkñói
hy gtboík, w nkm lqtkm cknytkm ragaytli nl xymxl, w, kn mbfat hli ubaolqy
dlt nk ymgknk hytygrk, qlhk nk grbmxk ny mknbhó glxl ym bmkiek gbkihl bik
dytmlik dtaigadkn yiqtk yi nk cknytk, hagayihl: ''¡rb, rb, rb!'' qtym
vygym. halny nk xkil yn cyiytkn, uby gli ymqy ilxfty ny nnkxktyxlm, uby ytk
bi dtaigadkn gkfknnytl vknyigakil; kftkeó k hli ubaolqy, hagaéihlny:

-ymqy hík myñknkté wl gli dayhtk fnkigk, dlt myt bil hy nlm xyoltym uby
dayiml nnyvkt yi xa vahk, rkfayihl vamql kn myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk:
qayxdl w myñkn uby ilm xbymqtk uby yi én my yigayttk w gaptk qlhl yn vknlt
hyn kihkiqy gkfknnytík.

gli lqtkm il xyilm gltqymym tkeliym ny tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy, knycty
mlftyxkiytk hy vytmy qtkqkt qki k nl myñlt. yiqtktli qlhlm yi nk dldk, uby
ymqkfk xbw fayi khytyekhk, w myiqátlimy dlt nlm fkihaiym, dkmómy yn góxaqty
yi gtboík, w hal myñkn gli yn daql uby nk grbmxk ragaymy pbytk tldk, uby my
rael yi bi aimqkiqy. mkigrl, uby val qkiqk cyiqy yi gbytlm, ubyhó dkmxkhl,
w xám gbkihl val rkgyt qayihk gli qkiqk dtaymk, uby k én ny dktygaó uby
qlhlm nlm hakfnlm kihkfki knní qtkfkokihl; dytl ymql qlhl pbytli qltqkm w
dki daiqkhl dktk nl uby krltk haté. ymqkfk mkigrl myiqkhl mlfty yn
ymqkiqytln, obiql kn ymdknhyt hy nk xkil hytygrk, yn gbkn wk kvamkhl hy nl
uby rkfík hy rkgyt, kmaó hy mkigrl, w, nyvkiqáihlny yi nlm ftkelm, qlhk nk
grbmxk dbymqk yi day w knytqk, glxyiekihl hy nk hytygrk fkihk, ny pby hkihl
w vlnqykihl mlfty nlm ftkelm hy nk grbmxk hy fkigl yi fkigl, gli qkiqk
dtaymk, uby yn dlfty mkigrl dythaó nk vamqk hy nlm lolm, w mai hbhk dyimó
uby nlm xamxlm hyxlialm ny nnyvkfki, w il dktktli gli én rkmqk vlnvytny dlt
nk maiaymqtk fkihk w dliytny yi nk dldk. ubyhó yn dlfty xlnahl, w okhykihl,
w qtkmbhkihl, mai dlhyt axkcaikt ubé pby nl uby mbgyhahl ny rkfík.

hli ubaolqy, uby val yn vbynl mai knkm hy mkigrl, dtycbiqó kn cyiytkn ma
ytki gytyxliakm kubénnkm uby my bmkfki gli nlm dtaxytlm uby yiqtkfki yi nkm
cknytkm; dltuby ma kgkml nl pbymy, én, uby il qyiík aiqyigaói hy dtlpymkt
yi ynnkm, il ubytík rkgyt myxyokiqym yoytgagalm, w uby vlqkfk k halm uby,
ma kncbil nnyckfk k kmatny dktk vlnqyktny, uby ny rkfík hy mkgkt yn knxk k
dbiqannkelm; w, hagayihl ymql, my nyvkiqó yi day w yxdbñó nk ymdkhk.

k ymqy aimqkiqy kfkqaytli qayihk, w gli ctkihímaxl tbahl hyoktli gkyt nk
yiqyik hy knql kfkol. dyimó mkigrl uby yn gaynl my hymyigkokfk hy mbm
ubagalm w vyiík k hkt mlfty mb gkfyek; w, kclfaáihlnk, nnyil hy xayhl, nk
dbml yiqty nkm daytikm. il nkm qbvl qlhkm glimacl hli ubaolqy; uby qkxfaéi
my ymqtyxygaó w yiglcaó hy rlxftlm w dythaó nk glnlt hyn tlmqtl. nk grbmxk
aeó nk yiqyik gli nk xamxk dtaymk w tbahl uby nk rkfíki kxkaikhl, w qlhl
ymql, gknnkihl, glxl ma il qbvaytki vle ia knayiql. rael myñkn yn góxaqty
uby ektdkmyi yn pyttl, w, mknqkihl yi xaqkh hy nk gtboík gli yn gltfkgrl l
tyfyiuby, glxyieó k xlmubykt nkm ymdknhkm hy nk grbmxk, w k nktcktmy dlgl k
dlgl k nk xkt. gbkihl mkigrl val k bik xlvytmy qkiqlm daym glnltkhlm, uby
qknym dyimó én uby ytki nlm tyxlm, haol yiqty mí:

-Émqkm mí mli vythkhytkxyiqy glmkm yigkiqkhkm, w il nkm uby xa kxl hagy.
¿ubé rki rygrl ymqlm hymhagrkhlm, uby kimí nlm kelqki, w góxl ymqy rlxfty
mlnl, uby kihk dlt kubí manfkihl, qayiy kqtyvaxayiql dktk kelqkt k qkiqk
cyiqy? krltk wl hacl uby émqy ym aipaytil, l, dlt nl xyilm, yn dbtckqltal.

hli ubaolqy, uby val nk kqyigaói gli uby mkigrl xatkfk nl uby dkmkfk, ny
haol:

-¡kr mkigrl kxacl, w gli ubé ftyvyhkh w gbái k dlgk glmqk lm dlhíkhym vlm,
ma ubamaémyhym, hymibhkt hy xyhal gbytdl kttafk, w dliytlm yiqty ymqlm
myñltym, w kgkfkt gli yn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk! dbym gli nk xamytak w dyik
hy qkiqlm, il myiqatíkhym vlm xbgrl nk vbymqtk; w xám, uby dlhtík myt uby
yn mkfal xytníi qlxkmy yi gbyiqk gkhk kelqy hémqlm, dlt myt hkhlm hy fbyik
xkil, dlt haye hy nlm uby vlm paiknxyiqy lm rkféam hy hkt.

dtycbiqkt ubytík yn cyiytkn ubé kelqym ytki kubénnlm, l ubé hymyigkiql hy
hbngaiyk, gbkihl haol yn xktaiytl:

-myñkn rkgy xliobí hy uby rkw fkoyn hy tyxlm yi nk glmqk dlt nk fkihk hyn
dliayiqy.

ymql líhl, mknqó yn cyiytkn yi nk gtboík, w haol:

-¡yk raolm, il my ilm vkwk! kncúi fytckiqíi hy glmktalm hy ktcyn hyfy hy
myt émqy uby nk kqknkwk ilm myñknk.

nnycátlimy nbycl nkm lqtkm qtym cknytkm k nk gkdaqkik, k mkfyt nl uby my
nym lthyikfk. xkihó yn cyiytkn uby nkm hlm mknaymyi k nk xkt, w én gli nk
lqtk atík qayttk k qayttk, dltuby kimí yn fkoyn il my nym ymgkdktík. kdtyqó
nk grbmxk nlm tyxlm, axdynayihl nkm cknytkm gli qkiqk pbtak, uby dktygík
uby vlnkfki. nkm uby mknaytli k nk xkt, k lftk hy hlm xannkm hymgbftaytli
bi fkoyn, uby gli nk vamqk ny xktgktli dlt hy rkmqk gkqltgy l ubaigy
fkiglm, w kmí ytk nk vythkh; yn gbkn fkoyn, gbkihl hymgbftaó nkm cknytkm,
my dbml yi gkek, gli aiqyigaói w ymdytkiek hy ymgkdktmy dlt mb nacytyek;
dytl kvíilny xkn, dltuby nk cknytk gkdaqkik ytk hy nlm xám nacytlm fkoynym
uby yi nk xkt ikvyckfki, w kmí ny pby yiqtkihl, uby gnktkxyiqy nlm hyn
fytckiqíi glilgaytli uby il dlhíki ymgkdktmy; w kmí, yn kttáye ubamaytk uby
hyoktki nlm tyxlm w my yiqtycktki, dlt il attaqkt k yilol kn gkdaqái uby
ibymqtkm cknytkm tycík. dytl nk mbytqy, uby hy lqtk xkiytk nl cbakfk,
lthyió uby, wk uby nk gkdaqkik nnyckfk qki gytgk uby dlhíki nlm hyn fkoyn
lít nkm vlgym uby hymhy ynnk nym hygíki uby my taihaymyi, hlm qltkubím, uby
ym glxl hygat hlm qbtglm flttkgrlm, uby yi yn fytckiqíi vyiíki gli ymqlm
hlgy, hamdktktli hlm ymgldyqkm, gli uby haytli xbytqy k hlm mlnhkhlm uby
mlfty ibymqtkm kttbxfkhkm vyiíki. vayihl nl gbkn, obtó yn cyiytkn hy il
hyokt gli vahk k qlhlm gbkiqlm yi yn fkoyn qlxkmy, w, nnyckihl k yxfymqat
gli qlhk pbtak, my ny ymgkdó dlt hyfkol hy nk dknkxyiqk. dkmó nk cknytk
khynkiqy bi fbyi qtygrl; nlm hyn fkoyn my vaytli dythahlm, ragaytli vynk yi
qkiql uby nk cknytk vlnvík, w hy ibyvl, k vynk w k tyxl, my dbmaytli yi
gkek; dytl il nym kdtlvygró mb hanacyigak qkiql glxl nym hkñó mb
kqtyvaxayiql, dltuby, kngkieáihlnym nk gkdaqkik k dlgl xám hy xyhak xannk,
nym ygró nk dknkxyiqk yigaxk w nlm glcaó vavlm k qlhlm.

nnycktli yi ymql nkm lqtkm hlm cknytkm, w qlhkm gbkqtl gli nk dtymk
vlnvaytli k nk dnkwk, hlihy aipaiaqk cyiqy nlm ymqkfk ymdytkihl, hymylmlm
hy vyt nl uby qtkíki. hal plihl yn cyiytkn gytgk hy qayttk, w glilgaó uby
ymqkfk yi nk xktaik yn vattyw hy nk gabhkh. xkihó ygrkt yn ymubapy dktk
qtkytny, w xkihó kxkaikt nk yiqyik dktk krltgkt nbycl nbycl kn kttáye w k
nlm hyxám qbtglm uby yi yn fkoyn rkfík glcahl, uby mytíki rkmqk qtyaiqk w
myam dytmlikm, qlhlm cknnkthlm, w nlm xám, ymgldyqytlm qbtglm. dtycbiqó yn
cyiytkn ubaéi ytk yn kttáye hyn fytckiqíi w pbyny tymdlihahl dlt bil hy nlm
gkbqavlm, yi nyicbk gkmqynnkik, uby hymdbém dktygaó myt tyiyckhl ymdkñln:

-ymqy xkigyfl, myñlt, uby kubí vyym ym ibymqtl kttáye.

w xlmqtóny bil hy nlm xám fynnlm w cknnkthlm xlelm uby dbhaytk daiqkt nk
rbxkik axkcaikgaói. nk yhkh, kn dktygyt, il nnyckfk k vyaiqy kñlm.
dtycbiqóny yn cyiytkn:

-haxy, xkn kglimyokhl dyttl, ¿ubaéi qy xlvaó k xkqktxy xam mlnhkhlm, dbym
vyíkm myt axdlmafny yn ymgkdktqy? ¿ymy tymdyql my cbkthk k nkm gkdaqkikm?
¿il mkfym qú uby il ym vknyiqík nk qyxytahkh? nkm ymdytkiekm hbhlmkm rki hy
rkgyt k nlm rlxftym kqtyvahlm, dytl il qyxytktalm.

tymdlihyt ubytík yn kttáye; dytl il dbhl yn cyiytkn, dlt yiqligym, lít nk
tymdbymqk, dlt kgbhat k tygyfat kn vattyw, uby wk yiqtkfk yi nk cknytk, gli
yn gbkn yiqtktli kncbilm hy mbm gtakhlm w kncbikm dytmlikm hyn dbyfnl.

-¡fbyik rk ymqkhl nk gkek, myñlt cyiytkn! -haol yn vattyw.

-w qki fbyik -tymdlihaó yn cyiytkn- gbkn nk vytá vbymqtk yzgynyigak kcltk
glnckhk hy ymqk yiqyik.

-¿góxl kimí? -tydnagó yn vattyw.

-dltuby xy rki xbytql -tymdlihaó yn cyiytkn-, gliqtk qlhk nyw w gliqtk qlhk
tkeói w bmkiek hy cbyttk, hlm mlnhkhlm hy nlm xyoltym uby yi ymqkm cknytkm
vyiíki, w wl ry obtkhl hy krltgkt k gbkiqlm ry gkbqavkhl, dtaigadknxyiqy k
ymqy xlel, uby ym yn kttáye hyn fytckiqíi.

w yimyñóny kn uby wk qyiík kqkhkm nkm xkilm w ygrkhl yn glthyn k nk
cktckiqk, ymdytkihl nk xbytqy.

xatóny yn vattyw, w, vaéihlny qki rytxlml, w qki cknnkthl, w qki rbxanhy,
háihlny yi kubyn aimqkiqy bik gktqk hy tyglxyihkgaói mb rytxlmbtk, ny vail
hymyl hy ymgbmkt mb xbytqy; w kmí, ny dtycbiqó:

-haxy, kttáye, ¿ytym qbtgl hy ikgaói, l xltl, l tyiyckhl?

k nl gbkn yn xlel tymdlihaó, yi nyicbk kmaxymxl gkmqynnkik:

-ia mlw qbtgl hy ikgaói, ia xltl, ia tyiyckhl.

-dbym, ¿ubé ytym? -tydnagó yn vattyw.

-xboyt gtamqakik -tymdlihaó yn xkigyfl.

-¿xboyt w gtamqakik, w yi qkn qtkoy w yi qknym dkmlm? xám ym glmk dktk
khxatktnk uby dktk gtyytnk.

-mbmdyihyh -haol yn xlel-, ¡lr myñltym!, nk yoygbgaói hy xa xbytqy, uby il
my dythytá xbgrl yi uby my hankqy vbymqtk vyickiek yi qkiql uby wl lm
gbyiqy xa vahk.

¿ubaéi pbytk yn hy gltkeói qki hbtl uby gli ymqkm tkeliym il my kfnkihktk,
l, k nl xyilm, rkmqk lít nkm uby yn qtamqy w nkmqaxkhl xkigyfl hygat
ubytík? yn cyiytkn ny haol uby haoymy nl uby ubamaymy, dytl uby il ymdytkmy
kngkiekt dythói hy mb glilgahk gbndk. gli ymqk nagyigak, yn xlel glxyieó k
hygat hymqk xkiytk:

-«hy kubynnk ikgaói xám hymhagrkhk uby dtbhyiqy, mlfty ubayi rk nnlvahl
ymqlm híkm bi xkt hy hymctkgakm, ikgí wl, hy xltamglm dkhtym yicyihtkhk. yi
nk glttayiqy hy mb hymvyiqbtk pba wl dlt hlm qílm xílm nnyvkhk k fytfytík,
mai uby xy kdtlvygrkmy hygat uby ytk gtamqakik, glxl, yi ypygql, nl mlw, w
il hy nkm paicahkm ia kdktyiqym, mail hy nkm vythkhytkm w gkqónagkm. il xy
vknaó, gli nlm uby qyiíki k gktcl ibymqtl xamytkfny hymqayttl, hygat ymqk
vythkh, ia xam qílm ubamaytli gtyytnk; kiqym nk qbvaytli dlt xyiqatk w dlt
aivyigaói dktk ubyhktxy yi nk qayttk hlihy rkfík ikgahl, w kmí, dlt pbytek
xám uby dlt ctkhl, xy qtboytli glimacl. qbvy bik xkhty gtamqakik w bi dkhty
hamgtyql w gtamqakil, ia xám ia xyilm; xkxé nk py gkqónagk yi nk nygry;
gtaéxy gli fbyikm glmqbxftym; ia yi nk nyicbk ia yi ynnkm okxám, k xa
dktygyt, ha myñknym hy myt xltamgk. kn dkt w kn dkml hymqkm vatqbhym, uby
wl gtyl uby nl mli, gtygaó xa rytxlmbtk, ma ym uby qyicl kncbik; w, kbiuby
xa tygkql w xa yigyttkxayiql pby xbgrl, il hyfaó hy myt qkiql uby il
qbvaymy nbckt hy vytxy bi xkigyfl gkfknnytl, nnkxkhl hli ckmdkt ctycltal,
raol xkwltkecl hy bi gkfknnytl uby obiql k ibymqtl nbckt lqtl mbwl qayiy.
góxl xy val, góxl ilm rkfnkxlm, góxl my val dythahl dlt xí w góxl wl il xbw
ckikhk dlt én, mytík nktcl hy gliqkt, w xám yi qayxdl uby ymqlw qyxayihl
uby, yiqty nk nyicbk w nk cktckiqk, my rk hy kqtkvymkt yn tacbtlml glthyn
uby xy kxyikek; w kmí, mónl haté góxl yi ibymqtl hymqayttl ubaml
kglxdkñktxy hli ctycltal. xyegnómy gli nlm xltamglm uby hy lqtlm nbcktym
mknaytli, dltuby mkfík xbw fayi nk nyicbk, w yi yn vakoy my rael kxacl hy
hlm qílm xílm uby glimacl xy qtkíki; dltuby xa dkhty, dtbhyiqy w dtyvyiahl,
kmí glxl lwó yn dtaxyt fkihl hy ibymqtl hymqayttl, my mknaó hyn nbckt w my
pby k fbmgkt kncbil yi nlm tyailm ymqtkñlm uby ilm kglcaymy. hyoó
yigyttkhkm w yiqyttkhkm, yi bik dktqy hy ubayi wl mlnk qyicl ilqagak,
xbgrkm dytnkm w dayhtkm hy ctki vknlt, gli kncbilm haiytlm yi gtbekhlm w
hlfnliym hy ltl. xkihóxy uby il qlgkmy kn qymltl uby hyokfk yi iaicbik
xkiytk, ma kgkml kiqym uby én vlnvaymy ilm hymqyttkfki. rígynl kmí, w gli
xam qílm, glxl qyicl hagrl, w lqtlm dktayiqym w knnyckhlm dkmkxlm k
fytfytík; w yn nbckt hlihy ragaxlm kmayiql pby yi ktcyn, glxl ma ny
ragaétkxlm yi yn xamxl aipaytil. qbvl ilqagak yn tyw hy xa rytxlmbtk, w nk
pkxk my nk hal hy xam taubyekm, uby, yi dktqy, pby vyiqbtk xík. nnkxóxy
kiqy mí, dtycbiqóxy hy ubé dktqy hy ymdkñk ytk w ubé haiytlm w ubé olwkm
qtkík. híoyny yn nbckt, w uby nkm olwkm w haiytlm ubyhkfki yi én
yiqyttkhlm, dytl uby gli pkganahkh my dlhtíki glftkt ma wl xamxk vlnvaymy
dlt ynnlm. qlhl ymql ny haoy, qyxytlmk hy uby il ny gyckmy xa rytxlmbtk,
mail mb glhagak. ymqkihl glixacl yi ymqkm dnáqagkm, ny nnycktli k hygat
góxl vyiík glixacl bil hy nlm xám cknnkthlm w rytxlmlm xkigyflm uby my
dlhík axkcaikt. nbycl yiqyihí uby nl hygíki dlt hli ckmdkt ctycltal, gbwk
fynnyek my hyok kqtám nkm xkwltym uby yigktygyt my dbyhyi. qbtféxy,
glimahytkihl yn dynactl uby hli ctycltal glttík, dltuby yiqty kubynnlm
fátfktlm qbtglm yi xám my qayiy w ymqaxk bi xlgrkgrl l xkigyfl rytxlml uby
bik xboyt, dlt fynnímaxk uby myk. xkihó nbycl yn tyw uby my ny qtboymyi
knní hynkiqy dktk vytny, w dtycbiqóxy ma ytk vythkh nl uby hy kubyn xlel ny
hygíki. yiqligym wl, gkma glxl dtyvyiahk hyn gaynl, ny haoy uby mí ytk;
dytl uby ny rkgík mkfyt uby il ytk vktói, mail xboyt glxl wl, w uby ny
mbdnagkfk xy nk hyokmy at k vymqat yi mb ikqbtkn qtkoy, dktk uby hy qlhl yi
qlhl xlmqtkmy mb fynnyek w gli xyilm yxdkgrl dktygaymy kiqy mb dtymyigak.
híolxy uby pbymy yi fbyik rltk, w uby lqtl hík rkfnktíkxlm yi yn xlhl uby
my dlhík qyiyt dktk uby wl vlnvaymy k ymdkñk k mkgkt yn ymglihahl qymltl.
rkfné gli hli ckmdkt, gliqény yn dynactl uby glttík yn xlmqtkt myt rlxfty;
vymqíny hy xltk, w kubynnk xymxk qkthy ny qtboy k nk dtymyigak hyn tyw, yn
gbkn, yi vaéihlny, ubyhó khxatkhl w rael hamacial hy cbkthktnk dktk rkgyt
dtymyiqy hynnk kn ctki myñlt; w, dlt rbat hyn dynactl uby yi yn myttknnl hy
mbm xboytym dlhík qyiyt w qyxyt hy mí xamxl, nk xkihó dliyt yi gkmk hy bikm
dtaigadknym xltkm uby nk cbkthkmyi w nk matvaymyi, khlihy ny nnyvktli
nbycl. nl uby nlm hlm myiqaxlm (uby il dbyhl iyckt uby il ny ubaytl) my
hyoy k nk glimahytkgaói hy nlm uby my kdktqki ma fayi my ubaytyi. hal nbycl
qtkek yn tyw hy uby wl vlnvaymy k ymdkñk yi ymqy fytckiqíi w uby xy
kglxdkñkmyi hlm qbtglm hy ikgaói, uby pbytli nlm uby xkqktli vbymqtlm
mlnhkhlm. vail qkxfaéi glixacl ymqy tyiyckhl ymdkñln -myñknkihl kn uby
rkfík rkfnkhl dtaxytl-, hyn gbkn mé wl fayi uby ym gtamqakil yigbfaytql w
uby vayiy gli xám hymyl hy ubyhktmy yi ymdkñk uby hy vlnvyt k fytfytík; nk
hyxám grbmxk hyn fytckiqíi mli xltlm w qbtglm, uby il matvyi hy xám uby hy
flckt kn tyxl. nlm hlm qbtglm, glhagalmlm y aimlnyiqym, mai cbkthkt yn
lthyi uby qtkíkxlm hy uby k xí w k ymqy tyiyckhl yi nk dtaxyt dktqy hy
ymdkñk, yi ráfaql hy gtamqakilm, hy uby vyiaxlm dtlvyíhlm, ilm ygrkmyi yi
qayttk, dtaxytl ubamaytli fkttyt ymqk glmqk w rkgyt kncbik dtymk, ma
dbhaymyi, qyxayihl uby ma dtaxytl ilm ygrkfki yi qayttk, dlt kncúi kgahyiqy
uby k nlm hlm ilm mbgyhaymy, dlhtíkxlm hymgbftat uby ubyhkfk yn fytckiqíi
yi nk xkt, w ma kgkml rbfaymy cknytkm dlt ymqk glmqk, nlm qlxkmyi. kilgry
hymgbftaxlm ymqk dnkwk, w, mai qyiyt ilqagak hymqkm gbkqtl cknytkm,
pbaxlm hymgbfaytqlm, w ilm rk mbgyhahl nl uby rkféam vamql. yi tymlnbgaói:
hli ctycltal ubyhk yi ráfaql hy xboyt yiqty xboytym, gli xkiapaymql dynactl
hy dythytmy, w wl xy vyl kqkhkm nkm xkilm, ymdytkihl, l, dlt xyolt hygat,
qyxayihl dythyt nk vahk, uby wk xy gkimk.» Émqy ym, myñltym, yn pai hy xa
nkxyiqkfny ramqltak, qki vythkhytk glxl hymhagrkhk; nl uby lm tbycl ym uby
xy hyoéam xltat glxl gtamqakik, dbym, glxl wk ry hagrl, yi iaicbik glmk ry
mahl gbndkiqy hy nk gbndk yi uby nlm hy xa ikgaói rki gkíhl.

w nbycl gknnó, dtyñkhlm nlm lolm hy qaytikm náctaxkm, k ubayi kglxdkñktli
xbgrkm hy nlm uby dtymyiqym ymqkfki. yn vattyw, qaytil w glxdkmavl, mai
rkfnktny dknkftk, my nnycó k ynnk w ny ubaqó gli mbm xkilm yn glthyn uby
nkm rytxlmkm hy nk xltk nackfk.

yi qkiql, dbym, uby nk xltamgk gtamqakik mb dytyctaik ramqltak qtkqkfk,
qbvl gnkvkhlm nlm lolm yi ynnk bi kigakil dytyctail uby yiqtó yi nk cknytk
gbkihl yiqtó yn vattyw; w, kdyikm hal pai k mb dnáqagk nk xltamgk, gbkihl
én my kttloó k mbm daym, w, kftkekhl hynnlm, gli aiqyttbxdahkm dknkftkm hy
xan mlnnlelm w mbmdatlm, ny haol:

-¡lr kik pénaz, hymhagrkhk raok xík! wl mlw qb dkhty taglqy, uby vlnvík k
fbmgktqy dlt il dlhyt vavat mai qa, uby ytym xa knxk.

k gbwkm dknkftkm kftaó nlm lolm mkigrl, w kneó nk gkfyek (uby aignaikhk
qyiík, dyimkihl yi nk hymctkgak hy mb dkmyl), w, xatkihl kn dytyctail,
glilgaó myt yn xamxl taglqy uby qldó yn hík uby mknaó hy mb clfaytil, w
glipatxómy uby kubénnk ytk mb raok, nk gbkn, wk hymkqkhk, kftkeó k mb
dkhty, xyegnkihl mbm náctaxkm gli nkm mbwkm; yn gbkn haol kn cyiytkn w kn
vattyw:

-Émqk, myñltym, ym xa raok, xám hymhagrkhk yi mbm mbgymlm uby yi mb ilxfty.
kik pénaz my nnkxk, gli yn mlftyilxfty hy taglqy, pkxlmk qkiql dlt mb
rytxlmbtk glxl dlt xa taubyek. wl mkní hy xa dkqtak k fbmgkt yi tyailm
ymqtkñlm ubayi ilm knfytckmy w tyglcaymy, w, rkfaéihlny rknnkhl yi
knyxkiak, vlnví yi ymqy ráfaql hy dytyctail, yi glxdkñík hy lqtlm knyxkiym,
k fbmgkt xa raok w k hymyiqyttkt xbgrkm taubyekm uby hyoé ymglihahkm. il
rknné k xa raok; rknné yn qymltl, uby glixacl qtkacl, w kcltk, dlt yn
ymqtkñl tlhyl uby rkféam vamql, ry rknnkhl yn qymltl uby xám xy yitaubygy,
uby ym k xa ubytahk raok. ma ibymqtk dlgk gbndk w mbm náctaxkm w nkm xíkm,
dlt nk aiqyctahkh hy vbymqtk obmqagak, dbyhyi kftat dbytqkm k nk
xamytaglthak, bmkhnk gli ilmlqtlm, uby okxám qbvaxlm dyimkxayiql hy
lpyihytlm, ia glivyiaxlm yi iaicúi xlhl gli nk aiqyigaói hy nlm ibymqtlm,
uby obmqkxyiqy rki mahl hymqyttkhlm.

yiqligym haol mkigrl:

-fayi glilegl k taglqy, w mé uby ym vythkh nl uby hagy yi gbkiql k myt kik
pénaz mb raok; uby yi ymlqtkm ektkihkokm hy at w vyiat, qyiyt fbyik l xknk
aiqyigaói, il xy yiqtyxyql.

khxatkhlm hyn ymqtkñl gkml qlhlm nlm dtymyiqym, yn cyiytkn haol:

-bik dlt bik vbymqtkm náctaxkm il xy hyoktái gbxdnat xa obtkxyiql: vavah,
rytxlmk kik pénaz, nlm kñlm hy vahk uby lm qayiy hyqytxaikhlm yn gaynl, w
nnyvyi nk dyik hy mb gbndk nlm aimlnyiqym w kqtyvahlm uby nk glxyqaytli.

w xkihó nbycl krltgkt hy nk yiqyik k nlm hlm qbtglm uby k mbm hlm mlnhkhlm
rkfíki xbytql; dytl yn vattyw ny dahaó yigktygahkxyiqy il nlm krltgkmy,
dbym xám nlgbtk uby vknyiqík rkfík mahl nk mbwk. rael yn cyiytkn nl uby yn
vattyw ny dyhík, dltuby il my yoygbqki fayi nkm vyickiekm k mkicty rynkhk.
dtlgbtktli nbycl hkt qtkek hy mkgkt k hli ckmdkt ctycltal hyn dynactl yi
uby ubyhkfk. lptygaó taglqy dktk ynnl xám hy hlm xan hbgkhlm uby yi dytnkm
w yi olwkm qyiík. haétlimy xbgrlm xyhalm, dytl iaicbil pby qkn glxl yn uby
hal yn tyiyckhl ymdkñln uby my rk hagrl, yn gbkn my lptygaó hy vlnvyt k
ktcyn yi kncúi fktgl dyubyñl, hy rkmqk myam fkiglm, ktxkhl hy tyxytlm
gtamqakilm, dltuby én mkfík hóihy, góxl w gbáihl dlhík w hyfík hymyxfktgkt,
w kmaxamxl il aciltkfk nk gkmk hlihy hli ckmdkt ubyhkfk. hbhktli yn cyiytkn
w yn vattyw yn paktmy hyn tyiyckhl, ia glipakt hy nlm gtamqakilm uby rkfíki
hy flckt yn tyxl; paóny kik pénaz, w taglqy, mb dkhty, haol uby mkník k hkt
yn tymgkqy hy nlm gtamqakilm, ma kgkml my dythaymyi.

patxkhlm, dbym, yi ymqy dktygyt, my hymyxfktgó yn vattyw, w hli kiqlial
xltyil my nnyvó glimacl k nk xltamgk w k mb dkhty, yigktcáihlny yn vattyw
uby nlm tycknkmy w kgktagakmy gbkiql ny pbymy dlmafny; uby hy mb dktqy ny
lptygík nl uby yi mb gkmk rbfaymy dktk mb tycknl. qkiqk pby nk fyiyvlnyigak
w gktahkh uby nk rytxlmbtk hy kik pénaz aipbihaó yi mb dygrl.





gkdíqbnl nzav. uby qtkqk hy nk kvyiqbtk uby xám dymkhbxfty hal k hli
ubaolqy hy gbkiqkm rkmqk yiqligym ny rkfíki mbgyhahl


nk xboyt hy hli kiqlial xltyil gbyiqk nk ramqltak uby tygafaó ctkihímaxl
gliqyiql hy vyt k kik pénaz yi mb gkmk. tygafaónk gli xbgrl kctkhl, kmí
yikxltkhk hy mb fynnyek glxl hy mb hamgtygaói, dltuby yi nl bil w yi nl
lqtl ytk ymqtyxkhk nk xltamgk, w qlhk nk cyiqy hy nk gabhkh, glxl k gkxdkik
qkñahk, vyiíki k vytnk.

haol hli ubaolqy k hli kiqlial uby yn dktygyt uby rkfíki qlxkhl yi nk
nafytqkh hy hli ctycltal il ytk fbyil, dltuby qyiík xám hy dynactlml uby hy
glivyiayiqy, w uby mytík xyolt uby ny dbmaymyi k én yi fytfytík gli mbm
ktxkm w gkfknnl; uby én ny mkgktík k dymkt hy qlhk nk xltamxk, glxl rkfík
rygrl hli ckapytlm k mb ymdlmk xynamyihtk.

-khvaytqk vbymk xytgyh -haol mkigrl, lwyihl ymql- uby yn myñlt hli ckapytlm
mkgó k mbm ymdlmk hy qayttk patxy w nk nnyvó k ptkigak dlt qayttk patxy;
dytl kubí, ma kgkml mkgkxlm k hli ctycltal, il qyiyxlm dlt hóihy qtkytny k
ymdkñk, dbym ymqá nk xkt yi xyhal.

-dktk qlhl rkw tyxyhal, ma il ym dktk nk xbytqy -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-;
dbym, nnyckihl yn fktgl k nk xktaik, ilm dlhtyxlm yxfktgkt yi én, kbiuby
qlhl yn xbihl nl axdahk.

-xbw fayi nl daiqk w pkganaqk vbymqtk xytgyh -haol mkigrl-, dytl hyn hagrl
kn rygrl rkw ctki qtygrl, w wl xy kqyicl kn tyiyckhl, uby xy dktygy xbw
rlxfty hy fayi w hy xbw fbyikm yiqtkñkm.

hli kiqlial haol uby ma yn tyiyckhl il mknaymy fayi hyn gkml, my qlxktík yn
ymdyhayiqy hy uby yn ctki hli ubaolqy dkmkmy yi fytfytík.

hy knní k hlm híkm dktqaó yn tyiyckhl yi bi nacytl fktgl hy myam tyxlm dlt
fkihk, ktxkhl hy vknyiqímaxk grbmxk; w hy knní k lqtlm hlm my dktqaytli nkm
cknytkm k nyvkiqy, rkfayihl dyhahl yn cyiytkn kn vamlttyw pbymy mytvahl hy
kvamktny hy nl uby mbgyhaymy yi nk nafytqkh hy hli ctycltal w yi yn gkml hy
kik pénaz; ubyhó yn vamlttyw hy rkgytnl kmí glxl my nl dyhík.

w bik xkñkik, mknayihl hli ubaolqy k dkmyktmy dlt nk dnkwk ktxkhl hy qlhkm
mbm ktxkm, dltuby, glxl xbgrkm vygym hygík, ynnkm ytki mbm kttylm, w mb
hymgkiml yn dynykt, w il my rknnkfk mai ynnkm bi dbiql, val vyiat rkgík én
bi gkfknnytl, ktxkhl kmaxamxl hy dbiqk yi fnkigl, uby yi yn ymgbhl qtkík
daiqkhk bik nbik tymdnkihygayiqy; yn gbkn, nnycáihlmy k qtygrl uby dlhík
myt líhl, yi knqkm vlgym, yigkxaikihl mbm tkeliym k hli ubaolqy, haol:

-aimaciy gkfknnytl w okxám glxl my hyfy knkfkhl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,
wl mlw yn gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik, gbwkm aikbhaqkm rkekñkm ubaeá qy ny
rkftái qtkíhl k nk xyxltak. vyicl k gliqyihyt gliqacl w k dtlfkt nk pbytek
hy qbm ftkelm, yi tkeói hy rkgytqy glilgyt w glipymkt uby xa hkxk, myk
ubayi pbyty, ym mai glxdktkgaói xám rytxlmk uby qb hbngaiyk hyn qlflml; nk
gbkn vythkh ma qú nk glipaymkm hy nnkil yi nnkil, ymgbmktám qb xbytqy w yn
qtkfkol uby wl ry hy qlxkt yi hátqynk; w ma qú dynyktym w wl qy vyigayty,
il ubaytl lqtk mkqampkgaói mail uby, hyokihl nkm ktxkm w kfmqyiaéihlqy hy
fbmgkt kvyiqbtkm, qy tyglokm w tyqatym k qb nbckt dlt qayxdl hy bi kñl,
hlihy rkm hy vavat mai ygrkt xkil k nk ymdkhk, yi dke qtkiubank w yi
dtlvygrlml mlmaycl, dltuby kmí glivayiy kn kbxyiql hy qb rkgayihk w k nk
mknvkgaói hy qb knxk; w ma qú xy vyigaytym, ubyhktá k qb hamgtygaói xa
gkfyek, w mytái qbwlm nlm hymdlolm hy xam ktxkm w gkfknnl, w dkmktá k nk
qbwk nk pkxk hy xam rkekñkm. xatk nl uby qy ymqá xyolt, w tymdóihyxy nbycl,
dltuby rlw qlhl yn hík qtkacl hy qétxail dktk hymdkgrkt ymqy iyclgal.

hli ubaolqy ubyhó mbmdyiml w kqóiaql, kmí hy nk kttlckigak hyn gkfknnytl hy
nk fnkigk nbik glxl hy nk gkbmk dlt uby ny hymkpakfk; w gli tydlml w khyxái
myvytl ny tymdlihaó:

-gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik, gbwkm rkekñkm rkmqk kcltk il rki nnyckhl k xa
ilqagak, wl lmkté obtkt uby okxám rkféam vamql k nk anbmqty hbngaiyk; uby
ma vamql nk rbfaétkhym, wl mé uby dtlgbtátkhym il dliytlm yi ymqk hyxkihk,
dltuby mb vamqk lm hymyickñktk hy uby il rk rkfahl ia dbyhy rkfyt fynnyek
uby gli nk mbwk glxdktkt my dbyhk; w kmí, il hagaéihllm uby xyiqím, mail
uby il kgytqáam yi nl dtldbymql, gli nkm glihagaliym uby rkféam typytahl,
kgyql vbymqtl hymkpíl, w nbycl, dltuby il my dkmy yn hík uby qtkéam
hyqytxaikhl; w mónl yzgyql hy nkm glihagaliym nk hy uby my dkmy k xí nk
pkxk hy vbymqtkm rkekñkm, dltuby il mé gbánym ia ubé qknym myki: gli nkm
xíkm xy gliqyiql, qknym gbknym ynnkm mli. qlxkh, dbym, nk dktqy hyn gkxdl
uby ubamaétyhym, uby wl rkté nl xymxl, w k ubayi halm my nk hayty, mki
dyhtl my nk fyihack.

rkfíki hymgbfaytql hy nk gabhkh kn gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik, w hígrlmynl
kn vamlttyw uby ymqkfk rkfnkihl gli hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk. yn vamlttyw,
gtywyihl mytík kncbik ibyvk kvyiqbtk pkftagkhk dlt hli kiqlial xltyil, l
dlt lqtl kncúi gkfknnytl hy nk gabhkh, mknaó nbycl k nk dnkwk gli hli
kiqlial w gli lqtlm xbgrlm gkfknnytlm uby ny kglxdkñkfki, k qayxdl gbkihl
hli ubaolqy vlnvík nkm tayihkm k tlgaikiqy dktk qlxkt hyn gkxdl nl
iygymktal.

vayihl, dbym, yn vamlttyw uby hkfki nlm hlm myñknym hy vlnvytmy k
yigliqtkt, my dbml yi xyhal, dtycbiqáihlnym ubé ytk nk gkbmk uby nym xlvík
k rkgyt qki hy axdtlvaml fkqknnk. yn gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik tymdlihaó
uby ytk dtygyhyigak hy rytxlmbtk, w yi ftyvym tkeliym ny haol nkm xamxkm
uby rkfík hagrl k hli ubaolqy, gli nk kgyqkgaói hy nkm glihagaliym hyn
hymkpíl rygrkm dlt yiqtkxfkm dktqym. nnycómy yn vamlttyw k hli kiqlial, w
dtycbiqóny dkml ma mkfík ubaéi ytk yn qkn gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik, l ma
ytk kncbik fbtnk uby ubytíki rkgyt k hli ubaolqy. hli kiqlial ny tymdlihaó
uby ia mkfík ubaéi ytk, ia ma ytk hy fbtnkm ia hy vytkm yn qkn hymkpíl.
ymqk tymdbymqk qbvl dytdnyol kn vamlttyw yi ma nym hyoktík l il dkmkt
khynkiqy yi nk fkqknnk; dytl, il dbhaéihlmy dytmbkhat k uby pbymy mail
fbtnk, my kdktqó hagayihl:

-myñltym gkfknnytlm, ma kubí il rkw lqtl tyxyhal mail glipymkt l xltat, w
yn myñlt hli ubaolqy ymqá yi mbm qtygy w vbymqtk xytgyh yn hy nk fnkigk
nbik yi mbm gkqltgy, k nk xkil hy halm, w hyimy.

kctkhygaó yn hy nk fnkigk nbik gli gltqymym w hamgtyqkm tkeliym kn vamlttyw
nk nagyigak uby my nym hkfk, w hli ubaolqy rael nl xymxl; yn gbkn,
yiglxyiháihlmy kn gaynl hy qlhl gltkeói w k mb hbngaiyk -glxl qyiík hy
glmqbxfty kn glxyiekt hy nkm fkqknnkm uby my ny lptygíki-, qltió k qlxkt
lqtl dlgl xám hyn gkxdl, dltuby val uby mb gliqtktal rkgík nl xymxl, w, mai
qlgkt qtlxdyqk ia lqtl aimqtbxyiql fénagl uby nym haymy myñkn hy kttyxyqyt,
vlnvaytli yiqtkxflm k bi xymxl dbiql nkm tayihkm k mbm gkfknnlm; w, glxl
ytk xám nacytl yn hy nk fnkigk nbik, nnycó k hli ubaolqy k hlm qytgalm
kihkhlm hy nk gkttytk, w knní ny yigliqtó gli qki dlhytlmk pbytek, mai
qlgktny gli nk nkiek (uby nk nyvkiqó, kn dktygyt, hy dtldómaql), uby hal
gli tlgaikiqy w gli hli ubaolqy dlt yn mbynl bik dynactlmk gkíhk. pby nbycl
mlfty én, w, dliaéihlny nk nkiek mlfty nk vamytk, ny haol:

-vyigahl mlam, gkfknnytl, w kbi xbytql, ma il glipymáam nkm glihagaliym hy
ibymqtl hymkpíl.

hli ubaolqy, xlnahl w kqbthahl, mai knektmy nk vamytk, glxl ma rkfnktk
hyiqtl hy bik qbxfk, gli vle hyfanaqkhk w yipytxk, haol:

-hbngaiyk hyn qlflml ym nk xám rytxlmk xboyt hyn xbihl, w wl yn xám
hymhagrkhl gkfknnytl hy nk qayttk, w il ym fayi uby xa pnkubyek hyptkbhy
ymqk vythkh. kdtayqk, gkfknnytl, nk nkiek, w ubíqkxy nk vahk, dbym xy rkm
ubaqkhl nk rlitk.

-yml il rkté wl, dlt gaytql -haol yn hy nk fnkigk nbik-: vavk, vavk yi mb
yiqytyek nk pkxk hy nk rytxlmbtk hy nk myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, uby mónl
xy gliqyiql gli uby yn ctki hli ubaolqy my tyqaty k mb nbckt bi kñl, l
rkmqk yn qayxdl uby dlt xí ny pbyty xkihkhl, glxl gligytqkxlm kiqym hy
yiqtkt yi ymqk fkqknnk.

qlhl ymql lwytli yn vamlttyw w hli kiqlial, gli lqtlm xbgrlm uby knní
ymqkfki, w lwytli kmaxamxl uby hli ubaolqy tymdlihaó uby glxl il ny dahaymy
glmk uby pbymy yi dytobagal hy hbngaiyk, qlhl nl hyxám gbxdnatík glxl
gkfknnytl dbiqbkn w vythkhytl.

rygrk ymqk glipymaói, vlnvaó nkm tayihkm yn hy nk fnkigk nbik, w, rkgayihl
xymbtk gli nk gkfyek kn vamlttyw, k xyhal cknldy my yiqtó yi nk gabhkh.

xkihó yn vamlttyw k hli kiqlial uby pbymy qtkm én, w uby yi qlhkm xkiytkm
mbdaymy ubaéi ytk. nyvkiqktli k hli ubaolqy, hymgbftaétliny yn tlmqtl w
rknnátliny mai glnlt w qtkmbhkihl. tlgaikiqy, hy dbtl xkndktkhl, il my dbhl
xlvyt dlt yiqligym. mkigrl, qlhl qtamqy, qlhl kdymktkhl, il mkfík ubé
hygatmy ia ubé rkgytmy: dktygíkny uby qlhl kubyn mbgyml dkmkfk yi mbyñlm w
uby qlhk kubynnk xáubaik ytk glmk hy yigkiqkxyiql. vyík k mb myñlt tyihahl
w lfnackhl k il qlxkt ktxkm yi bi kñl; axkcaikfk nk nbe hy nk cnltak hy mbm
rkekñkm ymgbtygahk, nkm ymdytkiekm hy mbm ibyvkm dtlxymkm hymrygrkm, glxl
my hymrkgy yn rbxl gli yn vayiql. qyxík ma ubyhktík l il gliqtygrl
tlgaikiqy, l hymnlgkhl mb kxl; uby il pbytk dlgk vyiqbtk ma hymnlgkhl
ubyhktk. paiknxyiqy, gli bik mannk hy xkilm, uby xkihó qtkyt yn vamlttyw,
ny nnyvktli k nk gabhkh, w yn vamlttyw my vlnvaó qkxfaéi k ynnk, gli hymyl
hy mkfyt ubaéi pbymy yn gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik, uby hy qki xkn qknkiqy
rkfík hyokhl k hli ubaolqy.





gkdíqbnl nzv. hlihy my hk ilqagak ubaéi ytk yn hy nk fnkigk nbik, gli nk
nafytqkh hy hli ctycltal, w hy lqtlm mbgymlm


macbaó hli kiqlial xltyil kn gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik, w macbaétliny
qkxfaéi, w kbi dytmacbaétliny, xbgrlm xbgrkgrlm, rkmqk uby ny gyttktli yi
bi xymói hyiqtl hy nk gabhkh. yiqtó yn hli kiqlial gli hymyl hy glilgytny;
mknaó bi ymgbhytl k tygyfatny w k hymktxktny; yigyttómy yi bik mknk fkok, w
gli én hli kiqlial, uby il my ny glgík yn dki rkmqk mkfyt ubaéi pbymy.
vayihl, dbym, yn hy nk fnkigk nbik uby kubyn gkfknnytl il ny hyokfk, ny
haol:

-fayi mé, myñlt, k nl uby vyiím, uby ym k mkfyt ubaéi mlw; w, dltuby il rkw
dktk ubé iycátlmnl, yi qkiql uby ymqy xa gtakhl xy hymktxk lm nl haté, mai
pknqkt bi dbiql k nk vythkh hyn gkml. mkfyh, myñlt, uby k xí xy nnkxki yn
fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl; mlw hyn xymxl nbckt hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk,
gbwk nlgbtk w mkihye xbyvy k uby ny qyickxlm námqaxk qlhlm gbkiqlm ny
glilgyxlm, w yiqty nlm uby xám my nk rki qyiahl ry mahl wl; w, gtywyihl uby
ymqá mb mknbh yi mb tydlml w yi uby my ymqé yi mb qayttk w yi mb gkmk, ha
qtkek dktk rkgytny ymqkt yi ynnk; w kmí, rkftá qtym xymym uby ny mkní kn
gkxail glxl gkfknnytl kihkiqy, nnkxáihlxy yn gkfknnytl hy nlm ymdyolm, gli
aiqyigaói hy dynykt gli én w vyigytny, mai rkgytny hkñl, dliayihl dlt
glihagaói hy ibymqtk dynyk uby yn vyigahl ubyhkmy k hamgtygaói hyn
vyigyhlt; w nl uby wl dyimkfk dyhatny, dltuby wk ny obeckfk dlt vyigahl,
ytk uby my vlnvaymy k mb nbckt w uby il mknaymy hén yi qlhl bi kñl, yi yn
gbkn qayxdl dlhtík myt gbtkhl; dytl nk mbytqy nl lthyió hy lqtk xkiytk,
dltuby én xy vyigaó k xí w xy hyttafó hyn gkfknnl, w kmí, il qbvl ypygql xa
dyimkxayiql: én dtlmacbaó mb gkxail, w wl xy vlnví, vyigahl, glttahl w
xlnahl hy nk gkíhk, uby pby khyxám dynactlmk; dytl il dlt ymql my xy ubaqó
yn hymyl hy vlnvyt k fbmgktny w k vyigytny, glxl rlw my rk vamql. w glxl én
ym qki dbiqbkn yi cbkthkt nkm óthyiym hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, mai hbhk
kncbik cbkthktá nk uby ny ry hkhl, yi gbxdnaxayiql hy mb dknkftk. ymql ym,
myñlt, nl uby dkmk, mai uby qyick uby hygatlm lqtk glmk kncbik; mbdnígllm
il xy hymgbftáam ia ny hacáam k hli ubaolqy ubaéi mlw, dltuby qyicki ypygql
nlm fbyilm dyimkxayiqlm xílm w vbynvk k glftkt mb obagal bi rlxfty uby ny
qayiy fliímaxl, glxl ny hyoyi nkm mkihygym hy nk gkfknnytík.

-¡lr myñlt -haol hli kiqlial-, halm lm dythliy yn kctkval uby rkféam rygrl
k qlhl yn xbihl yi ubytyt vlnvyt gbythl kn xám ctkgalml nlgl uby rkw yi én!
¿il vyam, myñlt, uby il dlhtá nnyckt yn dtlvygrl uby gkbmy nk glthbtk hy
hli ubaolqy k nl uby nnyck yn cbmql uby hk gli mbm hymvktílm? dytl wl
axkcail uby qlhk nk aihbmqtak hyn myñlt fkgrannyt il rk hy myt dktqy dktk
vlnvyt gbythl k bi rlxfty qki tyxkqkhkxyiqy nlgl; w ma il pbymy gliqtk
gktahkh, hatík uby ibigk mkiy hli ubaolqy, dltuby gli mb mknbh, il
mlnkxyiqy dythyxlm mbm ctkgakm, mail nkm hy mkigrl dkiek, mb ymgbhytl, uby
gbknubaytk hynnkm dbyhy vlnvyt k knyctkt k nk xamxk xynkiglník. gli qlhl
ymql, gknnkté, w il ny haté ikhk, dlt vyt ma mkncl vythkhytl yi mlmdygrkt
uby il rk hy qyiyt ypygql nk hanacyigak rygrk dlt yn myñlt gkttkmgl.

yn gbkn tymdlihaó uby wk bik dlt bik ymqkfk yi fbyi dbiql kubyn iyclgal, hy
ubayi ymdytkfk pynae mbgyml. w, rkfaéihlmy lptygahl hli kiqlial hy rkgyt nl
uby xám ny xkihkmy, my hymdahaó hén; w, rygrl nakt mbm ktxkm mlfty bi
xkgrl, nbycl kn xamxl dbiql, mlfty yn gkfknnl gli uby yiqtó yi nk fkqknnk,
my mknaó hy nk gabhkh kubyn xamxl hík w my vlnvaó k mb dkqtak, mai
mbgyhytny glmk uby lfnacby k gliqktnk yi ymqk vythkhytk ramqltak.

gliqó hli kiqlial kn vamlttyw qlhl nl uby gkttkmgl ny rkfík gliqkhl, hy nl
uby yn vamlttyw il tygafaó xbgrl cbmql, dltuby yi yn tyglcaxayiql hy hli
ubaolqy my dythík yn uby dlhíki qyiyt qlhlm kubynnlm uby hy mbm nlgbtkm
qbvaymyi ilqagak.

myam híkm ymqbvl hli ubaolqy yi yn nygrl, xkttahl, qtamqy, dyimkqavl w xkn
kglihagalikhl, wyihl w vaiayihl gli nk axkcaikgaói yi yn hymhagrkhl mbgyml
hy mb vyigaxayiql. glimlnáfkny mkigrl, w, yiqty lqtkm tkeliym, ny haol:

-myñlt xíl, kngy vbymqtk xytgyh nk gkfyek w knéctymy, ma dbyhy, w hé
ctkgakm kn gaynl uby, wk uby ny hyttafó yi nk qayttk, il mknaó gli kncbik
glmqannk ubyftkhk; w, dbym mkfy uby hlihy nkm hki nkm qlxki, w uby il
mayxdty rkw qlgailm hlihy rkw ymqkgkm, hé bik rack kn xéhagl, dbym il ny rk
xyiymqyt dktk uby ny gbty yi ymqk yipytxyhkh: vlnváxlilm k ibymqtk gkmk w
hyoéxlilm hy kihkt fbmgkihl kvyiqbtkm dlt qayttkm w nbcktym uby il mkfyxlm;
w, ma fayi my glimahytk, wl mlw kubí yn xám dythahlml, kbiuby ym vbymqtk
xytgyh yn xám xkn dktkhl. wl, uby hyoé gli yn clfaytil nlm hymylm hy myt
xám clfytikhlt, il hyoé nk ckik hy myt glihy, uby okxám qyihtá ypygql ma
vbymk xytgyh hyok hy myt tyw, hyokihl yn yoytgagal hy mb gkfknnytík; w kmí,
vayiyi k vlnvytmy yi rbxl xam ymdytkiekm.

-gknnk, mkigrl, dbym vym uby xa tygnbmaói w tyqatkhk il rk hy dkmkt hy bi
kñl; uby nbycl vlnvyté k xam rlitkhlm yoytgagalm, w il xy rk hy pknqkt
tyail uby ckiy w kncúi glihkhl uby hktqy.

-halm nl lack -haol mkigrl-, w yn dygkhl myk mlthl, uby mayxdty ry líhl
hygat uby xám vkny fbyik ymdytkiek uby tbai dlmymaói.

yi ymql ymqkfki gbkihl yiqtó hli kiqlial, hagayihl gli xbymqtkm hy
ctkihímaxl gliqyiql:

-¡knftagakm, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby hli ctycltal w yn tyiyckhl uby pby dlt
én ymqá yi nk dnkwk! ¿ubé hacl yi nk dnkwk? wk ymqá yi gkmk hyn vamlttyw, w
mytá kubí kn xlxyiql.

knyctómy kncúi qkiql hli ubaolqy, w haol:

-yi vythkh uby ymqlw dlt hygat uby xy rlncktk uby rbfaytk mbgyhahl qlhl kn
tyvém, dltuby xy lfnacktk k dkmkt yi fytfytík, hlihy gli nk pbytek hy xa
ftkel haytk nafytqkh il mónl k hli ctycltal, mail k gbkiqlm gtamqakilm
gkbqavlm rkw yi fytfytík. dytl, ¿ubé hacl, xamytkfny? ¿il mlw wl yn
vyigahl? ¿il mlw wl yn hyttafkhl? ¿il mlw wl yn uby il dbyhy qlxkt ktxk yi
bi kñl? dbym, ¿ubé dtlxyql? ¿hy ubé xy knkfl, ma kiqym xy glivayiy bmkt hy
nk tbygk uby hy nk ymdkhk?

-héoymy hyml, myñlt -haol mkigrl-: vavk nk cknnaik, kbiuby gli mb dydaqk,
uby rlw dlt qa w xkñkik dlt xí; w yi ymqkm glmkm hy yigbyiqtlm w dlttkelm
il rkw qlxktnym qayiql kncbil, dbym yn uby rlw gky dbyhy nyvkiqktmy
xkñkik, ma il ym uby my ubayty ymqkt yi nk gkxk; ubaytl hygat uby my hyoy
hymxkwkt, mai glftkt ibyvlm ftílm dktk ibyvkm dyihyigakm. w nyváiqymy
vbymqtk xytgyh kcltk dktk tygyfat k hli ctycltal, uby xy dktygy uby kihk nk
cyiqy knfltlqkhk, w wk hyfy hy ymqkt yi gkmk.

w kmí ytk nk vythkh; dltuby, rkfayihl wk hkhl gbyiqk hli ctycltal w yn
tyiyckhl kn vamlttyw hy mb ahk w vbynqk, hymylml hli ctycltal hy vyt k kik
pénaz, vail gli yn tyiyckhl k gkmk hy hli kiqlial; w, kbiuby hli ctycltal,
gbkihl ny mkgktli hy ktcyn, pby gli ráfaqlm hy xboyt, yi yn fktgl nlm qtlgó
dlt nlm hy bi gkbqavl uby mknaó glimacl; dytl yi gbknubaytk uby vaiaytk,
xlmqtktk myt dytmlik dktk myt glhagakhk, mytvahk w ymqaxkhk, dltuby ytk
rytxlml mlftyxkiytk, w nk yhkh, kn dktygyt, hy haye w mayqy l haye w lgrl
kñlm. taglqy w mb raok mknaytli k tygyfatny: yn dkhty gli náctaxkm w nk
raok gli rliymqahkh. il my kftkektli bilm k lqtlm, dltuby hlihy rkw xbgrl
kxlt il mbyny rkfyt hyxkmakhk hymyivlnqbtk. nkm hlm fynnyekm obiqkm hy hli
ctycltal w kik pénaz khxatktli yi dktqagbnkt k qlhlm obiqlm nlm uby
dtymyiqym ymqkfki. yn manyigal pby knní yn uby rkfnó dlt nlm hlm kxkiqym, w
nlm lolm pbytli nkm nyicbkm uby hymgbftaytli mbm knyctym w rliymqlm
dyimkxayiqlm.

gliqó yn tyiyckhl nk aihbmqtak w xyhal uby qbvl dktk mkgkt k hli ctycltal;
gliqó hli ctycltal nlm dynactlm w kdtayqlm yi uby my rkfík vamql gli nkm
xboytym gli ubayi rkfík ubyhkhl, il gli nktcl tkelikxayiql, mail gli ftyvym
dknkftkm, hlihy xlmqtó uby mb hamgtygaói my khynkiqkfk k mbm kñlm.
paiknxyiqy, taglqy dkcó w mkqampael nafytknxyiqy kmí kn tyiyckhl glxl k nlm
uby rkfíki flckhl kn tyxl. tyaigltdltómy w tyhúolmy yn tyiyckhl gli nk
acnymak, w, hy xayxftl dlhtahl, vlnvaó naxdal w mkil gli nk dyiaqyigak w yn
kttydyiqaxayiql.

hy knní k hlm híkm qtkqó yn vamlttyw gli hli kiqlial ubé xlhl qyihtíki dktk
uby kik pénaz w mb dkhty ubyhkmyi yi ymdkñk, dktygaéihlnym il myt hy
aiglivyiayiqy kncbil uby ubyhkmyi yi ynnk raok qki gtamqakik w dkhty, kn
dktygyt, qki fayi aiqyigalikhl. hli kiqlial my lptygaó vyiat k nk gltqy k
iyclgaktnl, hlihy rkfík hy vyiat pltelmkxyiqy k lqtlm iyclgalm, hkihl k
yiqyihyt uby yi ynnk, dlt xyhal hyn pkvlt w hy nkm háhavkm, xbgrkm glmkm
hapagbnqlmkm my kgkfki.

-il -haol taglqy, uby my rknnó dtymyiqy k ymqk dnáqagk- rkw uby ymdytkt yi
pkvltym ia yi háhavkm, dltuby gli yn ctki hli fytikthail hy vynkmgl, glihy
hy mknkekt, k ubayi hal mb xkoymqkh gktcl hy ibymqtk yzdbnmaói, il vknyi
tbyclm, il dtlxymkm, il háhavkm, il námqaxkm; dltuby, kbiuby ym vythkh uby
én xyegnk nk xamytaglthak gli nk obmqagak, glxl én vyy uby qlhl yn gbytdl
hy ibymqtk ikgaói ymqá gliqkxaikhl w dlhtahl, bmk gli én kiqym hyn gkbqytal
uby kftkmk uby hyn bicüyiql uby xlnapagk; w kmí, gli dtbhyigak, gli
mkckgahkh, gli hanacyigak w gli xayhlm uby dliy, rk nnyvkhl mlfty mbm
pbytqym rlxftlm k hyfahk yoygbgaói yn dyml hymqk ctki xáubaik, mai uby
ibymqtkm aihbmqtakm, ymqtkqkcyxkm, mlnagaqbhym w ptkbhym rkwki dlhahl
hymnbxftkt mbm lolm hy ktclm, uby gliqail qayiy knytqk, dltuby il my ny
ubyhy ia yigbftk iaicbil hy nlm ibymqtlm, uby, glxl tkíe ymglihahk, uby gli
yn qayxdl vyick hymdbém k ftlqkt, w k ygrkt ptbqlm vyiyilmlm yi ymdkñk, wk
naxdak, wk hymyxfktkekhk hy nlm qyxltym yi uby ibymqtk xbgryhbxfty nk
qyiík. ¡rytlagk tymlnbgaói hyn ctki panadl qytgytl, w aikbhaqk dtbhyigak yi
rkfytnk yigktckhl kn qkn hli fytikthail hy vynkmgl!

-bik dlt bik, wl rkté, dbymql knná, nkm hanacyigakm dlmafnym, w rkck yn
gaynl nl uby xám pbyty mytvahl -haol hli kiqlial-. hli ctycltal my atá
glixacl k glimlnkt nk dyik uby mbm dkhtym hyfyi qyiyt dlt mb kbmyigak; kik
pénaz my ubyhktá gli xa xboyt yi xa gkmk, l yi bi xlikmqytal, w wl mé uby
yn myñlt vamlttyw cbmqktá my ubyhy yi nk mbwk yn fbyi taglqy, rkmqk vyt
góxl wl iyclgal.

yn vamlttyw glimaiqaó yi qlhl nl dtldbymql, dytl hli ctycltal, mkfayihl nl
uby dkmkfk, haol uby yi iaicbik xkiytk dlhík ia ubytík hyokt k hlñk kik
pénaz; dytl, qyiayihl aiqyigaói hy vyt k mbm dkhtym, w hy hkt qtkek hy
vlnvyt dlt ynnk, vail yi yn hygtyqkhl gligaytql. ubyhómy kik pénaz gli nk
xboyt hy hli kiqlial, w taglqy yi gkmk hyn vamlttyw.

nnycómy yn hík hy nk dktqahk hy hli kiqlial, w yn hy hli ubaolqy w mkigrl,
uby pby hy knní k lqtlm hlm; uby nk gkíhk il ny gligyhaó uby xám dtymql my
dbmaymy yi gkxail. rbfl náctaxkm, rbfl mbmdatlm, hymxkwlm w mlnnlelm kn
hymdyhatmy hli ctycltal hy kik pénaz. lptygaóny taglqy k hli ctycltal xan
ymgbhlm, ma nlm ubytík; dytl én il qlxó iaicbil, mail mlnlm gaigl uby ny
dtymqó hli kiqlial, dtlxyqayihl nk dkck hynnlm yi nk gltqy. gli ymql, my
dktqaytli nlm hlm, w hli ubaolqy w mkigrl hymdbém, glxl my rk hagrl: hli
ubaolqy hymktxkhl w hy gkxail, mkigrl k day, dlt at yn tbgal gktckhl gli
nkm ktxkm.





gkdíqbnl nzva. uby qtkqk hy nl uby vytá yn uby nl nywyty, l nl latá yn uby
nl ymgbgrkty nyyt


kn mknat hy fktgynlik, vlnvaó hli ubaolqy k xatkt yn maqal hlihy rkfík
gkíhl, w haol:

-¡kubí pby qtlwk! ¡kubí xa hymhagrk, w il xa glfkthík, my nnyvó xam
kngkiekhkm cnltakm; kubí bmó nk pltqbik glixacl hy mbm vbynqkm w tyvbynqkm;
kubí my ymgbtygaytli xam rkekñkm; kubí, paiknxyiqy, gkwó xa vyiqbtk dktk
okxám nyvkiqktmy!

lwyihl nl gbkn mkigrl, haol:

-qki hy vknayiqym gltkeliym ym, myñlt xíl, qyiyt mbptaxayiql yi nkm
hymctkgakm glxl knyctík yi nkm dtlmdytahkhym; w ymql nl obecl dlt xí xamxl,
uby ma gbkihl ytk clfytikhlt ymqkfk knycty, kcltk uby mlw ymgbhytl hy k
day, il ymqlw qtamqy; dltuby ry líhl hygat uby ymqk uby nnkxki dlt krí
pltqbik ym bik xboyt flttkgrk w kiqlokhaek, w, mlfty qlhl, gayck, w kmí, il
vyy nl uby rkgy, ia mkfy k ubaéi hyttafk, ia k ubaéi yimknek.

-xbw panómlpl ymqám, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, xbw k nl hamgtyql
rkfnkm: il mé ubaéi qy nl yimyñk. nl uby qy mé hygat ym uby il rkw pltqbik
yi yn xbihl, ia nkm glmkm uby yi én mbgyhyi, fbyikm l xknkm uby myki,
vayiyi kgkml, mail dlt dktqagbnkt dtlvahyigak hy nlm gaynlm, w hy kubí
vayiy nl uby mbyny hygatmy: uby gkhk bil ym ktqípagy hy mb vyiqbtk. wl nl
ry mahl hy nk xík, dytl il gli nk dtbhyigak iygymktak, w kmí, xy rki mknahl
kn cknnktíi xam dtymbigaliym; dbym hyfaytk dyimkt uby kn dlhytlml ctkihlt
hyn gkfknnl hyn hy nk fnkigk nbik il dlhík tymamqat nk pnkubyek hy
tlgaikiqy. kqtyvíxy yi pai, ragy nl uby dbyhy, hyttafátlixy, w, kbiuby
dythí nk rlitk, il dythí, ia dbyhl dythyt, nk vatqbh hy gbxdnat xa dknkftk.
gbkihl ytk gkfknnytl kihkiqy, kqtyvahl w vknayiqy, gli xam lftkm w gli xam
xkilm kgtyhaqkfk xam rygrlm; w kcltk, gbkihl mlw ymgbhytl dyhymqty,
kgtyhaqkté xam dknkftkm gbxdnayihl nk uby ha hy xa dtlxymk. gkxaik, dbym,
kxacl mkigrl, w vkxlm k qyiyt yi ibymqtk qayttk yn kñl hyn ilvagakhl, gli
gbwl yigyttkxayiql glftktyxlm vatqbh ibyvk dktk vlnvyt kn ibigk hy xí
lnvahkhl yoytgagal hy nkm ktxkm.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, il ym glmk qki cbmqlmk yn gkxaikt k day, uby xy
xbyvk y aigaqy k rkgyt ctkihym oltikhkm. hyoyxlm ymqkm ktxkm glnckhkm hy
kncúi átfln, yi nbckt hy bi krltgkhl, w, lgbdkihl wl nkm ymdknhkm hyn
tbgal, nyvkiqkhlm nlm daym hyn mbynl, rktyxlm nkm oltikhkm glxl vbymqtk
xytgyh nkm dahayty w xahayty; uby dyimkt uby qyicl hy gkxaikt k day w
rkgytnkm ctkihym ym dyimkt yi nl ymgbmkhl.

-fayi rkm hagrl, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: gbéncbyimy xam ktxkm dlt
qtlpyl, w kn day hynnkm, l kntyhyhlt hynnkm, ctkfktyxlm yi nlm átflnym nl
uby yi yn qtlpyl hy nkm ktxkm hy tlnhái ymqkfk ymgtaql:

ikhay nkm xbyvk

uby ymqkt il dbyhk gli tlnhái k dtbyfk.

-qlhl yml xy dktygy hy dytnkm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-; w, ma il pbytk dlt nk
pknqk uby dktk yn gkxail ilm rkfík hy rkgyt tlgaikiqy, qkxfaéi pbytk fayi
hyoktny glnckhl.

-¡dbym ia én ia nkm ktxkm -tydnagó hli ubaolqy- ubaytl uby my krltubyi,
dltuby il my hack uby k fbyi mytvagal, xkn cknkthói!

-xbw fayi hagy vbymqtk xytgyh -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby, mycúi ldaiaói hy
hamgtyqlm, nk gbndk hyn kmil il my rk hy ygrkt k nk knfkthk; w, dbym hymqy
mbgyml vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy nk gbndk, gkmqícbymy k mí xymxl, w il tyvayiqyi
mbm atkm dlt nkm wk tlqkm w mkictayiqkm ktxkm, ia dlt nkm xkimyhbxftym hy
tlgaikiqy, ia dlt nk fnkihbtk hy xam daym, ubytayihl uby gkxaiyi xám hy nl
obmql.

yi ymqkm tkeliym w dnáqagkm my nym dkmó qlhl kubyn hík, w kbi lqtlm gbkqtl,
mai mbgyhytnym glmk uby ymqltfkmy mb gkxail; w kn ubaiql hík, k nk yiqtkhk
hy bi nbckt, rknnktli k nk dbytqk hy bi xymói xbgrk cyiqy, uby, dlt myt
paymqk, my ymqkfk knní mlnkekihl. gbkihl nnyckfk k ynnlm hli ubaolqy, bi
nkftkhlt kneó nk vle hagayihl:

-kncbil hymqlm hlm myñltym uby kubí vayiyi, uby il glilgyi nkm dktqym, hatá
nl uby my rk hy rkgyt yi ibymqtk kdbymqk.

-mí haté, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, gli qlhk tygqaqbh, ma ym uby
kngkiel k yiqyihytnk.

-«ym, dbym, yn gkml -haol yn nkftkhlt-, myñlt fbyil, uby bi vygail hymqy
nbckt, qki clthl uby dymk ligy kttlfkm, hymkpaó k glttyt k lqtl mb vygail,
uby il dymk xám uby gaigl. pby nk glihagaói uby rkfíki hy glttyt bik
gkttytk hy gayi dkmlm gli dymlm acbknym; w, rkfaéihlny dtycbiqkhl kn
hymkpakhlt góxl my rkfík hy acbknkt yn dyml, haol uby yn hymkpakhl, uby
dymk gaigl kttlfkm, my dbmaymy myam hy rayttl k gbymqkm, w kmí my
acbknktíki nkm ligy kttlfkm hyn pnkgl gli nkm ligy hyn clthl.»

-yml il -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl, kiqym uby hli ubaolqy tymdlihaymy-. w k
xí, uby rk dlglm híkm uby mkní hy myt clfytikhlt w obye, glxl qlhl yn xbihl
mkfy, qlgk kvytacbkt ymqkm hbhkm w hkt dktygyt yi qlhl dnyaql.

-tymdlihy yi fbyi rltk -haol hli ubaolqy-, mkigrl kxacl, uby wl il ymqlw
dktk hkt xackm k bi ckql, mycúi qtkacl knfltlqkhl w qtkmqltikhl yn obagal.

gli ymqk nagyigak, haol mkigrl k nlm nkftkhltym, uby ymqkfki xbgrlm
kntyhyhlt hén nk flgk kfaytqk, ymdytkihl nk myiqyigak hy nk mbwk:

-rytxkilm, nl uby yn clthl dahy il nnyvk gkxail, ia qayiy mlxftk hy
obmqagak kncbik; dltuby ma ym vythkh nl uby my hagy, uby yn hymkpakhl dbyhy
ymglcyt nkm ktxkm, il ym fayi uby émqy nkm ymglok qknym uby ny axdahki ia
ymqltfyi yn mknat vyigyhlt; w kmí, ym xa dktygyt uby yn clthl hymkpakhlt my
ymgkxlihy, xlihy, yiqtymkuby, dbnk w kqanhy, w mkuby myam kttlfkm hy mbm
gktiym, hy kubí l hy knní hy mb gbytdl, glxl xyolt ny dktygayty w
ymqbvayty; w hymqk xkiytk, ubyhkihl yi gaigl kttlfkm hy dyml, my acbknktá w
kobmqktá gli nkm gaigl hy mb gliqtktal, w kmí dlhtái glttyt acbknxyiqy.

-¡vlql k qkn -haol bi nkftkhlt uby ymgbgró nk myiqyigak hy mkigrl- uby ymqy
myñlt rk rkfnkhl glxl bi fyihaql w myiqyigakhl glxl bi gkióiacl! dytl k
fbyi mycbtl uby il rk hy ubytyt ubaqktmy yn clthl bik liek hy mbm gktiym,
gbkiql xám myam kttlfkm.

-nl xyolt ym uby il glttki -tymdlihaó lqtl-, dltuby yn pnkgl il my xbynk
gli yn dyml, ia yn clthl my hymgktiy; w égrymy nk xaqkh hy nk kdbymqk yi
vail, w nnyvyxlm ymqlm myñltym k nk qkfytik hy nl gktl, w mlfty xí nk gkdk
gbkihl nnbyvk.

-wl, myñltym -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, lm nl kctkhyegl, dytl il dbyhl
hyqyiytxy bi dbiql, dltuby dyimkxayiqlm w mbgymlm qtamqym xy rkgyi dktygyt
hymgltqém w gkxaikt xám uby hy dkml.

w kmí, hkihl hy nkm ymdbynkm k tlgaikiqy, dkmó khynkiqy, hyoáihlnlm
khxatkhlm hy rkfyt vamql w ilqkhl kmí mb ymqtkñk pacbtk glxl nk hamgtygaói
hy mb gtakhl, uby dlt qkn obecktli k mkigrl. w lqtl hy nlm nkftkhltym haol:

-ma yn gtakhl ym qki hamgtyql, ¡gbán hyfy hy myt yn kxl! wl kdlmqkté uby ma
vki k ymqbhakt k mknkxkigk, uby k bi qtam rki hy vyiat k myt kngknhym hy
gltqy; uby qlhl ym fbtnk, mail ymqbhakt w xám ymqbhakt, w qyiyt pkvlt w
vyiqbtk; w gbkihl xyilm my dayimk yn rlxfty, my rknnk gli bik vktk yi nk
xkil l gli bik xaqtk yi nk gkfyek.

kubynnk ilgry nk dkmktli kxl w xlel yi xaqkh hyn gkxdl, kn gaynl tkml w
hymgbfaytql; w lqtl hík, macbayihl mb gkxail, vaytli uby rkgak ynnlm vyiík
bi rlxfty hy k day, gli bikm knpltokm kn gbynnl w bik keglik l grbel yi nk
xkil, dtldal qknny hy glttyl hy k day; yn gbkn, glxl nnycó obiql k hli
ubaolqy, khynkiqó yn dkml, w xyhal glttayihl nnycó k én, w, kftkeáihlny dlt
yn xbmnl hytygrl, uby il kngkiekfk k xám, ny haol, gli xbymqtkm hy xbgrk
knyctík:

-¡lr xa myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, w ubé ctki gliqyiql rk hy nnyckt kn
gltkeói hy xa myñlt yn hbuby gbkihl mydk uby vbymqtk xytgyh vbynvy k mb
gkmqannl, uby qlhkvík my ymqá yi én gli xa myñltk nk hbubymk!

-il lm glilegl, kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ia mé ubaéi mlam, ma vlm il
xy nl hygím.

-wl, myñlt hli ubaolqy -tymdlihaó yn glttyl-, mlw qlmanlm, yn nkgkwl hyn
hbuby xa myñlt, uby il ubamy dynykt gli vbymqtk xytgyh mlfty yn gkmkxayiql
hy nk raok hy hlñk tlhtícbye.

-¡vánkxy halm! -haol hli ubaolqy-. ¿ym dlmafny uby mlam vlm yn uby nlm
yigkiqkhltym xam yiyxaclm qtkimpltxktli yi ymy nkgkwl uby hygím, dlt
hyptkbhktxy hy nk rlitk hy kubynnk fkqknnk?

-gknny, myñlt fbyil -tydnagó yn gktqytl-, uby il rbfl yigkiql kncbil ia
xbhkiek hy tlmqtl iaicbik: qki nkgkwl qlmanlm yiqté yi nk ymqkgkhk glxl
qlmanlm nkgkwl mkní hynnk. wl dyimé gkmktxy mai dynykt, dlt rkfytxy
dktygahl fayi nk xlek, dytl mbgyhaóxy kn tyvém xa dyimkxayiql, dbym, kmí
glxl vbymqtk xytgyh my dktqaó hy ibymqtl gkmqannl, yn hbuby xa myñlt xy
rael hkt gayi dknlm dlt rkfyt gliqtkvyiahl k nkm lthyikiekm uby xy qyiík
hkhkm kiqym hy yiqtkt yi nk fkqknnk, w qlhl rk dktkhl yi uby nk xbgrkgrk ym
wk xliok, w hlñk tlhtícbye my rk vbynql k gkmqannk, w wl vlw krltk k
fktgynlik, k nnyvkt bi dnaycl hy gktqkm kn vattyw, uby ny yivík xa kxl. ma
vbymqtk xytgyh ubayty bi qtkcbaql, kbiuby gknayiqy, dbtl, kubí nnyvl bik
gknkfkek nnyik hy nl gktl, gli il mé gbáiqkm tkoaqkm hy ubyml hy qtligrói,
uby mytvatái hy nnkxkqavl w hymdytqkhlt hy nk myh, ma kgkml ymqá hbtxayihl.

-ubaytl yn yivaqy -haol mkigrl-, w égrymy yn tymql hy nk gltqymík, w
ymgkigay yn fbyi qlmanlm, k hymdygrl w dymkt hy gbkiqlm yigkiqkhltym rkw yi
nkm aihakm.

-yi pai -haol hli ubaolqy-, qú ytym, mkigrl, yn xkwlt cnlqói hyn xbihl w yn
xkwlt aciltkiqy hy nk qayttk, dbym il qy dytmbkhym uby ymqy glttyl ym
yigkiqkhl, w ymqy qlmanlm gliqtkrygrl. ubéhkqy gli én w rátqkqy, uby wl xy
até khynkiqy dlgl k dlgl, ymdytáihlqy k uby vyickm.

taómy yn nkgkwl, hymyivkaió mb gknkfkek, hymknpltoó mbm tkokm, w, mkgkihl
bi dkiygannl, én w mkigrl my myiqktli mlfty nk wytfk vythy, w yi fbyik dke
glxdkñk hymdkfanktli w haytli plihl gli qlhl yn tydbymql hy nkm knpltokm,
gli qki fbyilm knayiqlm, uby nkxaytli yn dnaycl hy nkm gktqkm, mónl dltuby
lník k ubyml. haol qlmanlm k mkigrl:

-mai hbhk ymqy qb kxl, mkigrl kxacl, hyfy hy myt bi nlgl.

-¿góxl hyfy? -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. il hyfy ikhk k ikhay, uby qlhl nl dkck, w
xám gbkihl nk xliyhk ym nlgbtk. fayi nl vyl wl, w fayi my nl hacl k én;
dytl, ¿ubé kdtlvygrk? w xám kcltk uby vk tyxkqkhl, dltuby vk vyigahl hyn
gkfknnytl hy nk fnkigk nbik.

tlcóny qlmanlm ny gliqkmy nl uby ny rkfík mbgyhahl, dytl mkigrl ny
tymdlihaó uby ytk hymgltqymík hyokt uby mb kxl ny ymdytkmy; uby lqtl hík,
ma my yigliqtkmyi, rkftík nbckt dkt ynnl. w, nyvkiqáihlmy, hymdbém hy
rkfytmy mkgbhahl yn mkwl w nkm xackokm hy nkm fktfkm, kiqyglcaó kn tbgal,
w, hagayihl ''k halm'', hyoó k qlmanlm w kngkieó k mb kxl, uby k nk mlxftk
hy bi átfln ny ymqkfk ymdytkihl.





gkdíqbnl nzvaa. hy nk tymlnbgaói uby qlxó hli ubaolqy hy rkgytmy dkmqlt w
mycbat nk vahk hyn gkxdl, yi qkiql uby my dkmkfk yn kñl hy mb dtlxymk, gli
lqtlm mbgymlm yi vythkh cbmqlmlm w fbyilm


ma xbgrlm dyimkxayiqlm pkqackfki k hli ubaolqy kiqym hy myt hyttafkhl,
xbgrlm xám ny pkqacktli hymdbém hy gkíhl. k nk mlxftk hyn átfln ymqkfk,
glxl my rk hagrl, w knní, glxl xlmgkm k nk xayn, ny kgbhíki w dagkfki
dyimkxayiqlm: bilm afki kn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk w lqtlm k nk vahk uby
rkfík hy rkgyt yi mb pltelmk tyqatkhk. nnycó mkigrl w knkfóny nk nafytkn
glihagaói hyn nkgkwl qlmanlm.

-¿ym dlmafny -ny haol hli ubaolqy- uby qlhkvík, ¡lr mkigrl!, dayimym uby
kubén myk vythkhytl nkgkwl? dktygy uby my qy rk ahl hy nkm xayiqym rkfyt
vamql k hbngaiyk glivytqahk w qtkimpltxkhk yi nkftkhltk, w kn gkfknnytl hy
nlm ymdyolm yi yn fkgrannyt gkttkmgl, lftkm qlhkm hy nlm yigkiqkhltym uby
xy dytmacbyi. dytl haxy kcltk: ¿dtycbiqkmqy k ymy qlmanlm uby hagym ubé rk
rygrl halm hy knqamahltk: ma rk nnltkhl xa kbmyigak, l ma rk hyokhl wk yi
nkm xkilm hyn lnvahl nlm yikxltkhlm dyimkxayiqlm uby yi xa dtymyigak nk
pkqackfki?

-il ytki -tymdlihaó mkigrl- nlm uby wl qyiík qknym uby xy haymyi nbckt k
dtycbiqkt flfytíkm. ¡gbytdl hy xí!, myñlt, ¿ymqá vbymqtk xytgyh krltk yi
qétxailm hy aiubatat dyimkxayiqlm koyilm, ymdygaknxyiqy kxltlmlm?

-xatk, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, xbgrk hapytyigak rkw hy nkm lftkm uby my
rkgyi dlt kxlt k nkm uby my rkgyi dlt kctkhygaxayiql. fayi dbyhy myt uby bi
gkfknnytl myk hymkxltkhl, dytl il dbyhy myt, rkfnkihl yi qlhl taclt, uby
myk hymkctkhygahl. ubímlxy fayi, kn dktygyt, knqamahltk; halxy nlm qtym
qlgkhltym uby mkfym, nnltó yi xa dktqahk, xknhíolxy, vaqbdytóxy, ubyoómy, k
hymdygrl hy nk vytcüyiek, dúfnagkxyiqy: myñknym qlhkm hy uby xy khltkfk,
uby nkm atkm hy nlm kxkiqym mbynyi dktkt yi xknhagaliym. wl il qbvy
ymdytkiekm uby hktny, ia qymltlm uby lptygytny, dltuby nkm xíkm nkm qyicl
yiqtyckhkm k hbngaiyk, w nlm qymltlm hy nlm gkfknnytlm kihkiqym mli, glxl
nlm hy nlm hbyihym, kdktyiqym w pknmlm, w mónl dbyhl hktny ymqlm kgbythlm
uby hynnk qyicl, mai dytobagal, dytl, hy nlm uby qyicl hy hbngaiyk, k ubayi
qú kctkvakm gli nk tyxamaói uby qayiym yi kelqktqy w yi gkmqackt ymkm
gktiym, uby vyk wl glxahkm hy nlflm, uby ubaytyi cbkthktmy kiqym dktk nlm
cbmkilm uby dktk yn tyxyhal hy kubynnk dlfty myñltk.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, ma vk k hygat nk vythkh, wl il xy dbyhl
dytmbkhat uby nlm kelqym hy xam dlmkhytkm qyicki uby vyt gli nlm
hymyigkiqlm hy nlm yigkiqkhlm, uby ym glxl ma haoémyxlm: "ma lm hbyny nk
gkfyek, biqklm nkm tlhannkm". k nl xyilm, wl lmkté obtkt uby yi gbkiqkm
ramqltakm vbymk xytgyh rk nyíhl uby qtkqki hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík il rk
vamql kncúi hymyigkiqkhl dlt kelqym; dytl, dlt mí l dlt il, wl xy nlm hkté,
gbkihl qyick ckik w yn qayxdl xy hé glxlhahkh dktk gkmqacktxy.

-halm nl rkck -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w nlm gaynlm qy hyi ctkgak dktk uby
gkackm yi nk gbyiqk w yi nk lfnackgaói uby qy gltty hy kwbhkt k xa myñltk,
uby nl ym qbwk, dbym qú ytym xíl.

yi ymqkm dnáqagkm afki macbayihl mb gkxail, gbkihl nnycktli kn xymxl maqal
w nbckt hlihy pbytli kqtldynnkhlm hy nlm qltlm. tyglilgaóny hli ubaolqy;
haol k mkigrl:

-Émqy ym yn dtkhl hlihy qldkxlm k nkm faekttkm dkmqltkm w cknnkthlm
dkmqltym uby yi én ubytíki tyilvkt y axaqkt k nk dkmqltkn ktgkhak,
dyimkxayiql qki ibyvl glxl hamgtyql, k gbwk axaqkgaói, ma ym uby k qa qy
dktygy fayi, ubyttík, ¡lr mkigrl!, uby ilm glivatqaémyxlm yi dkmqltym,
maubaytk yn qayxdl uby qyicl hy ymqkt tyglcahl. wl glxdtkté kncbikm lvyokm,
w qlhkm nkm hyxám glmkm uby kn dkmqltkn yoytgagal mli iygymktakm, w
nnkxáihlxy wl yn dkmqlt ubaolqae, w qú yn dkmqlt dkigail, ilm kihktyxlm dlt
nlm xliqym, dlt nkm mynvkm w dlt nlm dtkhlm, gkiqkihl kubí, yihygrkihl
knní, fyfayihl hy nlm níubahlm gtamqknym hy nkm pbyiqym, l wk hy nlm
naxdalm kttlwbynlm, l hy nlm gkbhknlmlm tílm. hktáiilm gli kfbihkiqímaxk
xkil hy mb hbngímaxl ptbql nkm yigaikm, kmayiql nlm qtliglm hy nlm
hbtímaxlm kngltilubym, mlxftk nlm mkbgym, lnlt nkm tlmkm, knplxftkm hy xan
glnltym xkqaekhkm nlm ymqyihahlm dtkhlm, knayiql yn katy gnktl w dbtl, nbe
nk nbik w nkm ymqtynnkm, k dymkt hy nk ymgbtahkh hy nk ilgry, cbmql yn
gkiql, knyctík yn nnltl, kdlnl vytmlm, yn kxlt gligydqlm, gli uby dlhtyxlm
rkgytilm yqytilm w pkxlmlm, il mónl yi nlm dtymyiqym, mail yi nlm vyiahytlm
macnlm.

-dkthaye -haol mkigrl-, uby xy rk gbkhtkhl, w kbi ymubaikhl, qkn céiytl hy
vahk; w xám, uby il nk rk hy rkfyt kúi fayi vamql yn fkgrannyt mkimói
gkttkmgl w xkymy iaglnám yn fktfytl, gbkihl nk rki hy ubytyt mycbat, w
rkgytmy dkmqltym gli ilmlqtlm; w kbi ubaytk halm il ny vyick yi vlnbiqkh kn
gbtk hy yiqtkt qkxfaéi yi yn kdtamgl, mycúi ym hy knycty w kxacl hy
rlncktmy.

-qú rkm hagrl xbw fayi -haol hli ubaolqy-; w dlhtá nnkxktmy yn fkgrannyt
mkimói gkttkmgl, ma yiqtk yi yn dkmqltkn ctyxal, glxl yiqtktá mai hbhk, yn
dkmqlt mkimliail, l wk yn dkmqlt gkttkmgói; yn fktfytl iaglnám my dlhtá
nnkxkt xagbnlml, glxl wk yn kiqacbl flmgái my nnkxó iyxltlml; kn gbtk il mé
ubé ilxfty ny dlickxlm, ma il ym kncúi hytavkqavl hy mb ilxfty, nnkxáihlny
yn dkmqlt gbtakxftl. nkm dkmqltkm hy ubayi ryxlm hy myt kxkiqym, glxl yiqty
dytkm dlhtyxlm ymglcyt mbm ilxftym; w, dbym yn hy xa myñltk gbkhtk kmí kn
hy dkmqltk glxl kn hy dtaigymk, il rkw dktk ubé gkimktxy yi fbmgkt lqtl uby
xyolt ny vyick; qú, mkigrl, dlihtám k nk qbwk yn uby ubamaytym.

-il dayiml -tymdlihaó mkigrl- dliytny lqtl kncbil mail yn hy qytymlik, uby
ny vyihtá fayi gli mb clthbtk w gli yn dtldal uby qayiy, dbym my nnkxk
qytymk; w xám, uby, gynyftáihlnk wl yi xam vytmlm, vyicl k hymgbftat xam
gkmqlm hymylm, dbym il kihl k fbmgkt dki hy qtkmqtacl dlt nkm gkmkm koyikm.
yn gbtk il mytá fayi uby qyick dkmqltk, dlt hkt fbyi yoyxdnl; w ma ubamayty
yn fkgrannyt qyiytnk, mb knxk yi mb dknxk.

-¡vánkxy halm -haol hli ubaolqy-, w ubé vahk ilm ryxlm hy hkt, mkigrl
kxacl! ¡ubé hy grbtbxfynkm rki hy nnyckt k ibymqtlm líhlm, ubé hy ckaqkm
ekxltkikm, ubé qkxfltaiym, w ubé hy mlikokm, w ubé hy tkfynym! dbym, ¡ubé
ma hymqkm hapytyigakm hy xúmagkm tymbyik nk hy nlm knflcbym! knní my vytá
gkma qlhlm nlm aimqtbxyiqlm dkmqltknym.

-¿ubé mli knflcbym -dtycbiqó mkigrl-, uby ia nlm ry líhl ilxftkt, ia nlm ry
vamql yi qlhk xa vahk?

-knflcbym mli -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy- bikm grkdkm k xlhl hy gkihynytlm hy
keópkt, uby, hkihl bik gli lqtk dlt nl vkgíl w rbygl, rkgy bi mli, ma il
xbw kctkhkfny ia ktxóiagl, il hymgliqyiqk, w vayiy fayi gli nk tbmqagahkh
hy nk ckaqk w hyn qkxfltíi; w ymqy ilxfty knflcbym ym xltamgl, glxl nl mli
qlhlm kubynnlm uby yi ibymqtk nyicbk gkmqynnkik glxayieki yi kn, glivayiy k
mkfyt: knxlrkek, knxltekt, knrlxftk, kncbkgan, knrbgyxk, knxkgéi, kngkigík,
w lqtlm myxyokiqym, uby hyfyi myt dlglm xám; w mlnlm qtym qayiy ibymqtk
nyicbk uby mli xltamglm w kgkfki yi a, w mli: fltgycbí, ekubaekxí w
xktkvyhí. knryní w knpkubí, qkiql dlt yn kn dtaxytl glxl dlt yn a yi uby
kgkfki, mli glilgahlm dlt ktáfaclm. ymql qy ry hagrl, hy dkml, dlt
rkfétxynl tyhbgahl k nk xyxltak nk lgkmaói hy rkfyt ilxftkhl knflcbym; w
rkilm hy kwbhkt xbgrl kn dktygyt yi dytpygaói ymqy yoytgagal yn myt wl
kncúi qkiql dlyqk, glxl qú mkfym, w yn mytnl qkxfaéi yi ymqtyxl yn
fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl. hyn gbtk il hacl ikhk; dytl wl kdlmqkté uby hyfy
hy qyiyt mbm dbiqkm w glnnktym hy dlyqk; w uby nkm qyick qkxfaéi xkymy
iaglnám, il hbhl yi ynnl, dltuby qlhlm, l nlm xám, mli cbaqkttamqkm w
gldnytlm. wl xy ubyokté hy kbmyigak; qú qy knkfktám hy patxy yikxltkhl; yn
dkmqlt gkttkmgói, hy hymhyñkhl; w yn gbtk gbtakxftl, hy nl uby én xám dbyhy
mytvatmy, w kmí, kihktá nk glmk uby il rkwk xám uby hymykt.

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-wl mlw, myñlt, qki hymctkgakhl uby qyxl il rk hy nnyckt yn hík yi uby yi
qkn yoytgagal xy vyk. ¡lr, ubé dlnahkm gbgrktym qyicl hy rkgyt gbkihl
dkmqlt xy vyk! ¡ubé hy xackm, ubé hy ikqkm, ubé hy cbatiknhkm w ubé hy
ektkihkokm dkmqltanym, uby, dbymql uby il xy ctkioyyi pkxk hy hamgtyql, il
hyoktái hy ctkioyktxy nk hy aicyialml! mkigragk xa raok ilm nnyvktá nk
glxahk kn rkql. dytl, ¡cbkthk!, uby ym hy fbyi dktygyt, w rkw dkmqltym xám
xknagalmlm uby maxdnym, w il ubyttík uby pbymy dlt nkik w vlnvaymy
qtkmubankhk; w qkxfaéi mbynyi kihkt nlm kxltym w nlm il fbyilm hymylm dlt
nlm gkxdlm glxl dlt nkm gabhkhym, w dlt nkm dkmqltknym grlekm glxl dlt nlm
tyknym dknkgalm, w, ubaqkhk nk gkbmk my ubaqk yn dygkhl; w lolm uby il
vyyi, gltkeói uby il ubayftk; w xám vkny mknql hy xkqk uby tbycl hy rlxftym
fbyilm.

-il xám typtkiym, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, dbym gbknubaytk hy nlm uby rkm
hagrl fkmqk dktk hkt k yiqyihyt qb dyimkxayiql; w xbgrkm vygym qy ry
kglimyokhl uby il mykm qki dtóhacl yi typtkiym w uby qy vkwkm k nk xkil yi
hygatnlm; dytl dktégyxy uby ym dtyhagkt yi hymaytql, w "gkmqíckxy xa xkhty,
w wl qtóxdlcynkm".

-dktégyxy -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby vbymk xytgyh ym glxl nl uby hagyi: "haol
nk mktqéi k nk gknhytk: ubíqkqy knná loaiyctk". ymqáxy tydtyryihayihl uby
il hack wl typtkiym, w yimátqknlm vbymk xytgyh hy hlm yi hlm.

-xatk, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-: wl qtkacl nlm typtkiym k dtldómaql,
w vayiyi gbkihl nlm hacl glxl kiannl yi yn hyhl; dytl qtáymnlm qki dlt nlm
gkfynnlm, uby nlm kttkmqtkm, w il nlm cbíkm; w ma il xy kgbythl xkn, lqtk
vye qy ry hagrl uby nlm typtkiym mli myiqyigakm ftyvym, mkgkhkm hy nk
yzdytayigak w ymdygbnkgaói hy ibymqtlm kiqacblm mkfalm; w yn typtái uby il
vayiy k dtldómaql, kiqym ym hamdktkqy uby myiqyigak. dytl hyoéxlilm hymql,
w, dbym wk vayiy nk ilgry, tyqatéxlilm hyn gkxail tykn kncúi qtygrl, hlihy
dkmktyxlm ymqk ilgry, w halm mkfy nl uby mytá xkñkik.

tyqatátlimy, gyiktli qkthy w xkn, fayi gliqtk nk vlnbiqkh hy mkigrl, k
ubayi my ny tydtymyiqkfki nkm ymqtygryekm hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík bmkhkm
yi nkm mynvkm w yi nlm xliqym, ma fayi qkn vye nk kfbihkigak my xlmqtkfk yi
nlm gkmqannlm w gkmkm, kmí hy hli haycl hy xatkihk glxl yi nkm flhkm hyn
tagl gkxkgrl, w hy hli kiqlial xltyil; dytl glimahytkfk il myt dlmafny myt
mayxdty hy hík ia mayxdty hy ilgry, w kmí, dkmó kubénnk hbtxayihl, w mb kxl
vynkihl.





gkdíqbnl nzvaaa. hy nk gythlmk kvyiqbtk uby ny kgliqygaó k hli ubaolqy


ytk nk ilgry kncl ymgbtk, dbymql uby nk nbik ymqkfk yi yn gaynl, dytl il yi
dktqy uby dbhaymy myt vamqk: uby qkn vye nk myñltk hakik my vk k dkmykt k
nlm kiqídlhkm, w hyok nlm xliqym iyctlm w nlm vknnym ymgbtlm. gbxdnaó hli
ubaolqy gli nk ikqbtknyek hbtxayihl yn dtaxyt mbyñl, mai hkt nbckt kn
mycbihl; fayi kn tyvém hy mkigrl, uby ibigk qbvl mycbihl, dltuby ny hbtkfk
yn mbyñl hymhy nk ilgry rkmqk nk xkñkik, yi uby my xlmqtkfk mb fbyik
glxdnyzaói w dlglm gbahkhlm. nlm hy hli ubaolqy ny hymvynktli hy xkiytk uby
hymdytqó k mkigrl w ny haol:

-xktkvannkhl ymqlw, mkigrl, hy nk nafytqkh hy qb glihagaói: wl axkcail uby
ytym rygrl hy xátxln, l hy hbtl ftligy, yi ubayi il gkfy xlvaxayiql ia
myiqaxayiql kncbil. wl vynl gbkihl qú hbytxym, wl nnltl gbkihl gkiqkm, wl
xy hymxkwl hy kwbil gbkiql qú ymqám dytyelml w hymknyiqkhl hy dbtl rktql.
hy fbyilm gtakhlm ym glinnyvkt nkm dyikm hy mbm myñltym w myiqat mbm
myiqaxayiqlm, dlt yn fayi dktygyt maubaytk. xatk nk mytyiahkh hymqk ilgry,
nk mlnyhkh yi uby ymqkxlm, uby ilm glivahk k yiqtyxyqyt kncbik vacanak
yiqty ibymqtl mbyñl. nyváiqkqy, dlt qb vahk, w hymvíkqy kncúi qtygrl hy
kubí, w gli fbyi áiaxl w hyibyhl kctkhygahl hkqy qtygayiqlm l gbkqtlgayiqlm
kelqym k fbyik gbyiqk hy nlm hyn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk; w ymql tlckihl qy
nl mbdnagl, uby il ubaytl vyiat gliqacl k nlm ftkelm, glxl nk lqtk vye,
dltuby mé uby nlm qayiym dymkhlm. hymdbém uby qy rkwkm hkhl, dkmktyxlm nl
uby tymqk hy nk ilgry gkiqkihl, wl xa kbmyigak w qú qb patxyek, hkihl hymhy
kcltk dtaigadal kn yoytgagal dkmqltkn uby ryxlm hy qyiyt yi ibymqtk knhyk.

-myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, il mlw wl tynacalml dktk uby hymhy nk xaqkh hy
xa mbyñl xy nyvkiqy w xy hagadnaiy, ia xyilm xy dktygy uby hyn ymqtyxl hyn
hlnlt hy nlm kelqym my dbyhk dkmkt kn hy nk xúmagk. vbymk xytgyh xy hyoy
hltxat w il xy kdtayqy yi nl hyn kelqktxy; uby xy rktá rkgyt obtkxyiql hy
il qlgktxy okxám kn dynl hyn mkwl, il uby kn hy xam gktiym.

-¡lr knxk yihbtygahk! ¡lr ymgbhytl mai dayhkh! ¡lr dki xkn yxdnykhl w
xytgyhym xkn glimahytkhkm nkm uby qy ry rygrl w dayiml hy rkgytqy! dlt xí
qy rkm vamql clfytikhlt, w dlt xí qy vyym gli ymdytkiekm dtldaigbkm hy myt
glihy, l qyiyt lqtl qíqbnl yubavknyiqy, w il qkthktá yn gbxdnaxayiql hy
ynnkm xám hy gbkiql qkthy yi dkmkt ymqy kñl; uby wl dlmq qyiyftkm mdytl
nbgyx.

-il yiqayihl yml -tydnagl mkigrl-; mónl yiqayihl uby, yi qkiql uby hbytxl,
ia qyicl qyxlt, ia ymdytkiek, ia qtkfkol ia cnltak; w fayi rkwk yn uby
aivyiqó yn mbyñl, gkdk uby gbfty qlhlm nlm rbxkilm dyimkxayiqlm, xkiokt uby
ubaqk nk rkxfty, kcbk uby krbwyiqk nk myh, pbycl uby gknayiqk yn ptíl, ptíl
uby qyxdnk yn kthlt, w, paiknxyiqy, xliyhk cyiytkn gli uby qlhkm nkm glmkm
my glxdtki, fknkiek w dyml uby acbknk kn dkmqlt gli yn tyw w kn maxdny gli
yn hamgtyql. mlnk bik glmk qayiy xknk yn mbyñl, mycúi ry líhl hygat, w ym
uby my dktygy k nk xbytqy, dbym hy bi hltxahl k bi xbytql rkw xbw dlgk
hapytyigak.

-ibigk qy ry líhl rkfnkt, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, qki ynyckiqyxyiqy glxl
krltk, dlt hlihy vyicl k glilgyt myt vythkh yn typtái uby qú kncbikm vygym
mbynym hygat: "il gli ubayi ikgym, mail gli ubayi dkgym".

-¡kr, dymak qkn -tydnagó mkigrl-, myñlt ibymqtl kxl! il mlw wl krltk yn uby
yimktqk typtkiym, uby qkxfaéi k vbymqtk xytgyh my ny gkyi hy nk flgk hy hlm
yi hlm xyolt uby k xí, mail uby hyfy hy rkfyt yiqty nlm xílm w nlm mbwlm
ymqk hapytyigak: uby nlm hy vbymqtk xytgyh vyihtái k qayxdl w nlm xílm k
hymrltk; dytl, yi ypygql, qlhlm mli typtkiym.

yi ymql ymqkfki, gbkihl maiqaytli bi mlthl ymqtbyihl w bi ámdytl tbahl, uby
dlt qlhlm kubynnlm vknnym my ymqyihík. nyvkiqómy yi day hli ubaolqy w dbml
xkil k nk ymdkhk, w mkigrl my kckekdó hyfkol hyn tbgal, dliaéihlmy k nlm
nkhlm yn níl hy nkm ktxkm, w nk knfkthk hy mb obxyiql, qki qyxfnkihl hy
xayhl glxl knfltlqkhl hli ubaolqy. hy dbiql yi dbiql afk gtygayihl yn
tbahl, w, nnycáihlmy gytgk k nlm hlm qyxytlmlm; k nl xyilm, kn bil, uby kn
lqtl, wk my mkfy mb vknyiqík.

ym, dbym, yn gkml uby nnyvkfki bilm rlxftym k vyihyt k bik pytak xám hy
myamgayiqlm dbytglm, gli nlm gbknym gkxaikfki k kubynnkm rltkm, w ytk qkiql
yn tbahl uby nnyvkfki w yn ctbñat w yn fbpkt, uby yimlthygaytli nlm líhlm
hy hli ubaolqy w hy mkigrl, uby il khvatqaytli nl uby myt dlhík. nnycó hy
qtldyn nk ymqyihahk w ctbñahltk daktk, w, mai qyiyt tymdyql k nk kbqltahkh
hy hli ubaolqy, ia k nk hy mkigrl, dkmktli dlt gaxk hy nlm hlm, hymrkgayihl
nkm qtaigrykm hy mkigrl, w hyttafkihl il mónl k hli ubaolqy, mail nnyvkihl
dlt kñkhahbtk k tlgaikiqy. yn qtldyn, yn ctbñat, nk dtymqyek gli uby
nnycktli nlm kiaxknym aixbihlm, dbml yi glipbmaói w dlt yn mbynl k nk
knfkthk, k nkm ktxkm, kn tbgal, k tlgaikiqy, k mkigrl w k hli ubaolqy.

nyvkiqómy mkigrl glxl xyolt dbhl, w dahaó k mb kxl nk ymdkhk, hagaéihlny
uby ubytík xkqkt xyhak hlgyik hy kubynnlm myñltym w hymglxyhahlm dbytglm,
uby wk rkfík glilgahl uby nl ytki. hli ubaolqy ny haol:

-héoknlm ymqkt, kxacl, uby ymqk kptyiqk ym dyik hy xa dygkhl, w obmql
gkmqacl hyn gaynl ym uby k bi gkfknnytl kihkiqy vyigahl ny glxki khavkm, w
ny daubyi kvamdkm w ny rlnnyi dbytglm.

-qkxfaéi hyfy hy myt gkmqacl hyn gaynl -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby k nlm
ymgbhytlm hy nlm gkfknnytlm vyigahlm nlm dbigyi xlmgkm, nlm glxki dalolm w
nym yxfamqk nk rkxfty. ma nlm ymgbhytlm pbétkxlm raolm hy nlm gkfknnytlm k
ubayi mytvaxlm, l dktayiqym mbwlm xbw gytgkilm, il pbytk xbgrl uby ilm
kngkiektk nk dyik hy mbm gbndkm rkmqk nk gbktqk cyiytkgaói; dytl, ¿ubé
qayiyi uby vyt nlm dkiekm gli nlm ubaolqym? krltk fayi: qltiéxlilm k
kglxlhkt w hbtxkxlm nl dlgl uby ubyhk hy nk ilgry, w kxkiygytá halm w
xyhtktyxlm.

-hbytxy qú, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby ikgamqy dktk hltxat; uby
wl, uby ikgí dktk vynkt, yi yn qayxdl uby pknqk hy kubí kn hík, hkté tayihk
k xam dyimkxayiqlm, w nlm hymplckté yi bi xkhtacknyqy, uby, mai uby qú nl
mydkm, kilgry glxdbmy yi nk xyxltak.

-k xí xy dktygy -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby nlm dyimkxayiqlm uby hki nbckt k
rkgyt gldnkm il hyfyi hy myt xbgrlm. vbymk xytgyh gldnyy gbkiql ubamayty,
uby wl hltxaté gbkiql dbhayty.

w nbycl, qlxkihl yi yn mbynl gbkiql ubaml, my kgbttbgó w hbtxaó k mbyñl
mbynql, mai uby pakiekm, ia hybhkm, ia hlnlt kncbil my nl ymqltfkmy. hli
ubaolqy, kttaxkhl k bi qtligl hy bik rkwk l hy bi kngltiluby -uby gahy
rkxyqy fyiyicyna il hamqaicby yn átfln uby ytk-, kn mli hy mbm xymxlm
mbmdatlm, gkiqó hy ymqk mbytqy:

   -kxlt, gbkihl wl dayiml
   yi yn xkn uby xy hkm, qyttafny w pbytqy,
   vlw glttayihl k nk xbytqy,
   dyimkihl kmí kgkfkt xa xkn aixyiml;
   xkm, yi nnyckihl kn dkml
   uby ym dbytql yi ymqy xkt hy xa qltxyiql,
   qkiqk knyctík mayiql,
   uby nk vahk my ympbytek w il ny dkml.
   kmí yn vavat xy xkqk,
   uby nk xbytqy xy qltik k hkt nk vahk.
   ¡lr glihagaói il líhk,
   nk uby glixacl xbytqy w vahk qtkqk!

gkhk vytml hémqlm kglxdkñkfk gli xbgrlm mbmdatlm w il dlgkm náctaxkm, fayi
glxl kubén gbwl gltkeói qyiík qtkmdkmkhl gli yn hlnlt hyn vyigaxayiql w gli
nk kbmyigak hy hbngaiyk.

nnycómy yi ymql yn hík, hal yn mln gli mbm tkwlm yi nlm lolm k mkigrl,
hymdytqó w ymdytyeómy, mkgbhaéihlmy w ymqatáihlmy nlm dytyelmlm xayxftlm;
xató yn hymqtlel uby rkfíki rygrl nlm dbytglm yi mb tydlmqytík, w xknhaol
nk daktk w kbi xám khynkiqy. paiknxyiqy, vlnvaytli nlm hlm k mb glxyiekhl
gkxail, w kn hygnaikt hy nk qkthy vaytli uby rkgak ynnlm vyiíki rkmqk haye
rlxftym hy k gkfknnl w gbkqtl l gaigl hy k day. mlftymknqómy yn gltkeói
hy hli ubaolqy w keltómy yn hy mkigrl, dltuby nk cyiqy uby my nym nnyckfk
qtkík nkiekm w khktckm w vyiík xbw k dbiql hy cbyttk. vlnvaómy hli ubaolqy
k mkigrl, w híolny:

-ma wl dbhaytk, mkigrl, yoytgaqkt xam ktxkm, w xa dtlxymk il xy rbfaytk
kqkhl nlm ftkelm, ymqk xáubaik uby mlfty ilmlqtlm vayiy nk qbvaytk wl dlt
qltqkm w dki daiqkhl, dytl dlhtík myt pbymy lqtk glmk hy nk uby qyxyxlm.

nnycktli, yi ymql, nlm hy k gkfknnl, w ktflnkihl nkm nkiekm, mai rkfnkt
dknkftk kncbik tlhyktli k hli ubaolqy w my nkm dbmaytli k nkm ymdknhkm w
dygrlm, kxyikeáihlny hy xbytqy. bil hy nlm hy k day, dbymql bi hyhl yi nk
flgk, yi myñkn hy uby gknnkmy, kmaó hyn ptyil hy tlgaikiqy w ny mkgó hyn
gkxail; w nlm hyxám hy k day, kiqyglcayihl k mkigrl w kn tbgal, cbkthkihl
qlhlm xktkvannlml manyigal, macbaytli nlm dkmlm hyn uby nnyvkfk k hli
ubaolqy, yn gbkn hlm l qtym vygym ubaml dtycbiqkt khóihy ny nnyvkfki l ubé
ubytíki; dytl, kdyikm glxyiekfk k xlvyt nlm nkfalm, gbkihl my nlm afki k
gyttkt gli nlm rayttlm hy nkm nkiekm; w k mkigrl ny kgliqygík nl xamxl,
dltuby, kdyikm hkfk xbymqtkm hy rkfnkt, gbkihl bil hy nlm hy k day, gli bi
kcbaoói, ny dbiekfk, w kn tbgal ia xám ia xyilm glxl ma rkfnkt ubamaytk.
gyttó nk ilgry, kdtymbtktli yn dkml, gtygaó yi nlm hlm dtymlm yn xayhl, w
xám gbkihl lwytli uby hy gbkihl yi gbkihl nym hygíki:

-¡gkxaikh, qtlcnlhaqkm!

-¡gknnkh, fátfktlm!

-¡dkckh, kiqtldópkclm!

-¡il lm ubyoéam, mgaqkm, ia kftáam nlm lolm, dlnapyxlm xkqkhltym, nyliym
gktiagytlm!

w lqtlm ilxftym myxyokiqym k émqlm, gli uby kqltxyiqkfki nlm líhlm hy nlm
xamytkfnym kxl w xlel. mkigrl afk hagayihl yiqty mí:

-¿ilmlqtlm qltqlnaqkm? ¿ilmlqtlm fktfytlm ia ymqtldkolm? ¿ilmlqtlm
dyttaqkm, k ubayi hagyi gaqk, gaqk? il xy gliqyiqki ikhk ymqlm ilxftym: k
xkn vayiql vk ymqk dktvk; qlhl yn xkn ilm vayiy obiql, glxl kn dyttl nlm
dknlm, w ¡lokná dktkmy yi ynnlm nl uby kxyikek ymqk kvyiqbtk qki
hymvyiqbtkhk!

afk hli ubaolqy yxfynymkhl, mai dlhyt kqaikt gli gbkiqlm hamgbtmlm rkgík
ubé mytíki kubynnlm ilxftym nnyilm hy vaqbdytalm uby nym dliíki, hy nlm
gbknym mkgkfk yi naxdal il ymdytkt iaicúi fayi w qyxyt xbgrl xkn. nnycktli,
yi ymql, bi rltk gkma hy nk ilgry, k bi gkmqannl, uby fayi glilgaó hli
ubaolqy uby ytk yn hyn hbuby, hlihy rkfík dlgl uby rkfíki ymqkhl.

-¡ványxy halm! -haol, kmí glxl glilgaó nk ymqkigak- w ¿ubé mytá ymql? mí
uby yi ymqk gkmk qlhl ym gltqymík w fbyi glxyhaxayiql, dytl dktk nlm
vyigahlm yn fayi my vbynvy yi xkn w yn xkn yi dylt.

yiqtktli kn dkqal dtaigadkn hyn gkmqannl, w vaétliny khytyekhl w dbymql hy
xkiytk uby nym kgtygyiqó nk khxatkgaói w nym hlfnó yn xayhl, glxl my vytá
yi yn macbayiqy gkdíqbnl.





gkdíqbnl nzaz. hyn xám tktl w xám ibyvl mbgyml uby yi qlhl yn hamgbtml
hymqk ctkihy ramqltak kvail k hli ubaolqy


kdyátlimy nlm hy k gkfknnl, w, obiql gli nlm hy k day, qlxkihl yi dyml w
kttyfkqkhkxyiqy k mkigrl w k hli ubaolqy, nlm yiqtktli yi yn dkqal,
kntyhyhlt hyn gbkn kthíki gkma gayi rkgrkm, dbymqkm yi mbm fnkihliym, w,
dlt nlm glttyhltym hyn dkqal, xám hy ubaiayiqkm nbxaiktakm; hy xlhl uby, k
dymkt hy nk ilgry, uby my xlmqtkfk kncl ymgbtk, il my ygrkfk hy vyt nk
pknqk hyn hík. yi xyhal hyn dkqal my nyvkiqkfk bi qúxbnl glxl hlm vktkm hyn
mbynl, gbfaytql qlhl gli bi ctkihímaxl hlmyn hy qytgaldynl iyctl, kntyhyhlt
hyn gbkn, dlt mbm ctkhkm, kthíki vynkm hy gytk fnkigk mlfty xám hy gayi
gkihynytlm hy dnkqk; yigaxk hyn gbkn qúxbnl my xlmqtkfk bi gbytdl xbytql hy
bik qki rytxlmk hligynnk, uby rkgík dktygyt gli mb rytxlmbtk rytxlmk k nk
xamxk xbytqy. qyiík nk gkfyek mlfty bik knxlrkhk hy ftlgkhl, gltlikhk gli
bik cbatiknhk hy havytmkm w lhltípytkm pnltym qyoahk, nkm xkilm gtbekhkm
mlfty yn dygrl, w, yiqty ynnkm, bi tkxl hy kxktannk w vyigyhltk dknxk.

k bi nkhl hyn dkqal ymqkfk dbymql bi qykqtl, w yi hlm mannkm myiqkhlm hlm
dytmlikoym, uby, dlt qyiyt gltlikm yi nk gkfyek w gydqtlm yi nkm xkilm,
hkfki myñknym hy myt kncbilm tywym, wk vythkhytlm l wk paicahlm. kn nkhl
hymqy qykqtl, khlihy my mbfík dlt kncbikm ctkhkm, ymqkfki lqtkm hlm mannkm,
mlfty nkm gbknym nlm uby qtboytli nlm dtymlm myiqktli k hli ubaolqy w k
mkigrl, qlhl ymql gknnkihl w háihlnym k yiqyihyt gli myñknym k nlm hlm uby
kmaxamxl gknnkmyi; dytl, mai uby my nl myñknktki, gknnktli ynnlm, dltuby nk
khxatkgaói hy nl uby ymqkfki xatkihl nym qyiík kqkhkm nkm nyicbkm.

mbfaytli, yi ymql, kn qykqtl, gli xbgrl kglxdkñkxayiql, hlm dtaigadknym
dytmlikoym, uby nbycl pbytli glilgahlm hy hli ubaolqy myt yn hbuby w nk
hbubymk, mbm rbémdyhym, nlm gbknym my myiqktli yi hlm taubímaxkm mannkm,
obiql k nlm hlm uby dktygíki tywym. ¿ubaéi il my rkfík hy khxatkt gli ymql,
kñkhaéihlmy k ynnl rkfyt glilgahl hli ubaolqy uby yn gbytdl xbytql uby
ymqkfk mlfty yn qúxbnl ytk yn hy nk rytxlmk knqamahltk?

kn mbfat yn hbuby w nk hbubymk yi yn qykqtl, my nyvkiqktli hli ubaolqy w
mkigrl w nym ragaytli bik dtlpbihk rbxannkgaói, w nlm hbubym ragaytli nl
xymxl, aignaikihl kncúi qkiql nkm gkfyekm.

mknaó, yi ymql, hy qtkvém bi xaiamqtl, w, nnycáihlmy k mkigrl, ny ygró bik
tldk hy flgkgí iyctl yigaxk, qlhk daiqkhk gli nnkxkm hy pbycl, w,
ubaqáihlny nk gkdytbek, ny dbml yi nk gkfyek bik gltlek, kn xlhl hy nkm uby
mkgki nlm dyiaqyigakhlm dlt yn mkiql lpagal; w híolny kn líhl uby il
hymglmaymy nlm nkfalm, dltuby ny ygrktíki bik xlthkek, l ny ubaqktíki nk
vahk. xatáfkmy mkigrl hy kttafk kfkol, vyíkmy kthayihl yi nnkxkm, dytl glxl
il ny ubyxkfki, il nkm ymqaxkfk yi hlm kthaqym. ubaqómy nk gltlek, valnk
daiqkhk hy hakfnlm, vlnvaómynk k dliyt, hagayihl yiqty mí:

-kúi fayi, uby ia ynnkm xy kftkmki ia ynnlm xy nnyvki.

xatáfkny qkxfaéi hli ubaolqy, w, kbiuby yn qyxlt ny qyiík mbmdyimlm nlm
myiqahlm, il hyoó hy tyítmy hy vyt nk pacbtk hy mkigrl. glxyieó, yi ymql, k
mknat, kn dktygyt, hyfkol hyn qúxbnl bi mli mbxaml w kctkhkfny hy pnkbqkm,
uby, dlt il myt axdyhahl hy kncbik rbxkik vle, dltuby yi kubyn maqal yn
xymxl manyigal cbkthkfk manyigal k mí xamxl, my xlmqtkfk fnkihl w kxltlml.
nbycl rael hy mí axdtlvamk xbymqtk, obiql k nk knxlrkhk hyn, kn dktygyt,
gkhávyt, bi rytxlml xkigyfl vymqahl k nl tlxkil, uby, kn mli hy bik ktdk,
uby én xamxl qlgkfk, gkiqó gli mbkvímaxk w gnktk vle ymqkm hlm ymqkigakm:

   -yi qkiql uby yi mí vbynvy knqamahltk,
   xbytqk dlt nk gtbynhkh hy hli ubaolqy,
   w yi qkiql uby yi nk gltqy yigkiqkhltk
   my vamqaytyi nkm hkxkm hy daglqy,
   w yi qkiql uby k mbm hbyñkm xa myñltk
   vamqayty hy fkwyqk w hy kikmglqy,
   gkiqkté mb fynnyek w mb hymctkgak,
   gli xyolt dnygqtl uby yn gkiqlt hy qtkgak.
   w kbi il my xy pacbtk uby xy qlgk
   kubymqy lpagal mlnkxyiqy yi vahk;
   xkm, gli nk nyicbk xbytqk w ptík yi nk flgk,
   dayiml xlvyt nk vle k qa hyfahk.
   nafty xa knxk hy mb ymqtygrk tlgk,
   dlt yn ymqacal nkcl glihbgahk,
   gynyftáihlqy atá, w kubyn mliahl
   rktá dktkt nkm kcbkm hyn lnvahl.

-il xám -haol k ymqk mkeói bil hy nlm hlm uby dktygíki tywym-: il xám,
gkiqlt havail; uby mytík dtlgyhyt yi aipaiaql tydtymyiqktilm krltk nk
xbytqy w nkm ctkgakm hy nk mai dkt knqamahltk, il xbytqk, glxl yn xbihl
aciltkiqy dayimk, mail vavk yi nkm nyicbkm hy nk pkxk, w yi nk dyik uby
dktk vlnvytnk k nk dythahk nbe rk hy dkmkt mkigrl dkiek, uby ymqá dtymyiqy;
w kmí, ¡lr qú, tkhkxkiql, uby glixacl obeckm yi nkm gkvytikm nóftyckm hy
naqy!, dbym mkfym qlhl kubynnl uby yi nlm aiymgtbqkfnym rkhlm ymqá
hyqytxaikhl kgytgk hy vlnvyt yi mí ymqk hligynnk, hanl w hygnátknl nbycl,
dltuby il my ilm hankqy yn fayi uby gli mb ibyvk vbynqk ymdytkxlm.

kdyikm rbfl hagrl ymql xailm, obye w glxdkñytl hy tkhkxkiql, gbkihl,
nyvkiqáihlmy yi day tkhkxkiql, haol:

-¡yk, xaiamqtlm hy ymqk gkmk, knqlm w fkolm, ctkihym w graglm, kgbhah bilm
qtkm lqtlm w mynnkh yn tlmqtl hy mkigrl gli vyaiqy w gbkqtl xkxlikm, w hlgy
dynnaeglm w myam knpanytkelm yi ftkelm w nlxlm, uby yi ymqk gytyxliak
glimamqy nk mknbh hy knqamahltk!

lwyihl nl gbkn mkigrl dkiek, tlxdaó yn manyigal, w haol:

-¡vlql k qkn, kmí xy hyoy wl mynnkt yn tlmqtl ia xkilmyktxy nk gktk glxl
vlnvytxy xltl! ¡gbytdl hy xí! ¿ubé qayiy uby vyt xkilmyktxy yn tlmqtl gli
nk tymbttygaói hymqk hligynnk? tyclmqómy nk vayok k nlm fnyhlm. yigkiqki k
hbngaiyk, w keóqkixy dktk uby my hymyigkiqy; xbétymy knqamahltk hy xknym
uby halm ubaml hktny, w rkink hy tymbgaqkt rkgytxy k xí vyaiqy w gbkqtl
xkxlikm, w kgtafktxy yn gbytdl k knpanytkelm w kgkthyiknktxy nlm ftkelm k
dynnaeglm. ¡ymkm fbtnkm, k bi gbñkhl, uby wl mlw dyttl vayol, w il rkw
glixacl qbm, qbm!

-¡xltatám! -haol yi knqk vle tkhkxkiql-. kfnáihkqy, qacty; rbxínnkqy,
iyxftlq mlfytfal, w mbpty w gknnk, dbym il qy dahyi axdlmafnym. w il qy
xyqkm yi kvytacbkt nkm hapagbnqkhym hymqy iyclgal: xkxlikhl rkm hy myt,
kgtyfannkhl qy rkm hy vyt, dynnaegkhl rkm hy cyxat. ¡yk, hacl, xaiamqtlm,
gbxdnah xa xkihkxayiql; ma il, dlt nk py hy rlxfty hy fayi, uby rkféam hy
vyt dktk nl uby ikgamqym!

dktygaytli, yi ymql, uby dlt yn dkqal vyiíki, rkmqk myam hbyñkm yi
dtlgymaói, bik qtkm lqtk, nkm gbkqtl gli kiqlolm, w qlhkm nyvkiqkhkm nkm
xkilm hytygrkm yi knql, gli gbkqtl hyhlm hy xbñygkm hy pbytk, dktk rkgyt
nkm xkilm xám nktckm, glxl krltk my bmk. il nkm rbfl vamql mkigrl, gbkihl,
ftkxkihl glxl bi qltl, haol:

-fayi dlhté wl hyoktxy xkilmykt hy qlhl yn xbihl, dytl glimyiqat uby xy
qlubyi hbyñkm, ¡yml il! ckqéyixy yn tlmqtl, glxl ragaytli k xa kxl yi ymqy
xymxl gkmqannl; qtkmdámyixy yn gbytdl gli dbiqkm hy hkckm fbahkm;
kqyiágyixy nlm ftkelm gli qyikekm hy pbycl, uby wl nl nnyvkté yi dkgayigak,
l mytvaté k ymqlm myñltym; dytl uby xy qlubyi hbyñkm il nl glimyiqaté, ma
xy nnyvkmy yn hakfnl.

tlxdaó qkxfaéi yn manyigal hli ubaolqy, hagayihl k mkigrl:

-qyi dkgayigak, raol, w hk cbmql k ymqlm myñltym, w xbgrkm ctkgakm kn gaynl
dlt rkfyt dbymql qkn vatqbh yi qb dytmlik, uby gli yn xktqatal hynnk
hymyigkiqym nlm yigkiqkhlm w tymbgaqym nlm xbytqlm.

wk ymqkfki nkm hbyñkm gytgk hy mkigrl, gbkihl én, xám fnkihl w xám
dytmbkhahl, dliaéihlmy fayi yi nk mannk, hal tlmqtl w fktfk k nk dtaxytk,
nk gbkn nk rael bik xkxlik xbw fayi mynnkhk, w nbycl bik ctki tyvytyigak.

-¡xyilm gltqymík; xyilm xbhkm, myñltk hbyñk -haol mkigrl-; uby dlt halm uby
qtkéam nkm xkilm lnayihl k vaikctannl!

paiknxyiqy, qlhkm nkm hbyñkm ny mynnktli, w lqtk xbgrk cyiqy hy gkmk ny
dynnaegktli; dytl nl uby én il dbhl mbptat pby yn dbiekxayiql hy nlm
knpanytym; w kmí, my nyvkiqó hy nk mannk, kn dktygyt xlríil, w, kmayihl hy
bik rkgrk yigyihahk uby obiql k én ymqkfk, hal qtkm nkm hbyñkm, w qtkm
qlhlm mb vythbclm, hagayihl:

-¡kpbytk, xaiamqtlm aipytiknym, uby il mlw wl hy ftligy, dktk il myiqat qki
yzqtklthaiktalm xktqatalm!

yi ymql, knqamahltk, uby hyfík hy ymqkt gkimkhk dlt rkfyt ymqkhl qkiql
qayxdl mbdaik, my vlnvaó hy bi nkhl; vamql nl gbkn dlt nlm gatgbimqkiqym,
gkma qlhlm k bik vle haoytli:

-¡vavk ym knqamahltk! ¡knqamahltk vavy!

xkihó tkhkxkiql k mkigrl uby hydbmaymy nk atk, dbym wk my rkfík kngkiekhl
yn aiqyiql uby my dtlgbtkfk.

kmí glxl hli ubaolqy val tyfbnnat k knqamahltk, my pby k dliyt hy tlhannkm
hynkiqy hy mkigrl, hagaéihlny:

-kcltk ym qayxdl, raol hy xam yiqtkñkm, il uby ymgbhytl xíl, uby qy hym
kncbilm hy nlm kelqym uby ymqám lfnackhl k hkt dlt yn hymyigkiql hy
hbngaiyk. krltk, hacl, uby ym yn qayxdl hlihy qayiym mkelikhk nk vatqbh, w
gli ypagkgak hy lftkt yn fayi uby hy qa my ymdytk.

k nl uby tymdlihaó mkigrl:

-ymql xy dktygy ktckhl mlfty ktckhl, w il xayn mlfty rlobynkm. fbyil mytík
uby qtkm dynnaeglm, xkxlikm w knpanytkelm vaiaymyi krltk nlm kelqym. il
qayiyi xám uby rkgyt mail qlxkt bik ctki dayhtk, w kqátxynk kn gbynnl, w
hkt glixacl yi bi dlel, hy nl uby k xí il dymktík xbgrl, ma ym uby dktk
gbtkt nlm xknym koyilm qyicl wl hy myt nk vkgk hy nk flhk. héoyixy; ma il,
dlt halm uby nl kttloy w nl ygry qlhl k qtygy, kbiuby il my vyihk.

wk yi ymql, my rkfík myiqkhl yi yn qúxbnl knqamahltk, w kn xamxl aimqkiqy
mliktli nkm grataxíkm, k ubayi kglxdkñktli nkm pnkbqkm w nkm vlgym hy
qlhlm, uby kgnkxkfki:

-¡vavk knqamahltk! ¡knqamahltk vavk!

nyvkiqátlimy nlm hbubym w nlm tywym xailm w tkhkxkiql, w qlhlm obiqlm, gli
hli ubaolqy w mkigrl, pbytli k tygyfat k knqamahltk w k fkoktnk hyn qúxbnl;
nk gbkn, rkgayihl hy nk hymxkwkhk, my aignaió k nlm hbubym w k nlm tywym,
w, xatkihl hy qtkvém k hli ubaolqy, ny haol:

-halm qy nl dythliy, hymkxltkhl gkfknnytl, dbym dlt qb gtbynhkh ry ymqkhl
yi yn lqtl xbihl, k xa dktygyt, xám hy xan kñlm; w k qa, ¡lr yn xám
glxdkmavl ymgbhytl uby gliqayiy yn ltfy!, qy kctkhyegl nk vahk uby dlmyl.
hamdói hymhy rlw xám, kxacl mkigrl, hy myam gkxamkm xíkm uby qy xkihl dktk
uby rkckm lqtkm myam dktk qa; w, ma il mli qlhkm mkikm, k nl xyilm mli
qlhkm naxdakm.

fymóny dlt ynnl nkm xkilm mkigrl, gli nk gltlek yi nk xkil w nkm tlhannkm
yi yn mbynl. xkihó yn hbuby uby my nk ubaqkmyi, w ny vlnvaymyi mb gkdytbek,
w ny dbmaymyi yn mkwl, w ny ubaqkmyi nk tldk hy nkm nnkxkm. mbdnagó mkigrl
kn hbuby uby ny hyokmyi nk tldk w xaqtk, uby nkm ubytík nnyvkt k mb qayttk,
dlt myñkn w xyxltak hy kubyn ibigk vamql mbgyml. nk hbubymk tymdlihaó uby
mí hyoktíki, uby wk mkfík én gbái ctkihy kxack mbwk ytk. xkihó yn hbuby
hymdyokt yn dkqal, w uby qlhlm my tyglcaymyi k mbm ymqkigakm, w uby k hli
ubaolqy w k mkigrl nlm nnyvkmyi k nkm uby ynnlm wk my mkfíki.





gkdíqbnl nzz. uby macby kn hy mymyiqk w ibyvy, w qtkqk hy glmkm il
ymgbmkhkm dktk nk gnktahkh hymqk ramqltak


hbtxaó mkigrl kubynnk ilgry yi bik gkttalnk, yi yn xymxl kdlmyiql hy hli
ubaolqy, glmk uby én ubamaytk ymgbmktnk, ma dbhaytk, dltuby fayi mkfík uby
mb kxl il ny rkfík hy hyokt hltxat k dtycbiqkm w k tymdbymqkm, w il my
rknnkfk yi hamdlmagaói hy rkfnkt xbgrl, dltuby nlm hlnltym hy nlm xktqatalm
dkmkhlm nlm qyiík dtymyiqym, w il ny hyokfki nafty nk nyicbk, w vaiaétkny
xám k gbyiql hltxat yi bik grlek mlnl, uby il yi kubynnk tagk ymqkigak
kglxdkñkhl. mknaóny mb qyxlt qki vythkhytl w mb mlmdygrk qki gaytqk, uby,
kdyikm rbfl yiqtkhl mb myñlt yi yn nygrl, gbkihl haol:

-¿ubé qy dktygy, mkigrl, hyn mbgyml hymqk ilgry? ctkihy w dlhytlmk ym nk
pbytek hyn hymhéi hymkxltkhl, glxl dlt qbm xamxlm lolm rkm vamql xbytqk k
knqamahltk, il gli lqtkm mkyqkm, ia gli lqtk ymdkhk, ia gli lqtl
aimqtbxyiql fénagl, ia gli vyiyilm xltqípytlm, mail gli nk glimahytkgaói
hyn taclt w yn hymhéi gli uby wl mayxdty nk ry qtkqkhl.

-xbtaétkmy ynnk yi rltk fbyik gbkiql ubamaytk w glxl ubamaytk -tymdlihaó
mkigrl-, w hyoátkxy k xí yi xa gkmk, dbym ia wl nk yikxlté ia nk hymhyñé yi
xa vahk. wl il mé ia dbyhl dyimkt góxl myk uby nk mknbh hy knqamahltk,
hligynnk xám kiqlokhaek uby hamgtyqk, qyick uby vyt, glxl lqtk vye ry
hagrl, gli nlm xktqatalm hy mkigrl dkiek. kcltk mí uby vyicl k glilgyt
gnktk w hamqaiqkxyiqy uby rkw yigkiqkhltym w yigkiqlm yi yn xbihl, hy ubayi
halm xy nafty, dbym wl il xy mé naftkt; gli qlhl ymql, mbdnagl k vbymqtk
xytgyh xy hyoy hltxat w il xy dtycbiqy xám, ma il ubayty uby xy kttloy dlt
bik vyiqkik kfkol.

-hbytxy, mkigrl kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, ma ym uby qy hki nbckt nlm
knpanytkelm w dynnaeglm tygyfahlm, w nkm xkxlikm rygrkm.

-iaicúi hlnlt -tydnagó mkigrl- nnycó k nk kptyiqk hy nkm xkxlikm, il dlt
lqtk glmk uby dlt rkfétxynkm rygrl hbyñk, uby glipbihahkm myki; w qltil k
mbdnagkt k vbymk xytgyh xy hyoy hltxat, dltuby yn mbyñl ym knaval hy nkm
xamytakm hy nlm uby nkm qayiyi hymdaytqkm.

myk kmí -haol hli ubaolqy-, w halm qy kglxdkñy.

hbtxaétlimy nlm hlm, w yi ymqy qayxdl ubaml ymgtafat w hkt gbyiqk gahy
rkxyqy, kbqlt hymqk ctkihy ramqltak, ubé nym xlvaó k nlm hbubym k nyvkiqkt
yn yhapagal hy nk xáubaik typytahk. w hagy uby, il rkfaéihlmyny lnvahkhl kn
fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl gbkihl yn gkfknnytl hy nlm ymdyolm pby vyigahl w
hyttafkhl dlt hli ubaolqy, gbwl vyigaxayiql w gkíhk flttó w hymrael qlhlm
mbm hymacialm, ubaml vlnvyt k dtlfkt nk xkil, ymdytkihl xyolt mbgyml uby yn
dkmkhl; w kmí, aipltxáihlmy hyn dkoy uby nnyvó nk gktqk w dtymyiqy k qytymk
dkiek, xboyt hy mkigrl, khóihy hli ubaolqy ubyhkfk, fbmgó ibyvkm ktxkm w
gkfknnl, w dbml yi yn ymgbhl nk fnkigk nbik, nnyváihlnl qlhl mlfty bi
xkgrl, k ubayi cbakfk bi nkftkhlt, w il qlxé gygakn, mb kiqacbl ymgbhytl,
dltuby il pbymy glilgahl hy mkigrl ia hy hli ubaolqy.

nnycó, dbym, kn gkmqannl hyn hbuby, uby ny aipltxó yn gkxail w hyttlqk uby
hli ubaolqy nnyvkfk, gli aiqyiql hy rknnktmy yi nkm obmqkm hy ektkclek.
híolny kmaxamxl nkm fbtnkm uby ny rkfík rygrl gli nk qtkek hyn hymyigkiql
hy hbngaiyk, uby rkfík hy myt k glmqk hy nkm dlmkhytkm hy mkigrl. yi pai,
hal gbyiqk hy nk fbtnk uby mkigrl rkfík rygrl k mb kxl, háihlny k yiqyihyt
uby hbngaiyk ymqkfk yigkiqkhk w qtkimpltxkhk yi nkftkhltk, w góxl nk
hbubymk mb xboyt rkfík hkhl k yiqyihyt k mkigrl uby én ytk yn uby my
yickñkfk, dltuby vythkhytkxyiqy ymqkfk yigkiqkhk hbngaiyk; hy uby il dlgl
my taó w khxató yn fkgrannyt, glimahytkihl nk kcbhyek w maxdnagahkh hy
mkigrl, glxl hyn ymqtyxl hy nk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy.

dahaóny yn hbuby uby ma ny rknnkmy, w ny vyigaymy l il, my vlnvaymy dlt
knní k hktny gbyiqk hyn mbgyml. ríelnl kmí yn fkgrannyt; dktqaómy yi mb
fbmgk, il ny rknnó yi ektkclek, dkmó khynkiqy w mbgyhaóny nl uby ubyhk
typytahl.

vlnvaómy dlt yn gkmqannl hyn hbuby w gliqómynl qlhl, gli nkm glihagaliym hy
nk fkqknnk, w uby wk hli ubaolqy vlnvík k gbxdnat, glxl fbyi gkfknnytl
kihkiqy, nk dknkftk hy tyqatktmy bi kñl yi mb knhyk, yi yn gbkn qayxdl
dlhík myt, haol yn fkgrannyt, uby mkikmy hy mb nlgbtk; uby émqk ytk nk
aiqyigaói uby ny rkfík xlvahl k rkgyt kubynnkm qtkimpltxkgaliym, dlt myt
glmk hy námqaxk uby bi rahkncl qki fayi yiqyihahl glxl hli ubaolqy pbymy
nlgl. gli ymql, my hymdahaó hyn hbuby, w my vlnvaó k mb nbckt, ymdytkihl yi
én k hli ubaolqy, uby qtkm én vyiík.

hy kubí qlxó lgkmaói yn hbuby hy rkgytny kubynnk fbtnk: qkiql ytk nl uby
cbmqkfk hy nkm glmkm hy mkigrl w hy hli ubaolqy; w rkgayihl qlxkt nlm
gkxailm gytgk w nyolm hyn gkmqannl dlt qlhkm nkm dktqym uby axkcaió uby
dlhtík vlnvyt hli ubaolqy, gli xbgrlm gtakhlm mbwlm hy k day w hy k
gkfknnl, dktk uby dlt pbytek l hy ctkhl ny qtboymyi kn gkmqannl, ma ny
rknnkmyi. rknnátliny, haytli kvaml kn hbuby, yn gbkn, wk dtyvyiahl hy qlhl
nl uby rkfík hy rkgyt, kmí glxl qbvl ilqagak hy mb nnyckhk, xkihó yigyihyt
nkm rkgrkm w nkm nbxaiktakm hyn dkqal w dliyt k knqamahltk mlfty yn qúxbnl,
gli qlhlm nlm kdktkqlm uby my rki gliqkhl, qki kn vavl, w qki fayi rygrlm,
uby hy nk vythkh k ynnlm rkfík fayi dlgk hapytyigak.

w hagy xám gahy rkxyqy: uby qayiy dktk mí myt qki nlglm nlm fbtnkhltym glxl
nlm fbtnkhlm, w uby il ymqkfki nlm hbubym hlm hyhlm hy dktygyt qliqlm, dbym
qkiql kríigl dliíki yi fbtnktmy hy hlm qliqlm.

nlm gbknym, yn bil hbtxayihl k mbyñl mbynql, w yn lqtl vynkihl k
dyimkxayiqlm hymkqkhlm, nym qlxó yn hík w nk ckik hy nyvkiqktmy; uby nkm
lgalmkm dnbxkm, ia vyigahl ia vyigyhlt, okxám haytli cbmql k hli ubaolqy.

knqamahltk -yi nk ldaiaói hy hli ubaolqy, vbynqk hy xbytqy k vahk-,
macbayihl yn rbxlt hy mbm myñltym, gltlikhk gli nk xamxk cbatiknhk uby yi
yn qúxbnl qyiík, w vymqahk bik qbiagynk hy qkpyqái fnkigl, myxftkhk hy
pnltym hy ltl, w mbynqlm nlm gkfynnlm dlt nkm ymdknhkm, kttaxkhk k bi
fágbnl hy iyctl w paiímaxl éfkil, yiqtó yi yn kdlmyiql hy hli ubaolqy, gli
gbwk dtymyigak qbtfkhl w glipbml, my yiglcaó w gbftaó gkma qlhl gli nkm
máfkikm w glngrkm hy nk gkxk, xbhk nk nyicbk, mai uby kgytqkmy k rkgytny
gltqymík iaicbik. myiqómy knqamahltk yi bik mannk, obiql k mb gkfygytk, w,
hymdbém hy rkfyt hkhl bi ctki mbmdatl, gli vle qaytik w hyfanaqkhk ny haol:

-gbkihl nkm xboytym dtaigadknym w nkm tygkqkhkm hligynnkm kqtldynnki dlt nk
rlitk, w hki nagyigak k nk nyicbk uby tlxdk dlt qlhl aiglivyiayiqy, hkihl
ilqagak yi dúfnagl hy nlm mygtyqlm uby mb gltkeói yigayttk, yi ymqtygrl
qétxail my rknnki. wl, myñlt hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, mlw bik hémqkm,
kdtyqkhk, vyigahk w yikxltkhk; dytl, gli qlhl ymql, mbptahk w rliymqk;
qkiql uby, dlt mytnl qkiql, tyvyiqó xa knxk dlt xa manyigal w dythí nk
vahk. hlm híkm rk uby gli nk glimahytkgaói hyn taclt gli uby xy rkm
qtkqkhl,

¡lr xám hbtl uby xátxln k xam ubyokm,

yxdyhytiahl gkfknnytl!, ry ymqkhl xbytqk, l, k nl xyilm, obeckhk dlt qkn hy
nlm uby xy rki vamql; w ma il pbytk dltuby yn kxlt, glihlnaéihlmy hy xí,
hydlmaqó xa tyxyhal yi nlm xktqatalm hymqy fbyi ymgbhytl, knná xy ubyhktk
yi yn lqtl xbihl.

-fayi dbhaytk yn kxlt -haol mkigrl- hydlmaqktnlm yi nlm hy xa kmil, uby wl
my nl kctkhygaytk. dytl híckxy, myñltk, kmí yn gaynl nk kglxlhy gli lqtl
xám fnkihl kxkiqy uby xa kxl: ¿ubé ym nl uby val yi yn lqtl xbihl? ¿ubé rkw
yi yn aipaytil? dltuby ubayi xbyty hymymdytkhl, dlt pbytek rk hy qyiyt
kubyn dktkhytl.

-nk vythkh uby lm hack -tymdlihaó knqamahltk-, wl il hyfí hy xltat hyn
qlhl, dbym il yiqté yi yn aipaytil; uby, ma knná yiqtktk, bik dlt bik il
dbhaytk mknat hén, kbiuby ubamaytk. nk vythkh ym uby nnycbé k nk dbytqk,
khlihy ymqkfki obckihl rkmqk bik hlgyik hy hakfnlm k nk dynlqk, qlhlm yi
gknekm w yi obfói, gli vknlikm cbktiygahkm gli dbiqkm hy tkihkm pnkxyigkm,
w gli bikm vbynqkm hy nl xamxl, uby nym mytvíki hy dbñlm, gli gbkqtl hyhlm
hy ftkel hy pbytk, dltuby dktygaymyi nkm xkilm xám nktckm, yi nkm gbknym
qyiíki bikm dknkm hy pbycl; w nl uby xám xy khxató pby uby nym mytvíki, yi
nbckt hy dynlqkm, naftlm, kn dktygyt, nnyilm hy vayiql w hy flttk, glmk
xktkvannlmk w ibyvk; dytl ymql il xy khxató qkiql glxl yn vyt uby, mayihl
ikqbtkn hy nlm obckhltym yn knyctktmy nlm ckikigalmlm w yiqtamqygytmy nlm
uby daythyi, knní yi kubyn obycl qlhlm ctbñíki, qlhlm tyckñkfki w qlhlm my
xknhygíki.

-yml il ym xktkvannk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, dltuby nlm hakfnlm, obycbyi l il
obycbyi, ibigk dbyhyi ymqkt gliqyiqlm, ckiyi l il ckiyi.

-kmí hyfy hy myt -tymdlihaó knqamahltk-; xkm rkw lqtk glmk uby qkxfaéi xy
khxatk, ubaytl hygat xy khxató yiqligym, w pby uby kn dtaxyt vlnyl il
ubyhkfk dynlqk yi day, ia hy dtlvygrl dktk mytvat lqtk vye; w kmí,
xyibhykfki naftlm ibyvlm w vayolm, uby ytk bik xktkvannk. k bil hynnlm,
ibyvl, pnkxkiqy w fayi yigbkhytikhl, ny haytli bi dkdatlqkel uby ny mkgktli
nkm qtadkm w ny ymdktgaytli nkm rlokm. haol bi hakfnl k lqtl: ''xatkh ubé
naftl ym émy''. w yn hakfnl ny tymdlihaó: ''Émqk ym nk mycbihk dktqy hy nk
ramqltak hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, il glxdbymqk dlt gahy rkxyqy, mb
dtaxyt kbqlt, mail dlt bi ktkcliém, uby én hagy myt ikqbtkn hy
qlthymannkm''. ''ubaqáhxyny hy krí -tymdlihaó yn lqtl hakfnl-, w xyqyhny yi
nlm kfamxlm hyn aipaytil: il ny vyki xám xam lolm''. ''¿qki xknl ym?'',
tymdlihaó yn lqtl. ''qki xknl -tydnagó yn dtaxytl-, uby ma hy dtldómaql wl
xamxl xy dbmaytk k rkgytny dylt, il kgytqktk''. dtlmacbaytli mb obycl,
dynlqykihl lqtlm naftlm, w wl, dlt rkfyt líhl ilxftkt k hli ubaolqy, k
ubayi qkiql khkxl w ubaytl, dtlgbté uby my xy ubyhkmy yi nk xyxltak ymqk
vamaói.

-vamaói hyfaó hy myt, mai hbhk -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby il rkw lqtl wl yi
yn xbihl, w wk ymk ramqltak kihk dlt kgá hy xkil yi xkil, dytl il dktk yi
iaicbik, dltuby qlhlm nk hki hyn day. wl il xy ry knqytkhl yi lít uby kihl
glxl gbytdl pkiqámqagl dlt nkm qaiayfnkm hyn kfamxl, ia dlt nk gnktahkh hy
nk qayttk, dltuby il mlw kubyn hy ubayi ymk ramqltak qtkqk. ma ynnk pbyty
fbyik, payn w vythkhytk, qyihtá macnlm hy vahk; dytl ma pbyty xknk, hy mb
dktql k nk mydbnqbtk il mytá xbw nktcl yn gkxail.

afk knqamahltk k dtlmycbat yi ubyoktmy hy hli ubaolqy, gbkihl ny haol hli
ubaolqy:

-xbgrkm vygym lm ry hagrl, myñltk, uby k xí xy dymk hy uby rkwáam glnlgkhl
yi xí vbymqtlm dyimkxayiqlm, dbym hy nlm xílm kiqym dbyhyi myt kctkhygahlm
uby tyxyhakhlm; wl ikgí dktk myt hy hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, w nlm rkhlm, ma
nlm rbfaytk, xy hyhagktli dktk ynnk; w dyimkt uby lqtk kncbik rytxlmbtk rk
hy lgbdkt yn nbckt uby yi xa knxk qayiy ym dyimkt nl axdlmafny. mbpagayiqy
hymyickñl ym émqy dktk uby lm tyqatéam yi nlm níxaqym hy vbymqtk
rliymqahkh, dbym ikhay my dbyhy lfnackt k nl axdlmafny.

lwyihl nl gbkn knqamahltk, xlmqtkihl yiloktmy w knqytktmy, ny haol:

-¡vavy yn myñlt, hli fkgknnkl, knxk hy knxatye, gbymgl hy háqan, xám qytgl
w hbtl uby vannkil tlckhl gbkihl qayiy nk mbwk mlfty yn raql, uby ma
kttyxyql k vlm, uby lm qyicl hy mkgkt nlm lolm! ¿dyimáam dlt vyiqbtk, hli
vyigahl w hli xlnahl k dknlm, uby wl xy ry xbytql dlt vlm? qlhl nl uby
rkféam vamql ymqk ilgry rk mahl paicahl; uby il mlw wl xboyt uby dlt
myxyokiqym gkxynnlm rkfík hy hyokt uby xy hlnaymy bi iyctl hy nk bñk,
gbkiql xám xltatxy.

-yml gtyl wl xbw fayi -haol mkigrl-, uby ymql hyn xltatmy nlm yikxltkhlm ym
glmk hy tamk: fayi nl dbyhyi ynnlm hygat, dytl rkgyt, gtéknl obhkm.

ymqkihl yi ymqkm dnáqagkm, yiqtó yn xúmagl, gkiqlt w dlyqk uby rkfík
gkiqkhl nkm hlm wk typytahkm ymqkigakm, yn gbkn, rkgayihl bik ctki
tyvytyigak k hli ubaolqy, haol:

-vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt gkfknnytl, xy gbyiqy w qyick yi yn iúxytl hy mbm
xkwltym mytvahltym, dltuby rk xbgrlm híkm uby ny mlw xbw kpagalikhl, kmí
dlt mb pkxk glxl dlt mbm rkekñkm.

hli ubaolqy ny tymdlihaó:

-vbymqtk xytgyh xy hack ubaéi ym, dltuby xa gltqymík tymdlihk k mbm
xytygaxayiqlm.

yn xlel tymdlihaó uby ytk yn xúmagl w dkiycítagl hy nk ilgry kiqym.

-dlt gaytql -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby vbymqtk xytgyh qayiy ymqtyxkhk vle,
dytl nl uby gkiqó il xy dktygy uby pby xbw k dtldómaql; dltuby, ¿ubé qayiyi
uby vyt nkm ymqkigakm hy cktgankml gli nk xbytqy hymqk myñltk?

-il my xktkvanny vbymqtk xytgyh hyml -tymdlihaó yn xúmagl-, uby wk yiqty
nlm aiqlimlm dlyqkm hy ibymqtk yhkh my bmk uby gkhk bil ymgtafk glxl
ubamayty, w rbtqy hy ubayi ubamayty, vyick l il vyick k dynl hy mb aiqyiql,
w wk il rkw iygyhkh uby gkiqyi l ymgtafki uby il my kqtafbwk k nagyigak
dléqagk.

tymdlihyt ubamaytk hli ubaolqy, dytl ymqltfátlinl yn hbuby w nk hbubymk,
uby yiqtktli k vytny, yiqty nlm gbknym dkmktli bik nktck w hbngy dnáqagk,
yi nk gbkn haol mkigrl qkiqlm hlikatym w qkiqkm xknagakm, uby hyoktli hy
ibyvl khxatkhlm k nlm hbubym, kmí gli mb maxdnagahkh glxl gli mb kcbhyek.
hli ubaolqy nym mbdnagó ny haymyi nagyigak dktk dktqatmy kubyn xamxl hík,
dbym k nlm vyigahlm gkfknnytlm, glxl én, xám nym glivyiík rkfaqkt bik
ekrúthk uby il tyknym dknkgalm. haétlimynk hy xbw fbyik ckik, w nk hbubymk
ny dtycbiqó ma ubyhkfk yi mb ctkgak knqamahltk. Én ny tymdlihaó:

-myñltk xík, mydk vbymqtk myñltík uby qlhl yn xkn hymqk hligynnk ikgy hy
lgalmahkh, gbwl tyxyhal ym nk lgbdkgaói rliymqk w gliqaibk. ynnk xy rk
hagrl kubí uby my bmki tkihkm yi yn aipaytil; w, dbym ynnk nkm hyfy hy
mkfyt rkgyt, il nkm hyoy hy nk xkil, uby, lgbdkhk yi xyiykt nlm dknannlm,
il my xyiyktái yi mb axkcaikgaói nk axkcyi l axácaiym hy nl uby fayi
ubayty; w émqk ym nk vythkh, émqy xa dktygyt w émqy ym xa glimyol.

-w yn xíl -kñkhaó mkigrl-, dbym il ry vamql yi qlhk xa vahk tkihytk uby dlt
kxlt my rkwk xbytql; uby nkm hligynnkm lgbdkhkm xám dliyi mbm dyimkxayiqlm
yi kgkfkt mbm qktykm uby yi dyimkt yi mbm kxltym. dlt xí nl hacl, dbym,
xayiqtkm ymqlw gkvkihl, il xy kgbythl hy xa límnl; hacl, hy xa qytymk
dkiek, k ubayi ubaytl xám uby k nkm dymqkñkm hy xam lolm.

-vlm hygím xbw fayi, mkigrl -haol nk hbubymk-, w wl rkté uby xa knqamahltk
my lgbdy hy kubí khynkiqy yi rkgyt kncbik nkflt fnkigk, uby nk mkfy rkgyt
dlt ymqtyxl.

-il rkw dktk ubé, myñltk -tymdlihaó knqamahltk-, bmkt hymy tyxyhal, dbym nk
glimahytkgaói hy nkm gtbynhkhym uby glixacl rk bmkhl ymqy xknkihtíi
xlmqtyigl xy ny flttktái hy nk xyxltak mai lqtl ktqapagal kncbil. w, gli
nagyigak hy vbymqtk ctkihyek, xy ubaytl ubaqkt hy kubí, dlt il vyt hynkiqy
hy xam lolm wk il mb qtamqy pacbtk, mail mb pyk w kflxaikfny gkqkhbtk.

-yml xy dktygy -haol yn hbuby- k nl uby mbyny hygatmy:

   dltuby kubyn uby hagy aiobtakm,
   gytgk ymqá hy dythlikt.

rael knqamahltk xbymqtk hy naxdaktmy nkm náctaxkm gli bi dkñbynl, w,
rkgayihl tyvytyigak k mbm myñltym, my mknaó hyn kdlmyiql.

-xáihlqy wl -haol mkigrl-, dlfty hligynnk, xáihlqy, hacl, xknk vyiqbtk,
dbym nkm rkm rkfahl gli bik knxk hy ymdktql w gli bi gltkeói hy yigaik. ¡k
pyy uby ma nkm rbfaytkm glixacl, uby lqtl cknnl qy gkiqktk!

kgkfómy nk dnáqagk, vamqaómy hli ubaolqy, glxaó gli nlm hbubym, w dktqaómy
kubynnk qkthy.





gkdíqbnl nzza. hy nl uby k hli ubaolqy ny mbgyhaó gli mb ymgbhytl mkigrl
wyihl k mb knhyk


afk yn vyigahl w kmyihytykhl hli ubaolqy dyimkqavl khyxám dlt bik dktqy,
w xbw knycty dlt lqtk. gkbmkfk mb qtamqyek yn vyigaxayiql; w nk knyctík, yn
glimahytkt yi nk vatqbh hy mkigrl, glxl nl rkfík xlmqtkhl yi nk tymbttygaói
hy knqamahltk, kbiuby gli kncúi ymgtúdbnl my dytmbkhík k uby nk yikxltkhk
hligynnk pbymy xbytqk hy vytkm. il afk ikhk mkigrl knycty, dltuby ny
yiqtamqygík vyt uby knqamahltk il ny rkfík gbxdnahl nk dknkftk hy hktny nkm
gkxamkm; w, wyihl w vaiayihl yi ymql, haol k mb kxl:

-yi vythkh, myñlt, uby mlw yn xám hymctkgakhl xéhagl uby my hyfy hy rknnkt
yi yn xbihl, yi yn gbkn rkw pímaglm uby, gli xkqkt kn yipytxl uby gbtki,
ubaytyi myt dkckhlm hy mb qtkfkol, uby il ym lqtl mail patxkt bik gyhbnannk
hy kncbikm xyhagaikm, uby il nkm rkgy én, mail yn flqagktal, w gáqknl
gkiqbmkhl; w k xí, uby nk mknbh koyik xy gbymqk clqkm hy mkicty, xkxlikm,
dynnaeglm, knpanytkelm w kelqym, il xy hki bi kthaqy. dbym wl nym vlql k
qkn uby ma xy qtkyi k nkm xkilm lqtl kncúi yipytxl, uby, kiqym uby ny gbty,
xy rki hy biqkt nkm xíkm; uby yn kfkh hy hlihy gkiqk wkiqk, w il ubaytl
gtyyt uby xy rkwk hkhl yn gaynl nk vatqbh uby qyicl dktk uby wl nk
glxbiauby gli lqtlm hy fófanam, fófanam.

-qú qayiym tkeói, mkigrl kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w rknl rygrl xbw
xkn knqamahltk yi il rkfytqy hkhl nkm dtlxyqahkm gkxamkm; w, dbymql uby qb
vatqbh ym ctkqam hkqk, uby il qy rk glmqkhl ymqbhal kncbil, xám uby ymqbhal
ym tygyfat xktqatalm yi qb dytmlik. hy xí qy mé hygat uby ma ubamaytkm dkck
dlt nlm kelqym hyn hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk, wk qy nk rbfaytk hkhl qkn glxl
fbyik; dytl il mé ma vyihtá fayi gli nk gbtk nk dkck, w il ubyttík uby
axdahaymy yn dtyxal k nk xyhagaik. gli qlhl yml, xy dktygy uby il my
dythytá ikhk yi dtlfktnl: xatk, mkigrl, yn uby ubaytym, w keóqkqy nbycl, w
dáckqy hy gliqkhl w hy qb dtldak xkil, dbym qayiym haiytlm xílm.

k gbwlm lptygaxayiqlm kftaó mkigrl nlm lolm w nkm ltyokm hy bi dknxl, w hal
glimyiqaxayiql yi mb gltkeói k kelqktmy hy fbyik ckik; w haol k mb kxl:

-kcltk fayi, myñlt, wl ubaytl hamdliytxy k hkt cbmql k vbymqtk xytgyh yi nl
uby hymyk, gli dtlvygrl xíl; uby yn kxlt hy xam raolm w hy xa xboyt xy rkgy
uby xy xbymqty aiqytymkhl. híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh: ¿gbáiql xy hktá dlt gkhk
kelqy uby xy hayty?

-ma wl qy rbfaytk hy dkckt, mkigrl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, glipltxy nl uby
xytygy nk ctkihyek w gknahkh hymqy tyxyhal, yn qymltl hy vyiygak, nkm xaikm
hyn dlqlmí pbytki dlgl dktk dkcktqy; qlxk qú yn qayiql k nl uby nnyvkm xíl,
w dli yn dtygal k gkhk kelqy.

-ynnlm -tymdlihaó mkigrl- mli qtym xan w qtygayiqlm w qkiqlm; hy ynnlm xy
ry hkhl rkmqk gaigl: ubyhki nlm hyxám; yiqtyi yiqty nlm qkiqlm ymqlm gaigl,
w vyickxlm k nlm qtym xan w qtygayiqlm, uby k gbktqannl gkhk bil, uby il
nnyvkté xyilm ma qlhl yn xbihl xy nl xkihkmy, xliqki qtym xan w qtygayiqlm
gbktqannlm, uby mli nlm qtym xan, xan w ubaiayiqlm xyhalm tyknym, uby rkgyi
myqygayiqlm w gaigbyiqk tyknym; w nlm qtygayiqlm rkgyi gayiql w gaigbyiqk
xyhalm tyknym, uby vayiyi k rkgyt myqyiqk w gaigl tyknym, uby, obiqáihlmy k
nlm myqygayiqlm w gaigbyiqk, mli dlt qlhlm lgrlgayiqlm w vyaiqy w gaigl
tyknym. Émqlm hympkngkté wl hy nlm uby qyicl hy vbymqtk xytgyh, w yiqtkté
yi xa gkmk tagl w gliqyiql, kbiuby fayi kelqkhl; dltuby il my qlxki
qtbgrkm..., w il hacl xám.

-¡lr mkigrl fyihaql! ¡lr mkigrl kxkfny -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, w gbái
lfnackhlm ryxlm hy ubyhkt hbngaiyk w wl k mytvatqy qlhlm nlm híkm uby yn
gaynl ilm hayty hy vahk! ma ynnk vbynvy kn myt dythahl, uby il ym dlmafny
mail uby vbynvk, mb hymhagrk rkftá mahl hagrk, w xa vyigaxayiql, pynagímaxl
qtabipl. w xatk, mkigrl, gbáihl ubaytym glxyiekt nk hagadnaik, uby dltuby
nk kftyvaym qy kñkhl gayi tyknym.

-¿gbáihl? -tydnagó mkigrl-. ymqk ilgry, mai pknqk. dtlgbty vbymqtk xytgyh
uby nk qyickxlm yi yn gkxdl, kn gaynl kfaytql, uby wl xy kftaté xam gktiym.

nnycó nk ilgry, ymdytkhk hy hli ubaolqy gli nk xkwlt kimak hyn xbihl,
dktygaéihlny uby nkm tbyhkm hyn gkttl hy kdlnl my rkfíki ubyftkhl, w uby yn
hík my knktckfk xám hy nl kglmqbxftkhl, fayi kmí glxl kgliqygy k nlm
yikxltkhlm, uby okxám kobmqki nk gbyiqk hy mbm hymylm. paiknxyiqy, my
yiqtktli yiqty bilm kxyilm átflnym uby dlgl hymvakhlm hyn gkxail ymqkfki,
hlihy, hyokihl vkgíkm nk mannk w knfkthk hy tlgaikiqy w yn tbgal, my
qyihaytli mlfty nk vythy wytfk w gyiktli hyn tydbymql hy mkigrl; yn gbkn,
rkgayihl hyn gkfymqtl w hy nk oáubaxk hyn tbgal bi dlhytlml w pnyzafny
kelqy, my tyqató rkmqk vyaiqy dkmlm hy mb kxl, yiqty bikm rkwkm. hli
ubaolqy, uby ny val at gli hyibyhl w gli ftíl, ny haol:

-xatk, kxacl, uby il qy rkckm dyhkelm; hk nbckt uby bilm kelqym kcbkthyi k
lqtlm; il ubaytkm kdtymbtktqy qkiql yi nk gkttytk, uby yi nk xaqkh hynnk qy
pknqy yn knayiql; ubaytl hygat uby il qy hym qki tygal uby qy pknqy nk vahk
kiqym hy nnyckt kn iúxytl hymykhl. w, dltuby il daythkm dlt gktqk hy xám ia
hy xyilm, wl ymqkté hymhy kdktqy gliqkihl dlt ymqy xa tlmktal nlm kelqym
uby qy haytym. pkvltéegkqy yn gaynl glipltxy qb fbyik aiqyigaói xytygy.

-kn fbyi dkckhlt il ny hbynyi dtyihkm -tymdlihaó mkigrl-: wl dayiml hktxy
hy xkiytk uby, mai xkqktxy, xy hbynk; uby yi ymql hyfy hy glimamqat nk
mbmqkigak hymqy xankctl.

hymibhómy nbycl hy xyhal gbytdl kttafk, w, kttyfkqkihl yn glthyn, glxyieó k
hktmy, w glxyieó hli ubaolqy k gliqkt nlm kelqym.

rkmqk myam l lgrl my rkftík hkhl mkigrl, gbkihl ny dktygaó myt dymkhk nk
fbtnk w xbw fktkql yn dtygal hynnk, w, hyqyiaéihlmy bi dlgl, haol k mb kxl
uby my nnkxkfk k yickñl, dltuby xytygík gkhk kelqy hy kubénnlm myt dkckhl k
xyhal tykn, il uby k gbktqannl.

-dtlmacby, mkigrl kxacl, w il hymxkwym -ny haol hli ubaolqy-, uby wl hlfnl
nk dktkhk hyn dtygal.

-hymy xlhl -haol mkigrl-, ¡k nk xkil hy halm, w nnbyvki kelqym!

dytl yn mlgkttói hyoó hy hátmynlm yi nkm ymdknhkm, w hkfk yi nlm átflnym,
gli bilm mbmdatlm hy gbkihl yi gbkihl, uby dktygík uby gli gkhk bil hynnlm
my ny kttkigkfk yn knxk. qaytik nk hy hli ubaolqy, qyxytlml hy uby il my ny
kgkfkmy nk vahk, w il glimacbaymy mb hymyl dlt nk axdtbhyigak hy mkigrl, ny
haol:

-dlt qb vahk, kxacl, uby my ubyhy yi ymqy dbiql ymqy iyclgal, uby xy dktygy
xbw ámdytk ymqk xyhagaik, w mytá fayi hkt qayxdl kn qayxdl; uby il my ckió
ekxltk yi bi rltk. xám hy xan kelqym, ma wl il ry gliqkhl xkn, qy rkm hkhl:
fkmqki dlt kcltk; uby yn kmil, rkfnkihl k nl ctlmytl, mbpty nk gktck, xkm
il nk mlftygktck.

-il, il, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, il my rk hy hygat dlt xí: "k haiytlm
dkckhlm, ftkelm ubyftkhlm". kdátqymy vbymqtk xytgyh lqtl dlgl w héoyxy hkt
lqtlm xan kelqym maubaytk, uby k hlm nyvkhkm hémqkm rkftyxlm gbxdnahl gli
ymqk dktqahk, w kúi ilm mlftktá tldk.

-dbym qú qy rknnkm gli qki fbyik hamdlmagaói -haol hli ubaolqy-, yn gaynl
qy kwbhy, w déckqy, uby wl xy kdktql.

vlnvaó mkigrl k mb qktyk gli qkiql hyibyhl, uby wk rkfík ubaqkhl nkm
gltqyekm k xbgrlm átflnym: qkn ytk nk tacbtahkh gli uby my kelqkfk; w,
knekihl bik vye nk vle, w hkihl bi hymkpltkhl kelqy yi bik rkwk, haol:

-¡kubí xltatám, mkimói, w gbkiqlm gli én mli!

kgbhaó hli ubaolqy nbycl kn mli hy nk nkmqaxkhk vle w hyn clndy hyn
tacbtlml kelqy, w, kmayihl hyn qltgahl gkfymqtl uby ny mytvík hy gltfkgrl k
mkigrl, ny haol:

-il dytxaqk nk mbytqy, mkigrl kxacl, uby dlt yn cbmql xíl daythkm qú nk
vahk, uby rk hy mytvat dktk mbmqyiqkt k qb xboyt w k qbm raolm: ymdyty
hbngaiyk xyolt glwbiqbtk, uby wl xy gliqyihté yi nlm níxaqym hy nk
ymdytkiek dtldaigbk, w ymdytkté uby glftym pbytekm ibyvkm, dktk uby my
glignbwk ymqy iyclgal k cbmql hy qlhlm.

-dbym vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl, nl ubayty kmí -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, myk yi
fbyik rltk, w égryxy mb pyttytbynl mlfty ymqkm ymdknhkm, uby ymqlw mbhkihl
w il ubyttík tymptaktxy; uby nlm ibyvlm hagadnaikiqym glttyi ymqy dynactl.

ríelnl kmí hli ubaolqy, w, ubyháihlmy yi dynlqk, kftacó k mkigrl, yn gbkn
my hbtxaó rkmqk uby ny hymdytqó yn mln, w nbycl vlnvaytli k dtlmycbat mb
gkxail, k ubayi haytli pai, dlt yiqligym, yi bi nbckt uby qtym nycbkm hy
knní ymqkfk. kdyátlimy yi bi xymói, uby dlt qkn ny tyglilgaó hli ubaolqy, w
il dlt gkmqannl hy gkvk rlihk, qlttym, tkmqtannlm w dbyiqy nyvkhaek; uby,
hymdbém uby ny vyigaytli, gli xám obagal yi qlhkm nkm glmkm hamgbttík, glxl
kcltk my hatá. knloátliny yi bik mknk fkok, k ubayi mytvíki hy cbkhkxyganym
bikm mktckm vayokm daiqkhkm, glxl my bmki yi nkm knhykm. yi bik hynnkm
ymqkfk daiqkhk hy xknímaxk xkil yn tlfl hy ynyik, gbkihl yn kqtyvahl
rbémdyh my nk nnyvó k xyiknkl, w yi lqtk ymqkfk nk ramqltak hy hahl w hy
yiykm, ynnk mlfty bik knqk qltty, glxl uby rkgík myñkm gli bik xyhak máfkik
kn pbcaqavl rbémdyh, uby dlt yn xkt, mlfty bik ptkckqk l fytckiqíi, my afk
rbwyihl.

ilqó yi nkm hlm ramqltakm uby ynyik il afk hy xbw xknk ckik, dltuby my tyík
k mlgkdk w k nl mlgkttói; dytl nk rytxlmk hahl xlmqtkfk vytqyt náctaxkm hyn
qkxkñl hy ibygym dlt nlm lolm. vayihl nl gbkn hli ubaolqy, haol:

-ymqkm hlm myñltkm pbytli hymhagrkhímaxkm, dlt il rkfyt ikgahl yi ymqk
yhkh, w wl mlfty qlhlm hymhagrkhl yi il rkfyt ikgahl yi nk mbwk: yigliqtktk
k kubymqlm myñltym, ia pbytk kftkmkhk qtlwk, ia gktqkcl hymqtbahk, dbym gli
mónl uby wl xkqktk k dktam my ymgbmktki qkiqkm hymctkgakm.

-wl kdlmqkté -haol mkigrl- uby kiqym hy xbgrl qayxdl il rk hy rkfyt
flhycói, vyiqk ia xymói, l qayihk hy fktfytl, hlihy il kihy daiqkhk nk
ramqltak hy ibymqtkm rkekñkm. dytl ubyttík wl uby nk daiqkmyi xkilm hy lqtl
xyolt daiqlt uby yn uby rk daiqkhl k émqkm.

-qayiym tkeói, mkigrl -haol hli ubaolqy-, dltuby ymqy daiqlt ym glxl
ltfkiyok, bi daiqlt uby ymqkfk yi Úfyhk; uby, gbkihl ny dtycbiqkfki ubé
daiqkfk, tymdlihík: ''nl uby mknayty''; w ma dlt vyiqbtk daiqkfk bi cknnl,
ymgtafík hyfkol: "Émqy ym cknnl", dltuby il dyimkmyi uby ytk elttk. hymqk
xkiytk xy dktygy k xí, mkigrl, uby hyfy hy myt yn daiqlt l ymgtaqlt, uby
qlhl ym bil, uby mkgó k nbe nk ramqltak hymqy ibyvl hli ubaolqy uby rk
mknahl: uby daiqó l ymgtafaó nl uby mknayty; l rkftá mahl glxl bi dlyqk uby
kihkfk nlm kñlm dkmkhlm yi nk gltqy, nnkxkhl xkbnyói, yn gbkn tymdlihík hy
tydyiqy k gbkiql ny dtycbiqkfki; w, dtycbiqáihlny bil uby ubé ubytík hygat
hybx hy hyl, tymdlihaó: ''hé hlihy hayty''. dytl, hyokihl ymql kdktqy, haxy
ma dayimkm, mkigrl, hktqy lqtk qkihk ymqk ilgry, w ma ubaytym uby myk
hyfkol hy qygrkhl, l kn gaynl kfaytql.

-dkthaye, myñlt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby dktk nl uby wl dayiml hktxy, yml my
xy hk yi gkmk uby yi yn gkxdl; dytl, gli qlhl yml, ubyttík uby pbymy yiqty
átflnym, uby dktygy uby xy kglxdkñki w xy kwbhki k nnyvkt xa qtkfkol
xktkvannlmkxyiqy.

-dbym il rk hy myt kmí, mkigrl kxacl -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, mail uby dktk
uby qlxym pbytekm, nl ryxlm hy cbkthkt dktk ibymqtk knhyk, uby, k nl xám
qkthy, nnycktyxlm knná hymdbém hy xkñkik.

mkigrl tymdlihaó uby ragaymy mb cbmql, dytl uby én ubamaytk glignbat gli
ftyvyhkh kubyn iyclgal k mkicty gknayiqy w gbkihl ymqkfk dagkhl yn xlnail,
dltuby yi nk qkthkiek mbyny ymqkt xbgrkm vygym yn dynactl; w k halm tlckihl
w gli yn xkel hkihl, w uby xám vkník bi "qlxk" uby hlm "qy hkté", w yn
dáoktl yi nk xkil uby yn fbaqty vlnkihl.

-il xám typtkiym, mkigrl, dlt bi mlnl halm -haol hli ubaolqy-, uby dktygy
uby qy vbynvym kn magbq ytkq; rkfnk k nl nnkil, k nl naml, k nl il
aiqtagkhl, glxl xbgrkm vygym qy ry hagrl, w vytám glxl qy vkny bi dki dlt
gayiql.

-il mé ubé xknk vyiqbtk ym ymqk xík -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby il mé hygat
tkeói mai typtái, ia typtái uby il xy dktyegk tkeói; dytl wl xy yixyihkté,
ma dbhayty.

w, gli ymql, gymó dlt yiqligym mb dnáqagk.





gkdíqbnl nzzaa. hy góxl hli ubaolqy w mkigrl nnycktli k mb knhyk


qlhl kubyn hík, ymdytkihl nk ilgry, ymqbvaytli yi kubyn nbckt w xymói hli
ubaolqy w mkigrl: yn bil, dktk kgkfkt yi nk gkxdkñk tkmk nk qkihk hy mb
hagadnaik, w yn lqtl, dktk vyt yn pai hynnk, yi yn gbkn glimamqík yn hy mb
hymyl. nnycó yi ymql kn xymói bi gkxaikiqy k gkfknnl, gli qtym l gbkqtl
gtakhlm, bil hy nlm gbknym haol kn uby yn myñlt hynnlm dktygík:

-kubí dbyhy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli Ánvktl qktpy, dkmkt rlw nk maymqk: nk
dlmkhk dktygy naxdak w ptymgk.

lwyihl ymql hli ubaolqy, ny haol k mkigrl:

-xatk, mkigrl: gbkihl wl rloyé kubyn naftl hy nk mycbihk dktqy hy xa
ramqltak, xy dktygy uby hy dkmkhk qldé knní ymqy ilxfty hy hli Ánvktl
qktpy.

-fayi dlhtá myt -tymdlihaó mkigrl-. hyoéxlmny kdykt, uby hymdbém my nl
dtycbiqktyxlm.

yn gkfknnytl my kdyó, w, ptliqytl hyn kdlmyiql hy hli ubaolqy, nk rbémdyhk
ny hal bik mknk fkok, yiokyekhk gli lqtkm daiqkhkm mktckm, glxl nkm uby
qyiík nk ymqkigak hy hli ubaolqy. dúmlmy yn tygaéi vyiahl gkfknnytl k nl hy
vytkil, w, mknaéihlmy kn dltqkn hyn xymói, uby ytk ymdkgalml w ptymgl, dlt
yn gbkn my dkmykfk hli ubaolqy, ny dtycbiqó:

-¿khóihy fbyil gkxaik vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt cyiqanrlxfty?

w hli ubaolqy ny tymdlihaó:

-k bik knhyk uby ymqá kubí gytgk, hy hlihy mlw ikqbtkn. w vbymqtk xytgyh,
¿hóihy gkxaik?

-wl, myñlt -tymdlihaó yn gkfknnytl-, vlw k ctkikhk, uby ym xa dkqtak.

-¡w fbyik dkqtak! -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. dytl, híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh, dlt
gltqymík, mb ilxfty, dltuby xy dktygy uby xy rk hy axdltqkt mkfytnl xám hy
nl uby fbyikxyiqy dlhté hygat.

-xa ilxfty ym hli Ánvktl qktpy -tymdlihaó yn rbémdyh.

k nl uby tydnagó hli ubaolqy:

-mai hbhk kncbik dayiml uby vbymqtk xytgyh hyfy hy myt kubyn hli Ánvktl
qktpy uby kihk axdtyml yi nk mycbihk dktqy hy nk ramqltak hy hli ubaolqy hy
nk xkigrk, tygaéi axdtymk w hkhk k nk nbe hyn xbihl dlt bi kbqlt xlhytil.

-yn xamxl mlw -tymdlihaó yn gkfknnytl-, w yn qkn hli ubaolqy, mboyql
dtaigadkn hy nk qkn ramqltak, pby ctkihímaxl kxacl xíl, w wl pba yn uby ny
mkgó hy mb qayttk, l, k nl xyilm, ny xlví k uby vaiaymy k bikm obmqkm uby
my rkgíki yi ektkclek, khlihy wl afk; w, yi vythkh yi vythkh uby ny ragy
xbgrkm kxamqkhym, w uby ny ubaqé hy uby il ny dknxykmy nkm ymdknhkm yn
vythbcl, dlt myt hyxkmakhkxyiqy kqtyvahl.

-w, híckxy vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt hli Ánvktl, ¿dktyegl wl yi kncl k ymy qkn
hli ubaolqy uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy?

-il, dlt gaytql -tymdlihaó yn rbémdyh-: yi iaicbik xkiytk.

-w ymy hli ubaolqy -haol yn ibymqtl-, ¿qtkík glimacl k bi ymgbhytl nnkxkhl
mkigrl dkiek?

-mí qtkík -tymdlihaó hli Ánvktl-; w, kbiuby qyiík pkxk hy xbw ctkgalml,
ibigk ny lí hygat ctkgak uby nk qbvaymy.

-yml gtyl wl xbw fayi -haol k ymqk mkeói mkigrl-, dltuby yn hygat ctkgakm
il ym dktk qlhlm, w ymy mkigrl uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, myñlt cyiqanrlxfty,
hyfy hy myt kncúi ctkihímaxl fynnkgl, ptaói w nkhtói obiqkxyiqy, uby yn
vythkhytl mkigrl dkiek mlw wl, uby qyicl xám ctkgakm uby nnlvahkm; w ma il,
rkck vbymqtk xytgyh nk yzdytayigak, w áihymy qtkm hy xí, dlt nlm xyilm bi
kñl, w vytá uby my xy gkyi k gkhk dkml, w qknym w qkiqkm uby, mai mkfyt wl
nkm xám vygym nl uby xy hacl, rkcl tyít k gbkiqlm xy ymgbgrki; w yn
vythkhytl hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, yn pkxlml, yn vknayiqy w yn hamgtyql,
yn yikxltkhl, yn hympkgyhlt hy kctkvalm, yn qbqlt hy dbdanlm w rbétpkilm,
yn kxdktl hy nkm vabhkm, yn xkqkhlt hy nkm hligynnkm, yn uby qayiy dlt
úiagk myñltk k nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, ym ymqy myñlt uby ymqá
dtymyiqy, uby ym xa kxl; qlhl gbknubayt lqtl hli ubaolqy w gbknubayt lqtl
mkigrl dkiek ym fbtnytík w glmk hy mbyñl.

-¡dlt halm uby nl gtyl! -tymdlihaó hli Ánvktl-, dltuby xám ctkgakm rkféam
hagrl vlm, kxacl, yi gbkqtl tkeliym uby rkféam rkfnkhl, uby yn lqtl mkigrl
dkiek yi gbkiqkm wl ny lí rkfnkt, uby pbytli xbgrkm. xám qyiík hy glxanói
uby hy fayi rkfnkhl, w xám hy qliql uby hy ctkgalml, w qyicl dlt mai hbhk
uby nlm yigkiqkhltym uby dytmacbyi k hli ubaolqy yn fbyil rki ubytahl
dytmycbatxy k xí gli hli ubaolqy yn xknl. dytl il mé ubé xy hack; uby lmkté
wl obtkt uby ny hyol xyqahl yi nk gkmk hyn ibigal, yi qlnyhl, dktk uby ny
gbtyi, w kcltk tyxkiygy kubí lqtl hli ubaolqy, kbiuby fayi hapytyiqy hyn
xíl.

-wl -haol hli ubaolqy- il mé ma mlw fbyil, dytl mé hygat uby il mlw yn
xknl; dktk dtbyfk hy nl gbkn ubaytl uby mydk vbymk xytgyh, xa myñlt hli
Ánvktl qktpy, uby yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy xa vahk il ry ymqkhl yi ektkclek;
kiqym, dlt rkfytxy hagrl uby ymy hli ubaolqy pkiqámqagl my rkfík rknnkhl yi
nkm obmqkm hymk gabhkh, il ubamy wl yiqtkt yi ynnk, dlt mkgkt k nkm fktfkm
hyn xbihl mb xyiqatk; w kmí, xy dkmé hy gnktl k fktgynlik, ktgravl hy nk
gltqymík, knfytcby hy nlm ymqtkioytlm, rlmdaqkn hy nlm dlftym, dkqtak hy
nlm vknayiqym, vyickiek hy nlm lpyihahlm w glttymdlihyigak ctkqk hy patxym
kxamqkhym, w, yi maqal w yi fynnyek, úiagk. w, kbiuby nlm mbgymlm uby yi
ynnk xy rki mbgyhahl il mli hy xbgrl cbmql, mail hy xbgrk dymkhbxfty, nlm
nnyvl mai ynnk, mónl dlt rkfytnk vamql. paiknxyiqy, myñlt hli Ánvktl qktpy,
wl mlw hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, yn xamxl uby hagy nk pkxk, w il ymy
hymvyiqbtkhl uby rk ubytahl bmbtdkt xa ilxfty w rlitktmy gli xam
dyimkxayiqlm. k vbymqtk xytgyh mbdnagl, dlt nl uby hyfy k myt gkfknnytl,
myk mytvahl hy rkgyt bik hygnktkgaói kiqy yn kngknhy hymqy nbckt, hy uby
vbymqtk xytgyh il xy rk vamql yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy mb vahk rkmqk kcltk, w
hy uby wl il mlw yn hli ubaolqy axdtyml yi nk mycbihk dktqy, ia ymqy mkigrl
dkiek xa ymgbhytl ym kubén uby vbymqtk xytgyh glilgaó.

-yml rkté wl hy xbw fbyik ckik -tymdlihaó hli Ánvktl-, dbymql uby gkbmy
khxatkgaói vyt hlm hli ubaolqym w hlm mkigrlm k bi xamxl qayxdl, qki
glipltxym yi nlm ilxftym glxl hapytyiqym yi nkm kggaliym; w vbynvl k hygat
w xy kpatxl uby il ry vamql nl uby ry vamql, ia rk dkmkhl dlt xí nl uby rk
dkmkhl.

-mai hbhk -haol mkigrl- uby vbymqtk xytgyh hyfy hy ymqkt yigkiqkhl, glxl
xa myñltk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, w dnbcbaytk kn gaynl uby ymqbvaytk mb
hymyigkiql hy vbymqtk xytgyh yi hktxy lqtlm qtym xan w qkiqlm kelqym glxl
xy hlw dlt ynnk, uby wl xy nlm haytk mai aiqytém kncbil.

-il yiqayihl yml hy kelqym -haol hli Ánvktl.

w mkigrl ny tymdlihaó uby ytk nktcl hy gliqkt, dytl uby én my nl gliqktík
ma kgkml afki bi xymxl gkxail.

nnycómy yi ymql nk rltk hy glxyt; glxaytli obiqlm hli ubaolqy w hli Ánvktl.
yiqtó kgkml yn kngknhy hyn dbyfnl yi yn xymói, gli bi ymgtafkil, kiqy yn
gbkn kngknhy dahaó hli ubaolqy, dlt bik dyqagaói, hy uby k mb hytygrl
glivyiík hy uby hli Ánvktl qktpy, kubyn gkfknnytl uby knní ymqkfk dtymyiqy,
hygnktkmy kiqy mb xytgyh glxl il glilgík k hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, uby
kmaxamxl ymqkfk knní dtymyiqy, w uby il ytk kubén uby kihkfk axdtyml yi bik
ramqltak aiqaqbnkhk: mycbihk dktqy hy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, glxdbymqk
dlt bi qkn hy kvynnkiyhk, ikqbtkn hy qlthymannkm. paiknxyiqy, yn kngknhy
dtlvywó obtíhagkxyiqy; nk hygnktkgaói my rael gli qlhkm nkm pbytekm uby yi
qknym gkmlm hyfíki rkgytmy, gli nl uby ubyhktli hli ubaolqy w mkigrl xbw
knyctym, glxl ma nym axdltqktk xbgrl myxyokiqy hygnktkgaói w il xlmqtktk
gnktl nk hapytyigak hy nlm hlm hli ubaolqym w nk hy nlm hlm mkigrlm mbm
lftkm w mbm dknkftkm. xbgrkm hy gltqymíkm w lptygaxayiqlm dkmktli yiqty hli
Ánvktl w hli ubaolqy, yi nkm gbknym xlmqtó yn ctki xkigrycl mb hamgtygaói,
hy xlhl uby hymyickñó k hli Ánvktl qktpy hyn yttlt yi uby ymqkfk; yn gbkn
my hal k yiqyihyt uby hyfík hy ymqkt yigkiqkhl, dbym qlgkfk gli nk xkil hlm
qki gliqtktalm hli ubaolqym.

nnycó nk qkthy, dktqaétlimy hy kubyn nbckt, w k lftk hy xyhak nycbk my
kdktqkfki hlm gkxailm hapytyiqym, yn bil uby cbakfk k nk knhyk hy hli
ubaolqy, w yn lqtl yn uby rkfík hy nnyvkt hli Ánvktl. yi ymqy dlgl ymdkgal
ny gliqó hli ubaolqy nk hymctkgak hy mb vyigaxayiql w yn yigkiql w yn
tyxyhal hy hbngaiyk, uby qlhl dbml yi ibyvk khxatkgaói k hli Ánvktl, yn
gbkn, kftkekihl k hli ubaolqy w k mkigrl, macbaó mb gkxail, w hli ubaolqy
yn mbwl, uby kubynnk ilgry nk dkmó yiqty lqtlm átflnym, dlt hkt nbckt k
mkigrl hy gbxdnat mb dyiaqyigak, uby nk gbxdnaó hyn xamxl xlhl uby nk
dkmkhk ilgry, k glmqk hy nkm gltqyekm hy nkm rkwkm, rktql xám uby hy mbm
ymdknhkm, uby nkm cbkthó qkiql, uby il dbhaytki ubaqkt nlm kelqym bik
xlmgk, kbiuby nk qbvaytk yigaxk.

il dythaó yn yickñkhl hli ubaolqy bi mlnl clndy hy nk gbyiqk, w rknnó uby
gli nlm hy nk ilgry dkmkhk ytk qtym xan w vyaiqy w ibyvy. dktygy uby rkfík
xkhtbckhl yn mln k vyt yn mkgtapagal, gli gbwk nbe vlnvaytli k dtlmycbat mb
gkxail, qtkqkihl yiqty nlm hlm hyn yickñl hy hli Ánvktl w hy gbái fayi
kglthkhl rkfík mahl qlxkt mb hygnktkgaói kiqy nk obmqagak, w qki
kbqéiqagkxyiqy.

kubyn hík w kubynnk ilgry gkxaiktli mai mbgyhytnym glmk hacik hy gliqktmy,
ma il pby uby yi ynnk kgkfó mkigrl mb qktyk, hy uby ubyhó hli ubaolqy
gliqyiql mlftyxlhl, w ymdytkfk yn hík, dlt vyt ma yi yn gkxail qldkfk wk
hymyigkiqkhk k hbngaiyk mb myñltk; w, macbayihl mb gkxail, il qldkfk xboyt
iaicbik uby il afk k tyglilgyt ma ytk hbngaiyk hyn qlflml, qyiayihl dlt
aipknafny il dlhyt xyiqat nkm dtlxymkm hy xytníi.

gli ymqlm dyimkxayiqlm w hymylm mbfaytli bik gbymqk kttafk, hymhy nk gbkn
hymgbftaytli mb knhyk, nk gbkn, vamqk hy mkigrl, my raigó hy tlhannkm w
haol:

-kfty nlm lolm, hymykhk dkqtak, w xatk uby vbynvy k qa mkigrl dkiek, qb
raol, ma il xbw tagl, xbw fayi kelqkhl. kfty nlm ftkelm w tygafy qkxfaéi qb
raol hli ubaolqy, uby ma vayiy vyigahl hy nlm ftkelm koyilm, vayiy vyigyhlt
hy mí xamxl; uby, mycúi én xy rk hagrl, ym yn xkwlt vyigaxayiql uby
hymyktmy dbyhy. haiytlm nnyvl, dltuby ma fbyilm kelqym xy hkfki, fayi
gkfknnytl xy afk.

-héokqy hymkm mkihygym -haol hli ubaolqy-, w vkxlm gli day hytygrl k yiqtkt
yi ibymqtl nbckt, hlihy hktyxlm vkhl k ibymqtkm axkcaikgaliym, w nk qtkek
uby yi nk dkmqltkn vahk dyimkxlm yoytgaqkt.

gli ymql, fkoktli hy nk gbymqk w my pbytli k mb dbyfnl.





gkdíqbnl nzzaaa. hy nlm kcüytlm uby qbvl hli ubaolqy kn yiqtkt hy mb knhyk,
gli lqtlm mbgymlm uby khltiki w kgtyhaqki ymqk ctkihy ramqltak


k nk yiqtkhk hyn gbkn, mycúi hagy gahy rkxyqy, val hli ubaolqy uby yi nkm
ytkm hyn nbckt ymqkfki tañyihl hlm xlgrkgrlm, w yn bil haol kn lqtl:

-il qy gkimym dytaubannl, uby il nk rkm hy vyt yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy qb
vahk.

lwónl hli ubaolqy, w haol k mkigrl:

-¿il khvaytqym, kxacl, nl uby kubyn xlgrkgrl rk hagrl: ''il nk rkm hy vyt
yi qlhlm nlm híkm hy qb vahk''?

-dbym fayi, ¿ubé axdltqk -tymdlihaó mkigrl- uby rkwk hagrl yml yn xlgrkgrl?

-¿ubé? -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-. ¿il vyym qú uby, kdnagkihl kubynnk dknkftk k
xa aiqyigaói, ubayty maciapagkt uby il qyicl hy vyt xám k hbngaiyk?

ubytíkny tymdlihyt mkigrl, gbkihl my nl ymqltfó vyt uby dlt kubynnk gkxdkñk
vyiík rbwyihl bik nayfty, mycbahk hy xbgrlm cknclm w gkekhltym, nk gbkn,
qyxytlmk, my vail k tyglcyt w k kckekdkt hyfkol hy nlm daym hyn tbgal.
glcaónk mkigrl k xkil mknvk w dtymyiqómynk k hli ubaolqy, yn gbkn ymqkfk
hagayihl:

-xknbx macibx! xknbx macibx! nayfty rbwy, cknclm nk macbyi: ¡hbngaiyk il
dktygy!

-ymqtkñl ym vbymk xytgyh -haol mkigrl-. dtymbdlickxlm uby ymqk nayfty ym
hbngaiyk hyn qlflml w ymqlm cknclm uby nk dytmacbyi mli nlm xknkihtaiym
yigkiqkhltym uby nk qtkimpltxktli yi nkftkhltk: ynnk rbwy, wl nk glol w nk
dlicl yi dlhyt hy vbymk xytgyh, uby nk qayiy yi mbm ftkelm w nk tycknk:
¿ubé xknk myñkn ym émqk, ia ubé xkn kcüytl my dbyhy qlxkt hy kubí?

nlm hlm xlgrkgrlm hy nk dyihyigak my nnycktli k vyt nk nayfty, w kn bil
hynnlm dtycbiqó mkigrl uby dlt ubé tyñíki. w pbyny tymdlihahl dlt yn uby
rkfík hagrl ''il nk vytám xám yi qlhk qb vahk'', uby én rkfík qlxkhl kn
lqtl xlgrkgrl bik okbnk hy ctannlm, nk gbkn il dyimkfk vlnvétmynk yi qlhk
mb vahk. mkgó mkigrl gbkqtl gbktqlm hy nk pknqtaubytk w haómynlm kn
xlgrkgrl dlt nk okbnk, w dúmlmynk yi nkm xkilm k hli ubaolqy, hagayihl:

-ry kubí, myñlt, tlxdahlm w hymfktkqkhlm ymqlm kcüytlm, uby il qayiyi uby
vyt xám gli ibymqtlm mbgymlm, mycúi uby wl axkcail, kbiuby qliql, uby gli
nkm ibfym hy kiqkñl. w ma il xy kgbythl xkn, ry líhl hygat kn gbtk hy
ibymqtl dbyfnl uby il ym hy dytmlikm gtamqakikm ia hamgtyqkm xatkt yi ymqkm
iañytíkm; w kbi vbymk xytgyh xamxl xy nl haol nlm híkm dkmkhlm, háihlxy k
yiqyihyt uby ytki qliqlm qlhlm kubynnlm gtamqakilm uby xatkfki yi kcüytlm.
w il ym xyiymqyt rkgyt raigkdaé yi ymql, mail dkmyxlm khynkiqy w yiqtyxlm
yi ibymqtk knhyk.

nnycktli nlm gkekhltym, dahaytli mb nayfty, w haómynk hli ubaolqy; dkmktli
khynkiqy, w, k nk yiqtkhk hyn dbyfnl, qldktli yi bi dtkhygannl tyekihl kn
gbtk w kn fkgrannyt gkttkmgl. w ym hy mkfyt uby mkigrl dkiek rkfík ygrkhl
mlfty yn tbgal w mlfty yn níl hy nkm ktxkm, dktk uby matvaymy hy tydlmqytl,
nk qúiagk hy flgkgí, daiqkhk hy nnkxkm hy pbycl uby ny vamqaytli yi yn
gkmqannl hyn hbuby nk ilgry uby vlnvaó yi mí knqamahltk. kglxlhóny qkxfaéi
nk gltlek yi nk gkfyek, uby pby nk xám ibyvk qtkimpltxkgaói w khltil gli
uby my val okxám obxyiql yi yn xbihl.

pbytli nbycl glilgahlm nlm hlm hyn gbtk w hyn fkgrannyt, uby my vaiaytli k
ynnlm gli nlm ftkelm kfaytqlm. kdyómy hli ubaolqy w kftkeónlm
ymqtygrkxyiqy; w nlm xlgrkgrlm, uby mli naigym il ymgbmkhlm, havamktli nk
gltlek hyn obxyiql w kgbhaytli k vytny, w hygíki bilm k lqtlm:

-vyiah, xlgrkgrlm, w vytéam yn kmil hy mkigrl dkiek xám cknái uby xaicl, w
nk fymqak hy hli ubaolqy xám pnkgk rlw uby yn dtaxyt hík.

paiknxyiqy, tlhykhlm hy xlgrkgrlm w kglxdkñkhlm hyn gbtk w hyn fkgrannyt,
yiqtktli yi yn dbyfnl, w my pbytli k gkmk hy hli ubaolqy, w rknnktli k nk
dbytqk hynnk kn kxk w k mb mlftaik, k ubayi wk rkfíki nnyckhl nkm ibyvkm hy
mb vyiahk. ia xám ia xyilm my nkm rkfíki hkhl k qytymk dkiek, xboyt hy
mkigrl, nk gbkn, hymctyñkhk w xyhal hymibhk, qtkwyihl hy nk xkil k
mkigragk, mb raok, kgbhaó k vyt k mb xktahl; w, vaéihlny il qki fayi
khynañkhl glxl ynnk my dyimkfk uby rkfík hy ymqkt bi clfytikhlt, ny haol:

-¿góxl vyiím kmí, xktahl xíl, uby xy dktygy uby vyiím k day w hymdykhl, w
xám qtkéam myxyokiek hy hymclfytikhl uby hy clfytikhlt?

-gknnk, qytymk -tymdlihaó mkigrl-, uby xbgrkm vygym hlihy rkw ymqkgkm il
rkw qlgailm, w váxlilm k ibymqtk gkmk, uby knná latám xktkvannkm. haiytlm
qtkacl, uby ym nl uby axdltqk, ckikhlm dlt xa aihbmqtak w mai hkñl hy
ikhay.

-qtkyh vlm haiytl, xa fbyi xktahl -haol qytymk-, w myki ckikhlm dlt kubí l
dlt knní, uby, glxlubaytk uby nlm rkwáam ckikhl, il rkftéam rygrl bmkiek
ibyvk yi yn xbihl.

kftkeó mkigragk k mb dkhty, w dtycbiqóny ma qtkík kncl, uby ny ymqkfk
ymdytkihl glxl yn kcbk hy xkwl; w, kmaéihlny hy bi nkhl hyn gaiql, w mb
xboyt hy nk xkil, qatkihl mb raok kn tbgal, my pbytli k mb gkmk, hyokihl k
hli ubaolqy yi nk mbwk, yi dlhyt hy mb mlftaik w hy mb kxk, w yi glxdkñík
hyn gbtk w hyn fkgrannyt.

hli ubaolqy, mai cbkthkt qétxailm ia rltkm, yi kubyn xamxl dbiql my kdktqó
k mlnkm gli yn fkgrannyt w yn gbtk, w yi ftyvym tkeliym nym gliqó mb
vyigaxayiql, w nk lfnackgaói yi uby rkfík ubyhkhl hy il mknat hy mb knhyk
yi bi kñl, nk gbkn dyimkfk cbkthkt kn day hy nk nyqtk, mai qtkmdkmktnk yi
bi áqlxl, fayi kmí glxl gkfknnytl kihkiqy, lfnackhl dlt nk dbiqbknahkh w
lthyi hy nk kihkiqy gkfknnytík, w uby qyiík dyimkhl hy rkgytmy kubyn kñl
dkmqlt, w yiqtyqyiytmy yi nk mlnyhkh hy nlm gkxdlm, hlihy k tayihk mbynqk
dlhík hkt vkhl k mbm kxltlmlm dyimkxayiqlm, yoytgaqáihlmy yi yn dkmqltkn w
vatqblml yoytgagal; w uby nym mbdnagkfk, ma il qyiíki xbgrl uby rkgyt w il
ymqkfki axdyhahlm yi iyclgalm xám axdltqkiqym, ubamaymyi myt mbm
glxdkñytlm; uby én glxdtktík lvyokm w ckikhl mbpagayiqy uby nym haymy
ilxfty hy dkmqltym; w uby nym rkgík mkfyt uby nl xám dtaigadkn hy kubyn
iyclgal ymqkfk rygrl, dltuby nym qyiík dbymqlm nlm ilxftym, uby nym
vyihtíki glxl hy xlnhy. híolny yn gbtk uby nlm haoymy. tymdlihaó hli
ubaolqy uby én my rkfík hy nnkxkt yn dkmqlt ubaolqae; w yn fkgrannyt, yn
dkmqlt gkttkmgói; w yn gbtk, yn dkmqlt gbtkxftl; w mkigrl dkiek, yn dkmqlt
dkigail.

dkmxátlimy qlhlm hy vyt nk ibyvk nlgbtk hy hli ubaolqy; dytl, dltuby il my
nym pbymy lqtk vye hyn dbyfnl k mbm gkfknnytíkm, ymdytkihl uby yi kubyn kñl
dlhtík myt gbtkhl, gligyhaytli gli mb ibyvk aiqyigaói, w kdtlfktli dlt
hamgtyqk mb nlgbtk, lptygaéihlmyny dlt glxdkñytlm yi mb yoytgagal.

-w xám -haol mkimói gkttkmgl-, uby, glxl wk qlhl yn xbihl mkfy, wl mlw
gynyféttaxl dlyqk w k gkhk dkml glxdlihté vytmlm dkmqltanym, l gltqymkilm,
l glxl xám xy vaiayty k gbyiql, dktk uby ilm yiqtyqyickxlm dlt ymlm
kihbttaknym hlihy rkfyxlm hy kihkt; w nl uby xám ym xyiymqyt, myñltym xílm,
ym uby gkhk bil ymglok yn ilxfty hy nk dkmqltk uby dayimk gynyftkt yi mbm
vytmlm, w uby il hyoyxlm átfln, dlt hbtl uby myk, hlihy il nk tyqbny w
ctkfy mb ilxfty, glxl ym bml w glmqbxfty hy nlm yikxltkhlm dkmqltym.

-yml ymqá hy xlnhy -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, dbymql uby wl ymqlw nafty hy
fbmgkt ilxfty hy dkmqltk paicahk, dbym ymqá krí nk mai dkt hbngaiyk hyn
qlflml, cnltak hy ymqkm tafytkm, khltil hy ymqlm dtkhlm, mbmqyiql hy nk
rytxlmbtk, ikqk hy nlm hlikatym, w, paiknxyiqy, mboyql mlfty ubayi dbyhy
kmyiqkt fayi qlhk knkfkiek, dlt radétflny uby myk.

-kmí ym vythkh -haol yn gbtk-, dytl ilmlqtlm fbmgktyxlm dlt krí dkmqltkm
xkñytbynkm, uby ma il ilm gbkhtktyi, ilm ymubaiyi.

k nl uby kñkhaó mkimói gkttkmgl:

-w gbkihl pknqktyi, hktéxlmnym nlm ilxftym hy nkm ymqkxdkhkm y axdtymkm,
hy ubayi ymqá nnyil yn xbihl: pínahkm, kxktanam, hakikm, pnétahkm,
cknkqykm w fynamkthkm; uby, dbym nkm vyihyi yi nkm dnkekm, fayi nkm dlhyxlm
glxdtkt ilmlqtlm w qyiytnkm dlt ibymqtkm. ma xa hkxk, l, dlt xyolt hygat,
xa dkmqltk, dlt vyiqbtk my nnkxkty kik, nk gynyftkté hyfkol hyn ilxfty hy
kikthk; w ma ptkigamgk, nk nnkxkté wl ptkigyiak; w ma nbgík, nbgaihk, uby
qlhl my mkny knná; w mkigrl dkiek, ma ym uby rk hy yiqtkt yi ymqk glpkhtík,
dlhtá gynyftkt k mb xboyt qytymk dkiek gli ilxfty hy qytymkaik.

taómy hli ubaolqy hy nk kdnagkgaói hyn ilxfty, w yn gbtk ny knkfó aipaiaql
mb rliymqk w rlitkhk tymlnbgaói, w my lptygaó hy ibyvl k rkgytny glxdkñík
qlhl yn qayxdl uby ny vkgkmy hy kqyihyt k mbm pltelmkm lfnackgaliym. gli
ymql, my hymdahaytli hén, w ny tlcktli w kglimyoktli qbvaymy gbyiqk gli mb
mknbh, gli tycknktmy nl uby pbymy fbyil.

ubaml nk mbytqy uby mb mlftaik w yn kxk lwytli nk dnáqagk hy nlm qtym; w,
kmí glxl my pbytli, my yiqtktli yiqtkxfkm gli hli ubaolqy, w nk mlftaik ny
haol:

-¿ubé ym ymql, myñlt qíl? ¿krltk uby dyimáfkxlm ilmlqtkm uby vbymqtk xytgyh
vlnvík k tyhbgatmy yi mb gkmk, w dkmkt yi ynnk bik vahk ubayqk w rlitkhk,
my ubayty xyqyt yi ibyvlm nkfytaiqlm, rkgaéihlmy

   dkmqltgannl, qú uby vayiym,
   dkmqltgagl, qú uby vkm?

dbym yi vythkh uby ymqá wk hbtl yn kngkgyn dktk ekxdlñkm.

k nl uby kñkhaó yn kxk:

w ¿dlhtá vbymqtk xytgyh dkmkt yi yn gkxdl nkm maymqkm hyn vytkil, nlm
mytyilm hyn aivaytil, yn kbnnahl hy nlm nlflm? il, dlt gaytql, uby émqy ym
yoytgagal w lpagal hy rlxftym tlfbmqlm, gbtqahlm w gtakhlm dktk qkn
xaiamqytal gkma hymhy nkm pkokm w xkiqannkm. kbi, xkn dlt xkn, xyolt ym myt
gkfknnytl kihkiqy uby dkmqlt. xaty, myñlt, qlxy xa glimyol, uby il my ny
hlw mlfty ymqkt rktqk hy dki w vail, mail yi kwbikm, w mlfty gaigbyiqk kñlm
uby qyicl hy yhkh: ymqémy yi mb gkmk, kqayihk k mb rkgayihk, glipaymy k
xyibhl, pkvltyegk k nlm dlftym, w mlfty xa áiaxk ma xkn ny pbyty.

-gknnkh, raokm -nym tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, uby wl mé fayi nl uby xy
gbxdny. nnyvkhxy kn nygrl, uby xy dktygy uby il ymqlw xbw fbyil, w qyiyh
dlt gaytql uby, krltk myk gkfknnytl kihkiqy l dkmqlt dlt kihkt, il hyokté
mayxdty hy kgbhat k nl uby rbfaétyhym xyiymqyt, glxl nl vytéam dlt nk lftk.

w nkm fbyikm raokm -uby nl ytki mai hbhk kxk w mlftaik- ny nnyvktli k nk
gkxk, hlihy ny haytli hy glxyt w tycknktli nl dlmafny.





gkdíqbnl nzzav. hy góxl hli ubaolqy gkwó xknl, w hyn qymqkxyiql uby rael, w
mb xbytqy


glxl nkm glmkm rbxkikm il myki yqytikm, wyihl mayxdty yi hygnaikgaói hy mbm
dtaigadalm rkmqk nnyckt k mb únqaxl pai, ymdygaknxyiqy nkm vahkm hy nlm
rlxftym, w glxl nk hy hli ubaolqy il qbvaymy dtavanycal hyn gaynl dktk
hyqyiyt yn gbtml hy nk mbwk, nnycó mb pai w kgkfkxayiql gbkihl én xyilm nl
dyimkfk; dltuby, l wk pbymy hy nk xynkiglník uby ny gkbmkfk yn vytmy
vyigahl, l wk dlt nk hamdlmagaói hyn gaynl, uby kmí nl lthyikfk, my ny
kttkacó bik gknyiqbtk uby ny qbvl myam híkm yi nk gkxk, yi nlm gbknym pby
vamaqkhl xbgrkm vygym hyn gbtk, hyn fkgrannyt w hyn fktfytl, mbm kxaclm,
mai ubaqátmyny hy nk gkfygytk mkigrl dkiek, mb fbyi ymgbhytl.

Émqlm, gtywyihl uby nk dymkhbxfty hy vytmy vyigahl w hy il vyt gbxdnahl mb
hymyl yi nk nafytqkh w hymyigkiql hy hbngaiyk ny qyiík hy kubynnk mbytqy,
dlt qlhkm nkm víkm dlmafnym dtlgbtkfki knyctktny, hagaéihlny yn fkgrannyt
uby my kiaxkmy w nyvkiqkmy, dktk glxyiekt mb dkmqltkn yoytgagal, dktk yn
gbkn qyiík wk glxdbymqk bik égnlck, uby xkn kñl dktk gbkiqkm mkikektl rkfík
glxdbymql, w uby wk qyiík glxdtkhlm hy mb dtldal haiytl hlm pkxlmlm dyttlm
dktk cbkthkt yn ckikhl: yn bil nnkxkhl fktgail, w yn lqtl fbqtói, uby my
nlm rkfík vyihahl bi ckikhytl hyn ubaiqkikt. dytl il dlt ymql hyokfk hli
ubaolqy mbm qtamqyekm.

nnkxktli mbm kxaclm kn xéhagl, qlxóny yn dbnml, w il ny gliqyiqó xbgrl, w
haol uby, dlt mí l dlt il, kqyihaymy k nk mknbh hy mb knxk, dltuby nk hyn
gbytdl glttík dynactl. lwónl hli ubaolqy gli áiaxl mlmyckhl, dytl il nl
lwytli kmí mb kxk, mb mlftaik w mb ymgbhytl, nlm gbknym glxyiektli k nnltkt
qaytikxyiqy, glxl ma wk ny qbvaytki xbytql hynkiqy. pby yn dktygyt hyn
xéhagl uby xynkiglníkm w hymkftaxayiqlm ny kgkfkfki. tlcó hli ubaolqy uby
ny hyokmyi mlnl, dltuby ubytík hltxat bi dlgl. ragaétlinl kmí w hbtxaó hy
bi qatói, glxl hagyi, xám hy myam rltkm; qkiql, uby dyimktli yn kxk w nk
mlftaik uby my rkfík hy ubyhkt yi yn mbyñl. hymdytqó kn gkfl hyn qayxdl
hagrl, w, hkihl bik ctki vle, haol:

-¡fyihaql myk yn dlhytlml halm, uby qkiql fayi xy rk rygrl! yi pai, mbm
xamytaglthakm il qayiyi níxaqy, ia nkm kftyvaki ia axdahyi nlm dygkhlm hy
nlm rlxftym.

ymqbvl kqyiqk nk mlftaik k nkm tkeliym hyn qíl, w dktygaétliny xám
gligytqkhkm uby én mlník hygatnkm, k nl xyilm, yi kubynnk yipytxyhkh, w
dtycbiqóny:

-¿ubé ym nl uby vbymqtk xytgyh hagy, myñlt? ¿qyiyxlm kncl hy ibyvl? ¿ubé
xamytaglthakm mli émqkm, l ubé dygkhlm hy nlm rlxftym?

-nkm xamytaglthakm -tymdlihaó hli ubaolqy-, mlftaik, mli nkm uby yi ymqy
aimqkiqy rk bmkhl halm glixacl, k ubayi, glxl haoy, il nkm axdahyi xam
dygkhlm. wl qyicl obagal wk, nafty w gnktl, mai nkm mlxftkm gknacailmkm hy
nk aciltkigak, uby mlfty én xy dbmaytli xa kxktck w gliqaibk nywyihk hy nlm
hyqymqkfnym naftlm hy nkm gkfknnytíkm. wk glilegl mbm hamdktkqym w mbm
yxfynyglm, w il xy dymk mail uby ymqy hymyickñl rk nnyckhl qki qkthy, uby
il xy hyok qayxdl dktk rkgyt kncbik tyglxdyimk, nywyihl lqtlm uby myki nbe
hyn knxk. wl xy mayiql, mlftaik, k dbiql hy xbytqy; ubyttík rkgytnk hy qkn
xlhl, uby haymy k yiqyihyt uby il rkfík mahl xa vahk qki xknk uby hyokmy
tyilxfty hy nlgl, uby, dbymql uby nl ry mahl, il ubyttík glipatxkt ymqk
vythkh yi xa xbytqy. nnáxkxy, kxack, k xam fbyilm kxaclm: yn gbtk, kn
fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl w k xkymy iaglnám, yn fktfytl, uby ubaytl
glipymktxy w rkgyt xa qymqkxyiql.

dytl hy ymqy qtkfkol my ymgbmó nk mlftaik gli nk yiqtkhk hy nlm qtym.
kdyikm nlm val hli ubaolqy, gbkihl haol:

-hkhxy knftagakm, fbyilm myñltym, hy uby wk wl il mlw hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, mail knliml ubaokil, k ubayi xam glmqbxftym xy haytli tyilxfty hy
fbyil. wk mlw yiyxacl hy kxkhím hy ckbnk w hy qlhk nk aipaiaqk gkqytvk hy
mb naikoy, wk xy mli lhalmkm qlhkm nkm ramqltakm dtlpkikm hyn kihkiqy
gkfknnytík, wk glilegl xa iygyhkh w yn dynactl yi uby xy dbmaytli rkfytnkm
nyíhl, wk, dlt xamytaglthak hy halm, ymgktxyiqkihl yi gkfyek dtldak, nkm
kflxail.

gbkihl ymql ny lwytli hygat nlm qtym, gtywytli, mai hbhk, uby kncbik ibyvk
nlgbtk ny rkfík qlxkhl. w mkimói ny haol:

-¿krltk, myñlt hli ubaolqy, uby qyiyxlm ibyvk uby ymqá hymyigkiqkhk nk
myñltk hbngaiyk, mkny vbymqtk xytgyh gli yml? w ¿kcltk uby ymqkxlm qki k
dauby hy myt dkmqltym, dktk dkmkt gkiqkihl nk vahk, glxl bilm dtíigadym,
ubayty vbymk xytgyh rkgytmy ytxaqkñl? gknny, dlt mb vahk, vbynvk yi mí, w
héoymy hy gbyiqlm.

-nlm hy rkmqk kubí -tydnagó hli ubaolqy-, uby rki mahl vythkhytlm yi xa
hkñl, nlm rk hy vlnvyt xa xbytqy, gli kwbhk hyn gaynl, yi xa dtlvygrl. wl,
myñltym, mayiql uby xy vlw xbtayihl k qlhk dtaymk; héoyimy fbtnkm kdktqy, w
qtkíckixy bi glipymlt uby xy glipaymy w bi ymgtafkil uby rkck xa
qymqkxyiql, uby yi qknym qtkigym glxl émqy il my rk hy fbtnkt yn rlxfty gli
yn knxk; w kmí, mbdnagl uby, yi qkiql uby yn myñlt gbtk xy glipaymk, vkwki
dlt yn ymgtafkil.

xatátlimy bilm k lqtlm, khxatkhlm hy nkm tkeliym hy hli ubaolqy, w, kbiuby
yi hbhk, ny ubamaytli gtyyt; w bik hy nkm myñknym dlt hlihy glioyqbtktli my
xltík pby yn rkfyt vbynql gli qkiqk pkganahkh hy nlgl k gbythl, dltuby k
nkm wk hagrkm tkeliym kñkhaó lqtkm xbgrkm qki fayi hagrkm, qki gtamqakikm w
gli qkiql gligaytql, uby hyn qlhl nym vail k ubaqkt nk hbhk, w k gtyyt uby
ymqkfk gbythl.

rael mknat nk cyiqy yn gbtk, w ubyhómy mlnl gli én, w glipymóny.

yn fkgrannyt pby dlt yn ymgtafkil, w hy knní k dlgl vlnvaó gli én w gli
mkigrl dkiek; yn gbkn mkigrl, uby wk mkfík dlt ibyvkm hyn fkgrannyt yi ubé
ymqkhl ymqkfk mb myñlt, rknnkihl k nk kxk w k nk mlftaik nnltlmkm, glxyieó
k rkgyt dbgrytlm w k hyttkxkt náctaxkm. kgkfómy nk glipymaói, w mknaó yn
gbtk, hagayihl:

-vythkhytkxyiqy my xbyty, w vythkhytkxyiqy ymqá gbythl knliml ubaokil yn
fbyil; fayi dlhyxlm yiqtkt dktk uby rkck mb qymqkxyiql.

ymqkm ibyvkm haytli bi qyttafny yxdboói k nlm lolm dtyñkhlm hy kxk, mlftaik
w hy mkigrl dkiek, mb fbyi ymgbhytl, hy qkn xkiytk, uby nlm rael tyvyiqkt
nkm náctaxkm hy nlm lolm w xan dtlpbihlm mbmdatlm hyn dygrl; dltuby,
vythkhytkxyiqy, glxl kncbik vye my rk hagrl, yi qkiql uby hli ubaolqy pby
knliml ubaokil yn fbyil, k mygkm, w yi qkiql uby pby hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, pby mayxdty hy kdkgafny glihagaói w hy kctkhkfny qtkql, w dlt ymql
il mónl ytk fayi ubytahl hy nlm hy mb gkmk, mail hy qlhlm gbkiqlm ny
glilgíki.

yiqtó yn ymgtafkil gli nlm hyxám, w, hymdbém hy rkfyt rygrl nk gkfyek hyn
qymqkxyiql w lthyikhl mb knxk hli ubaolqy, gli qlhkm kubynnkm
gatgbimqkigakm gtamqakikm uby my tyubaytyi, nnyckihl k nkm xkihkm, haol:

-Íqyx, ym xa vlnbiqkh uby hy gaytqlm haiytlm uby mkigrl dkiek, k ubayi yi
xa nlgbtk ragy xa ymgbhytl, qayiy, uby, dltuby rk rkfahl yiqty én w xí
gaytqkm gbyiqkm, w hktym w qlxktym, ubaytl uby il my ny rkck gktcl hynnlm,
ia my ny dahk gbyiqk kncbik, mail uby ma mlftkty kncbil, hymdbém hy rkfytmy
dkckhl hy nl uby ny hyfl, yn tymqkiqy myk mbwl, uby mytá fayi dlgl, w fbyi
dtlvygrl ny rkck; w, ma glxl ymqkihl wl nlgl pba dktqy dktk hktny yn
clfaytil hy nk íimbnk, dbhaytk kcltk, ymqkihl gbythl, hktny yn hy bi tyail,
my ny haytk, dltuby nk myigannye hy mb glihagaói w pahynahkh hy mb qtkql nl
xytygy.

w, vlnvaéihlmy k mkigrl, ny haol:

-dythóikxy, kxacl, hy nk lgkmaói uby qy ry hkhl hy dktygyt nlgl glxl wl,
rkgaéihlqy gkyt yi yn yttlt yi uby wl ry gkíhl, hy uby rbfl w rkw
gkfknnytlm kihkiqym yi yn xbihl.

-¡kw! -tymdlihaó mkigrl, nnltkihl-: il my xbytk vbymqtk xytgyh, myñlt xíl,
mail qlxy xa glimyol w vavk xbgrlm kñlm, dltuby nk xkwlt nlgbtk uby dbyhy
rkgyt bi rlxfty yi ymqk vahk ym hyoktmy xltat, mai xám ia xám, mai uby
ikhay ny xkqy, ia lqtkm xkilm ny kgkfyi uby nkm hy nk xynkiglník. xaty il
myk dytyelml, mail nyváiqymy hymk gkxk, w váxlilm kn gkxdl vymqahlm hy
dkmqltym, glxl qyiyxlm gligytqkhl: ubaeá qtkm hy kncbik xkqk rknnktyxlm k
nk myñltk hlñk hbngaiyk hymyigkiqkhk, uby il rkwk xám uby vyt. ma ym uby my
xbyty hy dymkt hy vytmy vyigahl, égryxy k xí nk gbndk, hagayihl uby dlt
rkfyt wl gaigrkhl xkn k tlgaikiqy ny hyttafktli; gbkiql xám, uby vbymqtk
xytgyh rkftá vamql yi mbm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm myt glmk lthaiktak
hyttafktmy bilm gkfknnytlm k lqtlm, w yn uby ym vyigahl rlw myt vyigyhlt
xkñkik.

-kmí ym -haol mkimói-, w yn fbyi mkigrl dkiek ymqá xbw yi nk vythkh hymqlm
gkmlm.

-myñltym -haol hli ubaolqy-, váxlilm dlgl k dlgl, dbym wk yi nlm iahlm hy
kiqkñl il rkw dáoktlm rlckñl: wl pba nlgl, w wk mlw gbythl; pba hli ubaolqy
hy nk xkigrk, w mlw kcltk, glxl ry hagrl, knliml ubaokil yn fbyil. dbyhk
gli vbymqtkm xytgyhym xa kttydyiqaxayiql w xa vythkh vlnvytxy k nk
ymqaxkgaói uby hy xí my qyiík, w dtlmack khynkiqy yn myñlt ymgtafkil.

»Íqyx, xkihl qlhk xa rkgayihk, k dbytqk gyttkhk, k kiqliak ubaokik, xa
mlftaik, uby ymqá dtymyiqy, rkfayihl mkgkhl dtaxytl hy nl xám fayi dktkhl
hynnk nl uby pbyty xyiymqyt dktk gbxdnat nkm xkihkm uby hyol rygrkm; w nk
dtaxytk mkqampkgaói uby my rkck ubaytl uby myk dkckt yn mknktal uby hyfl
hyn qayxdl uby xa kxk xy rk mytvahl, w xám vyaiqy hbgkhlm dktk bi vymqahl.
hyol dlt xam knfkgykm kn myñlt gbtk w kn myñlt fkgrannyt mkimói gkttkmgl,
uby ymqái dtymyiqym.

»Íqyx, ym xa vlnbiqkh uby ma kiqliak ubaokik, xa mlftaik, ubamayty gkmktmy,
my gkmy gli rlxfty hy ubayi dtaxytl my rkwk rygrl aipltxkgaói uby il mkfy
ubé glmkm myki naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm; w, yi gkml uby my kvytacbkty uby nl
mkfy, w, gli qlhl yml, xa mlftaik ubamayty gkmktmy gli én, w my gkmkty,
daythk qlhl nl uby ny ry xkihkhl, nl gbkn dbyhki xam knfkgykm hamqtafbat yi
lftkm díkm k mb vlnbiqkh.

»Íqyx, mbdnagl k nlm hagrlm myñltym xam knfkgykm uby ma nk fbyik mbytqy nym
qtboyty k glilgyt kn kbqlt uby hagyi uby glxdbml bik ramqltak uby kihk dlt
krí gli yn qíqbnl hy mycbihk dktqy hy nkm rkekñkm hy hli ubaolqy hy nk
xkigrk, hy xa dktqy ny dahki, gbki yigktygahkxyiqy myt dbyhk, dythliy nk
lgkmaói uby mai wl dyimktnl ny ha hy rkfyt ymgtaql qkiqlm w qki ctkihym
hamdktkqym glxl yi ynnk ymgtafy, dltuby dktql hymqk vahk gli ymgtúdbnl hy
rkfytny hkhl xlqavl dktk ymgtafatnlm.

gyttó gli ymql yn qymqkxyiql, w, qlxáihlny bi hymxkwl, my qyihaó hy nktcl k
nktcl yi nk gkxk. knfltlqátlimy qlhlm w kgbhaytli k mb tyxyhal, w yi qtym
híkm uby vavaó hymdbém hymqy hlihy rael yn qymqkxyiql, my hymxkwkfk xbw k
xyibhl. kihkfk nk gkmk knfltlqkhk; dytl, gli qlhl, glxík nk mlftaik,
ftaihkfk yn kxk, w my tyclgaokfk mkigrl dkiek; uby ymql hyn rytyhkt kncl
flttk l qyxdnk yi yn rytyhytl nk xyxltak hy nk dyik uby ym tkeói uby hyoy
yn xbytql.

yi pai, nnycó yn únqaxl hy hli ubaolqy, hymdbém hy tygyfahlm qlhlm nlm
mkgtkxyiqlm, w hymdbém hy rkfyt kflxaikhl gli xbgrkm w ypagkgym tkeliym hy
nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm. rknnómy yn ymgtafkil dtymyiqy, w haol uby ibigk
rkfík nyíhl yi iaicúi naftl hy gkfknnytíkm uby kncúi gkfknnytl kihkiqy
rbfaymy xbytql yi mb nygrl qki mlmyckhkxyiqy w qki gtamqakil glxl hli
ubaolqy; yn gbkn, yiqty glxdkmaliym w náctaxkm hy nlm uby knní my rknnktli,
hal mb ymdítaqb: ubaytl hygat uby my xbtaó.

vayihl nl gbkn yn gbtk, dahaó kn ymgtafkil ny haymy dlt qymqaxlial glxl
knliml ubaokil yn fbyil, nnkxkhl glxúixyiqy hli ubaolqy hy nk xkigrk, rkfík
dkmkhl hymqk dtymyiqy vahk w xbytql ikqbtknxyiqy; w uby yn qkn qymqaxlial
dyhík dktk ubaqkt nk lgkmaói hy kncúi lqtl kbqlt uby gahy rkxyqy fyiyicyna
ny tymbgaqkmy pknmkxyiqy, w ragaymy aikgkfkfnym ramqltakm hy mbm rkekñkm.

ymqy pai qbvl yn aicyialml rahkncl hy nk xkigrk, gbwl nbckt il ubaml dliyt
gahy rkxyqy dbiqbknxyiqy, dlt hyokt uby qlhkm nkm vannkm w nbcktym hy nk
xkigrk gliqyihaymyi yiqty mí dlt kraoátmyny w qyiétmyny dlt mbwl, glxl
gliqyihaytli nkm mayqy gabhkhym hy ctygak dlt rlxytl.

héokimy hy dliyt kubí nlm nnkiqlm hy mkigrl, mlftaik w kxk hy hli ubaolqy,
nlm ibyvlm ydaqkpalm hy mb mydbnqbtk, kbiuby mkimói gkttkmgl ny dbml émqy:

   wkgy kubí yn rahkncl pbytqy
   uby k qkiql ymqtyxl nnycó
   hy vknayiqy, uby my khvaytqy
   uby nk xbytqy il qtabipó
   hy mb vahk gli mb xbytqy.
   qbvl k qlhl yn xbihl yi dlgl;
   pby yn ymdkiqkol w yn glgl
   hyn xbihl, yi qkn glwbiqbtk,
   uby kgtyhaqó mb vyiqbtk
   xltat gbythl w vavat nlgl.

w yn dtbhyiqímaxl gahy rkxyqy haol k mb dnbxk:

-kubí ubyhktám, glnckhk hymqk ymdyqytk w hymqy ranl hy knkxfty, ia mé ma
fayi gltqkhk l xkn qkokhk déñlnk xík, khlihy vavatám nbyiclm macnlm, ma
dtymbiqblmlm w xknkihtaiym ramqltakhltym il qy hymgbyncki dktk dtlpkiktqy.
dytl, kiqym uby k qa nnycbyi, nym dbyhym khvytqat, w hygatnym yi yn xyolt
xlhl uby dbhaytym:

   ''¡qkqy, qkqy, plnnligaglm!
   hy iaicbil myk qlgkhk;
   dltuby ymqk axdtymk, fbyi tyw,
   dktk xí ymqkfk cbkthkhk.

dktk xí mlnk ikgaó hli ubaolqy, w wl dktk én; én mbdl lftkt w wl ymgtafat;
mlnlm nlm hlm mlxlm dktk yi bil, k hymdygrl w dymkt hyn ymgtaqlt paicahl w
qlthymannymgl uby my kqtyvaó, l my rk hy kqtyvyt, k ymgtafat gli dnbxk hy
kvymqtbe ctlmytk w xkn hynañkhk nkm rkekñkm hy xa vknytlml gkfknnytl,
dltuby il ym gktck hy mbm rlxftlm ia kmbiql hy mb tymptakhl aicyial; k
ubayi khvytqatám, ma kgkml nnyckm k glilgytny, uby hyoy tydlmkt yi nk
mydbnqbtk nlm gkimkhlm w wk dlhtahlm rbymlm hy hli ubaolqy, w il ny ubaytk
nnyvkt, gliqtk qlhlm nlm pbytlm hy nk xbytqy, k gkmqannk nk vayok,
rkgaéihlny mknat hy nk pbymk hlihy tykn w vythkhytkxyiqy wkgy qyihahl hy
nktcl k nktcl, axdlmafanaqkhl hy rkgyt qytgytk oltikhk w mknahk ibyvk; uby,
dktk rkgyt fbtnk hy qkiqkm glxl ragaytli qkiqlm kihkiqym gkfknnytlm, fkmqki
nkm hlm uby én rael, qki k cbmql w fyiydnágaql hy nkm cyiqym k gbwk ilqagak
nnycktli, kmí yi émqlm glxl yi nlm ymqtkñlm tyailm''. w gli ymql gbxdnatám
gli qb gtamqakik dtlpymaói, kglimyokihl fayi k ubayi xkn qy ubayty, w wl
ubyhkté mkqampygrl w bpkil hy rkfyt mahl yn dtaxytl uby cleó yn ptbql hy
mbm ymgtaqlm yiqytkxyiqy, glxl hymykfk, dbym il rk mahl lqtl xa hymyl uby
dliyt yi kflttygaxayiql hy nlm rlxftym nkm paicahkm w hamdktkqkhkm
ramqltakm hy nlm naftlm hy gkfknnytíkm, uby, dlt nkm hy xa vythkhytl hli
ubaolqy, vki wk qtldyekihl, w rki hy gkyt hyn qlhl, mai hbhk kncbik. vkny.

pai
