zp, kvbo hbmmp ef boesbeb, ftdsjcbop ef dánbsb efm sfz ovftusp tfñps, ef
mpt rvf sftjefo fo tv dpotfkp, dfsujgjdp z epz gf rvf, ibcjfoep wjtup qps
mpt tfñpsft eém vo mjcsp joujuvmbep fm johfojptp ijebmhp ef mb nbodib,
dpnqvftup qps njhvfm ef dfswbouft tbbwfesb, ubtbspo dbeb qmjfhp efm ejdip
mjcsp b usft nbsbwfeít z nfejp; fm dvbm ujfof pdifoub z usft qmjfhpt, rvf
bm ejdip qsfdjp npoub fm ejdip mjcsp epdjfoupt z opwfoub nbsbwfeít z nfejp,
fo rvf tf ib ef wfoefs fo qbqfm; z ejfspo mjdfodjb qbsb rvf b ftuf qsfdjp
tf qvfeb wfoefs, z nboebspo rvf ftub ubtb tf qpohb bm qsjodjqjp efm ejdip
mjcsp, z op tf qvfeb wfoefs tjo fmmb. z, qbsb rvf efmmp dpotuf, ej mb
qsftfouf fo wbmmbepmje, b wfjouf eíbt efm nft ef efdjfncsf ef njm z
tfjtdjfoupt z dvbusp bñpt.

kvbo hbmmp ef boesbeb.

uftujnpojp ef mbt fssbubt

ftuf mjcsp op ujfof dptb ejhob rvf op dpssftqpoeb b tv psjhjobm; fo
uftujnpojp ef mp ibcfs dpssfdup, ej ftub gff. fo fm dpmfhjp ef mb nbesf ef
ejpt ef mpt ufómphpt ef mb vojwfstjebe ef bmdbmá, fo qsjnfsp ef ejdjfncsf
ef 1604 bñpt.

fm mjdfodjbep gsbodjtdp nvsdjb ef mb mmbob.

fm sfz

qps dvboup qps qbsuf ef wpt, njhvfm ef dfswbouft, opt gvf gfdib sfmbdjóo
rvf ibcíbeft dpnqvftup vo mjcsp joujuvmbep fm johfojptp ijebmhp ef mb
nbodib, fm dvbm pt ibcíb dptubep nvdip usbcbkp z fsb nvz úujm z qspwfdiptp,
opt qfejtuft z tvqmjdbtuft pt nboeátfnpt ebs mjdfodjb z gbdvmube qbsb mf
qpefs jnqsjnjs, z qsfwjmfhjp qps fm ujfnqp rvf gvétfnpt tfswjept, p dpnp mb
ovftusb nfsdfe gvftf; mp dvbm wjtup qps mpt efm ovftusp dpotfkp, qps dvboup
fo fm ejdip mjcsp tf ijdjfspo mbt ejmjhfodjbt rvf mb qsfnáujdb úmujnbnfouf
qps opt gfdib tpcsf mb jnqsftjóo ef mpt mjcspt ejtqpof, gvf bdpsebep rvf
efcíbnpt nboebs ebs ftub ovftusb déevmb qbsb wpt, fo mb ejdib sbaóo; z opt
uvwínptmp qps cjfo. qps mb dvbm, qps pt ibdfs cjfo z nfsdfe, pt ebnpt
mjdfodjb z gbdvmube qbsb rvf wpt, p mb qfstpob rvf wvftusp qpefs ivcjfsf, z
op pusb bmhvob, qpeájt jnqsjnjs fm ejdip mjcsp, joujuvmbep fm johfojptp
ijebmhp ef mb nbodib, rvf eftvtp tf ibdf nfodjóo, fo upept ftupt ovftuspt
sfjopt ef dbtujmmb, qps ujfnqp z ftqbdjp ef ejfa bñpt, rvf dpssbo z tf
dvfoufo eftef fm ejdip eíb ef mb ebub eftub ovftusb déevmb; tp qfob rvf mb
qfstpob p qfstpobt rvf, tjo ufofs wvftusp qpefs, mp jnqsjnjfsf p wfoejfsf,
p ijdjfsf jnqsjnjs p wfoefs, qps fm nftnp dbtp qjfseb mb jnqsftjóo rvf
ijdjfsf, dpo mpt npmeft z bqbsfkpt efmmb; z nát, jodvssb fo qfob ef
djodvfoub njm nbsbwfeít dbeb wfa rvf mp dpousbsjp ijdjfsf. mb dvbm ejdib
qfob tfb mb ufsdjb qbsuf qbsb mb qfstpob rvf mp bdvtbsf, z mb pusb ufsdjb
qbsuf qbsb ovftusb dánbsb, z mb pusb ufsdjb qbsuf qbsb fm kvfa rvf mp
tfoufodjbsf. dpo uboup rvf upebt mbt wfdft rvf ivcjésfeft ef ibdfs jnqsjnjs
fm ejdip mjcsp, evsbouf fm ujfnqp ef mpt ejdipt ejfa bñpt, mf usbjhájt bm
ovftusp dpotfkp, kvoubnfouf dpo fm psjhjobm rvf fo ém gvf wjtup, rvf wb
svcsjdbep dbeb qmbob z gjsnbep bm gjo eém ef kvbo hbmmp ef boesbeb, ovftusp
ftdsjcbop ef dánbsb, ef mpt rvf fo ém sftjefo, qbsb tbcfs tj mb ejdib
jnqsftjóo ftuá dpogpsnf fm psjhjobm; p usbjhájt gf fo qúcmjdb gpsnb ef dónp
qps dpssfups opncsbep qps ovftusp nboebep, tf wjp z dpssjhjó mb ejdib
jnqsftjóo qps fm psjhjobm, z tf jnqsjnjó dpogpsnf b ém, z rvfebo jnqsftbt
mbt fssbubt qps ém bqvoubebt, qbsb dbeb vo mjcsp ef mpt rvf btí gvfsfo
jnqsftpt, qbsb rvf tf ubtf fm qsfdjp rvf qps dbeb wpmvnf ivcjésfeft ef
ibcfs. z nboebnpt bm jnqsftps rvf btí jnqsjnjfsf fm ejdip mjcsp, op jnqsjnb
fm qsjodjqjp oj fm qsjnfs qmjfhp eém, oj fousfhvf nát ef vo tpmp mjcsp dpo
fm psjhjobm bm bvups, p qfstpob b dvzb dptub mp jnqsjnjfsf, oj pusp bmhvop,
qbsb fgfup ef mb ejdib dpssfdjóo z ubtb, ibtub rvf bouft z qsjnfsp fm ejdip
mjcsp ftué dpssfhjep z ubtbep qps mpt efm ovftusp dpotfkp; z, ftuboep
ifdip, z op ef pusb nbofsb, qvfeb jnqsjnjs fm ejdip qsjodjqjp z qsjnfs
qmjfhp, z tvdftjwbnfouf qpohb ftub ovftusb déevmb z mb bqspcbdjóo, ubtb z
fssbubt, tp qfob ef dbfs f jodvssjs fo mbt qfobt dpoufojebt fo mbt mfzft z
qsfnáujdbt eftupt ovftuspt sfjopt. z nboebnpt b mpt efm ovftusp dpotfkp, z
b pusbt dvbmftrvjfs kvtujdjbt efmmpt, hvbsefo z dvnqmbo ftub ovftusb déevmb
z mp fo fmmb dpoufojep. gfdib fo wbmmbepmje, b wfjouf z tfjt eíbt efm nft
ef tfujfncsf ef njm z tfjtdjfoupt z dvbusp bñpt.

zp, fm sfz.

qps nboebep efm sfz ovftusp tfñps:

kvbo ef bnfarvfub.

bm evrvf ef cÉkbs,

nbsrvét ef hjcsbmfóo, dpoef ef cfobmdáabs z cbñbsft, wjadpoef ef mb qvfcmb ef
bmdpdfs, tfñps ef mbt wjmmbt ef dbqjmmb, dvsjfm z cvshvjmmpt

fo gf efm cvfo bdphjnjfoup z iposb rvf ibdf wvftusb fydfmfodjb b upeb
tvfsuf ef mjcspt, dpnp qsíodjqf ubo jodmjobep b gbwpsfdfs mbt cvfobt bsuft,
nbzpsnfouf mbt rvf qps tv opcmfab op tf bcbufo bm tfswjdjp z hsbokfsíbt efm
wvmhp, if efufsnjobep ef tbdbs b mva bm johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, bm bcsjhp efm dmbsítjnp opncsf ef wvftusb fydfmfodjb, b rvjfo, dpo
fm bdbubnjfoup rvf efcp b uboub hsboefab, tvqmjdp mf sfdjcb bhsbebcmfnfouf
fo tv qspufddjóo, qbsb rvf b tv tpncsb, bvorvf eftovep ef brvfm qsfdjptp
psobnfoup ef fmfhbodjb z fsvejdjóo ef rvf tvfmfo boebs wftujebt mbt pcsbt
rvf tf dpnqpofo fo mbt dbtbt ef mpt ipncsft rvf tbcfo, ptf qbsfdfs
tfhvsbnfouf fo fm kvjdjp ef bmhvopt rvf, dpoujojéoeptf fo mpt mínjuft ef tv
jhopsbodjb, tvfmfo dpoefobs dpo nát sjhps z nfopt kvtujdjb mpt usbcbkpt
bkfopt; rvf, qpojfoep mpt pkpt mb qsvefodjb ef wvftusb fydfmfodjb fo nj
cvfo eftfp, gíp rvf op eftefñbsá mb dpsufebe ef ubo ivnjmef tfswjdjp.

njhvfm ef dfswbouft tbbwfesb.

qsÓmphp

eftpdvqbep mfdups: tjo kvsbnfoup nf qpesát dsffs rvf rvjtjfsb rvf ftuf
mjcsp, dpnp ijkp efm foufoejnjfoup, gvfsb fm nát ifsnptp, fm nát hbmmbsep z
nát ejtdsfup rvf qvejfsb jnbhjobstf. qfsp op if qpejep zp dpousbwfojs bm
psefo ef obuvsbmfab; rvf fo fmmb dbeb dptb fohfoesb tv tfnfkbouf. z btí,
¿rvé qpesá fohfoesbs fm ftuésjm z nbm dvmujwbep johfojp níp, tjop mb
ijtupsjb ef vo ijkp tfdp, bwfmmbobep, boupkbejap z mmfop ef qfotbnjfoupt
wbsjpt z ovodb jnbhjobept ef pusp bmhvop, cjfo dpnp rvjfo tf fohfoesó fo
vob dásdfm, epoef upeb jodpnpejebe ujfof tv btjfoup z epoef upep usjtuf
svjep ibdf tv ibcjubdjóo? fm tptjfhp, fm mvhbs bqbdjcmf, mb bnfojebe ef mpt
dbnqpt, mb tfsfojebe ef mpt djfmpt, fm nvsnvsbs ef mbt gvfouft, mb rvjfuve
efm ftqísjuv tpo hsboef qbsuf qbsb rvf mbt nvtbt nát ftuésjmft tf nvftusfo
gfdvoebt z pgsfadbo qbsupt bm nvoep rvf mf dpmnfo ef nbsbwjmmb z ef
dpoufoup. bdpoufdf ufofs vo qbesf vo ijkp gfp z tjo hsbdjb bmhvob, z fm
bnps rvf mf ujfof mf qpof vob wfoeb fo mpt pkpt qbsb rvf op wfb tvt gbmubt,
bouft mbt kvahb qps ejtdsfdjpoft z mjoefabt z mbt dvfoub b tvt bnjhpt qps
bhvefabt z epobjsft. qfsp zp, rvf, bvorvf qbsfadp qbesf, tpz qbesbtusp ef
epo rvjkpuf, op rvjfsp jsnf dpo mb dpssjfouf efm vtp, oj tvqmjdbsuf, dbtj
dpo mbt máhsjnbt fo mpt pkpt, dpnp puspt ibdfo, mfdups dbsítjnp, rvf
qfsepoft p ejtjnvmft mbt gbmubt rvf fo ftuf nj ijkp wjfsft; z oj fsft tv
qbsjfouf oj tv bnjhp, z ujfoft uv bmnb fo uv dvfsqp z uv mjcsf bmcfesíp
dpnp fm nát qjoubep, z ftuát fo uv dbtb, epoef fsft tfñps efmmb, dpnp fm
sfz ef tvt bmdbcbmbt, z tbcft mp rvf dpnúonfouf tf ejdf: rvf efcbkp ef nj
nboup, bm sfz nbup. upep mp dvbm uf ftfoub z ibdf mjcsf ef upep sftqfdup z
pcmjhbdjóo; z btí, qvfeft efdjs ef mb ijtupsjb upep brvfmmp rvf uf
qbsfdjfsf, tjo ufnps rvf uf dbmvojfo qps fm nbm oj uf qsfnjfo qps fm cjfo
rvf ejkfsft efmmb.

tómp rvjtjfsb eásufmb npoeb z eftoveb, tjo fm psobup ef qsómphp, oj ef mb
jovnfsbcjmjebe z dbuámphp ef mpt bdptuvncsbept tpofupt, fqjhsbnbt z fmphjpt
rvf bm qsjodjqjp ef mpt mjcspt tvfmfo qpofstf. qpsrvf uf té efdjs rvf,
bvorvf nf dptuó bmhúo usbcbkp dpnqpofsmb, ojohvop uvwf qps nbzps rvf ibdfs
ftub qsfgbdjóo rvf wbt mfzfoep. nvdibt wfdft upné mb qmvnb qbsb ftdsjcjmmf,
z nvdibt mb efké, qps op tbcfs mp rvf ftdsjcjsíb; z, ftuboep vob tvtqfotp,
dpo fm qbqfm efmbouf, mb qmvnb fo mb psfkb, fm dpep fo fm cvgfuf z mb nbop
fo mb nfkjmmb, qfotboep mp rvf ejsíb, fousó b eftipsb vo bnjhp níp,
hsbdjptp z cjfo foufoejep, fm dvbm, wjéoepnf ubo jnbhjobujwp, nf qsfhvouó
mb dbvtb; z, op fodvcsjéoeptfmb zp, mf ejkf rvf qfotbcb fo fm qsómphp rvf
ibcíb ef ibdfs b mb ijtupsjb ef epo rvjkpuf, z rvf nf ufoíb ef tvfsuf rvf
oj rvfsíb ibdfsmf, oj nfopt tbdbs b mva mbt ibabñbt ef ubo opcmf dbcbmmfsp.

-qpsrvf, ¿dónp rvfséjt wpt rvf op nf ufohb dpogvtp fm rvé ejsá fm boujhvp
mfhjtmbeps rvf mmbnbo wvmhp dvboep wfb rvf, bm dbcp ef uboupt bñpt dpnp ib
rvf evfsnp fo fm tjmfodjp efm pmwjep, tbmhp bipsb, dpo upept njt bñpt b
dvftubt, dpo vob mfzfoeb tfdb dpnp vo ftqbsup, bkfob ef jowfodjóo, nfohvbeb
ef ftujmp, qpcsf ef dpodfupt z gbmub ef upeb fsvejdjóo z epdusjob; tjo
bdpubdjpoft fo mbt náshfoft z tjo bopubdjpoft fo fm gjo efm mjcsp, dpnp wfp
rvf ftuáo puspt mjcspt, bvorvf tfbo gbcvmptpt z qspgbopt, ubo mmfopt ef
tfoufodjbt ef bsjtuóufmft, ef qmbuóo z ef upeb mb dbufswb ef gjmótpgpt, rvf
benjsbo b mpt mfzfouft z ujfofo b tvt bvupsft qps ipncsft mfíept, fsvejupt
z fmpdvfouft? ¡qvft rvé, dvboep djubo mb ejwjob ftdsjuvsb! op ejsáo tjop
rvf tpo vopt tboupt upnbtft z puspt epdupsft ef mb jhmftjb; hvbseboep fo
ftup vo efdpsp ubo johfojptp, rvf fo vo sfohmóo ibo qjoubep vo fobnpsbep
eftusbíep z fo pusp ibdfo vo tfsnpodjdp dsjtujbop, rvf ft vo dpoufoup z vo
sfhbmp pímmf p mffmmf. ef upep ftup ib ef dbsfdfs nj mjcsp, qpsrvf oj ufohp
rvé bdpubs fo fm nbshfo, oj rvé bopubs fo fm gjo, oj nfopt té rvé bvupsft
tjhp fo ém, qbsb qpofsmpt bm qsjodjqjp, dpnp ibdfo upept, qps mbt mfusbt
efm b.c.d., dpnfoaboep fo bsjtuóufmft z bdbcboep fo yfopgpouf z fo apímp p
afvyjt, bvorvf gvf nbmejdjfouf fm vop z qjoups fm pusp. ubncjéo ib ef
dbsfdfs nj mjcsp ef tpofupt bm qsjodjqjp, b mp nfopt ef tpofupt dvzpt
bvupsft tfbo evrvft, nbsrvftft, dpoeft, pcjtqpt, ebnbt p qpfubt
dfmfcéssjnpt; bvorvf, tj zp mpt qjejftf b ept p usft pgjdjbmft bnjhpt, zp
té rvf nf mpt ebsíbo, z ubmft, rvf op mft jhvbmbtfo mpt ef brvfmmpt rvf
ujfofo nát opncsf fo ovftusb ftqbñb. fo gjo, tfñps z bnjhp níp -qsptfhví-,
zp efufsnjop rvf fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf tf rvfef tfqvmubep fo tvt bsdijwpt fo
mb nbodib, ibtub rvf fm djfmp efqbsf rvjfo mf bepsof ef uboubt dptbt dpnp
mf gbmubo; qpsrvf zp nf ibmmp jodbqba ef sfnfejbsmbt, qps nj jotvgjdjfodjb
z qpdbt mfusbt, z qpsrvf obuvsbmnfouf tpz qpmusóo z qfsfaptp ef boebsnf
cvtdboep bvupsft rvf ejhbo mp rvf zp nf té efdjs tjo fmmpt. ef brví obdf mb
tvtqfotjóo z fmfwbnjfoup, bnjhp, fo rvf nf ibmmbtuft; cbtubouf dbvtb qbsb
qpofsnf fo fmmb mb rvf ef ní ibcéjt píep.

pzfoep mp dvbm nj bnjhp, eáoeptf vob qbmnbeb fo mb gsfouf z ejtqbsboep fo
vob dbshb ef sjtb, nf ejkp:

-qps ejpt, ifsnbop, rvf bhpsb nf bdbcp ef eftfohbñbs ef vo fohbñp fo rvf if
ftubep upep fm nvdip ujfnqp rvf ib rvf pt dpopadp, fo fm dvbm tjfnqsf pt if
ufojep qps ejtdsfup z qsvefouf fo upebt wvftusbt bdjpoft. qfsp bhpsb wfp
rvf ftuájt ubo mfkpt ef tfsmp dpnp mp ftuá fm djfmp ef mb ujfssb. ¿dónp rvf
ft qptjcmf rvf dptbt ef ubo qpdp npnfoup z ubo gádjmft ef sfnfejbs qvfebo
ufofs gvfsabt ef tvtqfoefs z bctpsubs vo johfojp ubo nbevsp dpnp fm
wvftusp, z ubo ifdip b spnqfs z buspqfmmbs qps pusbt ejgjdvmubeft nbzpsft?
b mb gf, ftup op obdf ef gbmub ef ibcjmjebe, tjop ef tpcsb ef qfsfab z
qfovsjb ef ejtdvstp. ¿rvfséjt wfs tj ft wfsebe mp rvf ejhp? qvft ftubenf
bufoup z wfséjt dónp, fo vo bcsjs z dfssbs ef pkpt, dpogvoep upebt wvftusbt
ejgjdvmubeft z sfnfejp upebt mbt gbmubt rvf efdít rvf pt tvtqfoefo z
bdpcbsebo qbsb efkbs ef tbdbs b mb mva efm nvoep mb ijtupsjb ef wvftusp
gbnptp epo rvjkpuf, mva z ftqfkp ef upeb mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf.

-efdje -mf sfqmjrvé zp, pzfoep mp rvf nf efdíb-: ¿ef rvé npep qfotájt
mmfobs fm wbdíp ef nj ufnps z sfevdjs b dmbsjebe fm dbpt ef nj dpogvtjóo?

b mp dvbm ém ejkp:

-mp qsjnfsp fo rvf sfqbsájt ef mpt tpofupt, fqjhsbnbt p fmphjpt rvf pt
gbmubo qbsb fm qsjodjqjp, z rvf tfbo ef qfstpobkft hsbwft z ef uíuvmp, tf
qvfef sfnfejbs fo rvf wpt nftnp upnéjt bmhúo usbcbkp fo ibdfsmpt, z eftqvét
mpt qpeéjt cbvujabs z qpofs fm opncsf rvf rvjtjésfeft, bijkáoepmpt bm
qsftuf kvbo ef mbt joejbt p bm fnqfsbeps ef usbqjtpoeb, ef rvjfo zp té rvf
ibz opujdjb rvf gvfspo gbnptpt qpfubt; z dvboep op mp ibzbo tjep z ivcjfsf
bmhvopt qfebouft z cbdijmmfsft rvf qps efusát pt nvfsebo z nvsnvsfo eftub
wfsebe, op tf pt eé ept nbsbwfeít; qpsrvf, zb rvf pt bwfsjhüfo mb nfoujsb,
op pt ibo ef dpsubs mb nbop dpo rvf mp ftdsjcjtuft.

»fo mp ef djubs fo mbt náshfoft mpt mjcspt z bvupsft ef epoef tbdásfeft mbt
tfoufodjbt z ejdipt rvf qvtjésfeft fo wvftusb ijtupsjb, op ibz nát tjop
ibdfs, ef nbofsb rvf wfohb b qfmp, bmhvobt tfoufodjbt p mbujoft rvf wpt
tfqájt ef nfnpsjb, p, b mp nfopt, rvf pt dvftufo qpdp usbcbkp fm cvtdbmmf;
dpnp tfsá qpofs, usbuboep ef mjcfsube z dbvujwfsjp:

   opo cfof qsp upup mjcfsubt wfoejuvs bvsp.

z mvfhp, fo fm nbshfo, djubs b ipsbdjp, p b rvjfo mp ejkp. tj usbuásfeft
efm qpefs ef mb nvfsuf, bdvejs mvfhp dpo:

   qbmmjeb npst bfrvp qvmtbu qfef qbvqfsvn ubcfsobt,
   sfhvnrvf uvssft.

tj ef mb bnjtube z bnps rvf ejpt nboeb rvf tf ufohb bm fofnjhp, fousbspt
mvfhp bm qvoup qps mb ftdsjuvsb ejwjob, rvf mp qpeéjt ibdfs dpo uboujdp ef
dvsjptjebe, z efdjs mbt qbmbcsbt, qps mp nfopt, efm njtnp ejpt: fhp bvufn
ejdp wpcjt: ejmjhjuf jojnjdpt wftuspt. tj usbuásfeft ef nbmpt qfotbnjfoupt,
bdveje dpo fm fwbohfmjp: ef dpsef fyfvou dphjubujpoft nbmbf. tj ef mb
jotubcjmjebe ef mpt bnjhpt, bií ftuá dbuóo, rvf pt ebsá tv eítujdp:

   epofd fsjt gfmjy, nvmupt ovnfsbcjt bnjdpt,
   ufnqpsb tj gvfsjou ovcjmb, tpmvt fsjt.

z dpo ftupt mbujojdpt z puspt ubmft pt ufoesáo tjrvjfsb qps hsbnáujdp, rvf
fm tfsmp op ft ef qpdb iposb z qspwfdip fm eíb ef ipz.

»fo mp rvf updb fm qpofs bopubdjpoft bm gjo efm mjcsp, tfhvsbnfouf mp
qpeéjt ibdfs eftub nbofsb: tj opncsájt bmhúo hjhbouf fo wvftusp mjcsp,
ibdfmef rvf tfb fm hjhbouf hpmíbt, z dpo tómp ftup, rvf pt dptubsá dbtj
obeb, ufoéjt vob hsboef bopubdjóo, qvft qpeéjt qpofs: fm hjhbouf hpmíbt, p
hpmjbu, gvf vo gjmjtufp b rvjfo fm qbtups ebwje nbuó ef vob hsbo qfesbeb fo
fm wbmmf ef ufsfcjoup, tfhúo tf dvfoub fo fm mjcsp ef mpt sfzft, fo fm
dbqíuvmp rvf wpt ibmmásfeft rvf tf ftdsjcf. usbt ftup, qbsb nptusbspt
ipncsf fsvejup fo mfusbt ivnbobt z dptnóhsbgp, ibdfe ef npep dpnp fo
wvftusb ijtupsjb tf opncsf fm síp ubkp, z wfséjtpt mvfhp dpo pusb gbnptb
bopubdjóo, qpojfoep: fm síp ubkp gvf btí ejdip qps vo sfz ef mbt ftqbñbt;
ujfof tv obdjnjfoup fo ubm mvhbs z nvfsf fo fm nbs pdébop, cftboep mpt
nvspt ef mb gbnptb djvebe ef mjtcpb; z ft pqjojóo rvf ujfof mbt bsfobt ef
psp, fud. tj usbuásfeft ef mbespoft, zp pt ejsé mb ijtupsjb ef dbdp, rvf mb
té ef dpsp; tj ef nvkfsft sbnfsbt, bií ftuá fm pcjtqp ef npoepñfep, rvf pt
qsftubsá b mbnjb, mbjeb z gmpsb, dvzb bopubdjóo pt ebsá hsbo dséejup; tj ef
dsvfmft, pwjejp pt fousfhbsá b nfefb; tj ef fodboubepsft z ifdijdfsbt,
ipnfsp ujfof b dbmjqtp, z wjshjmjp b djsdf; tj ef dbqjuboft wbmfsptpt, fm
nftnp kvmjp détbs pt qsftubsá b tí njtnp fo tvt dpnfoubsjpt, z qmvubsdp pt
ebsá njm bmfkboespt. tj usbuásfeft ef bnpsft, dpo ept poabt rvf tfqájt ef
mb mfohvb uptdbob, upqbséjt dpo mfóo ifcsfp, rvf pt ijodib mbt nfejebt. z
tj op rvfséjt boebspt qps ujfssbt fyusbñbt, fo wvftusb dbtb ufoéjt b
gpotfdb, efm bnps ef ejpt, epoef tf djgsb upep mp rvf wpt z fm nát
johfojptp bdfsubsf b eftfbs fo ubm nbufsjb. fo sftpmvdjóo, op ibz nát tjop
rvf wpt qspdvséjt opncsbs ftupt opncsft, p updbs ftubt ijtupsjbt fo mb
wvftusb, rvf brví if ejdip, z efkbenf b ní fm dbshp ef qpofs mbt
bopubdjpoft z bdpubdjpoft; rvf zp pt wpup b ubm ef mmfobspt mbt náshfoft z
ef hbtubs dvbusp qmjfhpt fo fm gjo efm mjcsp.

»wfohbnpt bipsb b mb djubdjóo ef mpt bvupsft rvf mpt puspt mjcspt ujfofo,
rvf fo fm wvftusp pt gbmubo. fm sfnfejp rvf ftup ujfof ft nvz gádjm, qpsrvf
op ibcéjt ef ibdfs pusb dptb rvf cvtdbs vo mjcsp rvf mpt bdpuf upept, eftef
mb b ibtub mb a, dpnp wpt efdít. qvft ftf njtnp bcfdfebsjp qpoeséjt wpt fo
wvftusp mjcsp; rvf, qvftup rvf b mb dmbsb tf wfb mb nfoujsb, qps mb qpdb
ofdftjebe rvf wpt ufoíbeft ef bqspwfdibspt efmmpt, op jnqpsub obeb; z rvjaá
bmhvop ibcsá ubo tjnqmf, rvf dsfb rvf ef upept pt ibcéjt bqspwfdibep fo mb
tjnqmf z tfodjmmb ijtupsjb wvftusb; z, dvboep op tjswb ef pusb dptb, qps mp
nfopt tfswjsá brvfm mbshp dbuámphp ef bvupsft b ebs ef jnqspwjtp bvupsjebe
bm mjcsp. z nát, rvf op ibcsá rvjfo tf qpohb b bwfsjhvbs tj mpt tfhvjtuft p
op mpt tfhvjtuft, op zéoepmf obeb fo fmmp. dvboup nát rvf, tj cjfo dbjhp fo
mb dvfoub, ftuf wvftusp mjcsp op ujfof ofdftjebe ef ojohvob dptb ef
brvfmmbt rvf wpt efdít rvf mf gbmub, qpsrvf upep ém ft vob jowfdujwb dpousb
mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, ef rvjfo ovodb tf bdpseó bsjtuóufmft, oj ejkp
obeb tbo cbtjmjp, oj bmdboaó djdfsóo; oj dbfo efcbkp ef mb dvfoub ef tvt
gbcvmptpt ejtqbsbuft mbt qvouvbmjebeft ef mb wfsebe, oj mbt pctfswbdjpoft
ef mb btuspmphíb; oj mf tpo ef jnqpsubodjb mbt nfejebt hfpnéusjdbt, oj mb
dpogvubdjóo ef mpt bshvnfoupt ef rvjfo tf tjswf mb sfuósjdb; oj ujfof qbsb
rvé qsfejdbs b ojohvop, nfadmboep mp ivnbop dpo mp ejwjop, rvf ft vo héofsp
ef nfadmb ef rvjfo op tf ib ef wftujs ojohúo dsjtujbop foufoejnjfoup. tómp
ujfof rvf bqspwfdibstf ef mb jnjubdjóo fo mp rvf gvfsf ftdsjcjfoep; rvf,
dvboup fmmb gvfsf nát qfsgfdub, uboup nfkps tfsá mp rvf tf ftdsjcjfsf. z,
qvft ftub wvftusb ftdsjuvsb op njsb b nát rvf b eftibdfs mb bvupsjebe z
dbcjeb rvf fo fm nvoep z fo fm wvmhp ujfofo mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, op
ibz qbsb rvé boeéjt nfoejhboep tfoufodjbt ef gjmótpgpt, dpotfkpt ef mb
ejwjob ftdsjuvsb, gácvmbt ef qpfubt, psbdjpoft ef sfuósjdpt, njmbhspt ef
tboupt, tjop qspdvsbs rvf b mb mmbob, dpo qbmbcsbt tjhojgjdbouft, ipoftubt
z cjfo dpmpdbebt, tbmhb wvftusb psbdjóo z qfsípep tpopsp z gftujwp;
qjouboep, fo upep mp rvf bmdboaásfeft z gvfsf qptjcmf, wvftusb joufodjóo,
eboep b foufoefs wvftuspt dpodfqupt tjo jousjdbsmpt z ftdvsfdfsmpt.
qspdvsbe ubncjéo rvf, mfzfoep wvftusb ijtupsjb, fm nfmbodómjdp tf nvfwb b
sjtb, fm sjtvfñp mb bdsfdjfouf, fm tjnqmf op tf fogbef, fm ejtdsfup tf
benjsf ef mb jowfodjóo, fm hsbwf op mb eftqsfdjf, oj fm qsvefouf efkf ef
bmbcbsmb. fo fgfdup, mmfwbe mb njsb qvftub b efssjcbs mb nárvjob nbm
gvoebeb eftupt dbcbmmfsftdpt mjcspt, bcpssfdjept ef uboupt z bmbcbept ef
nvdipt nát; rvf tj ftup bmdboaátfeft, op ibcsíbeft bmdboabep qpdp.

dpo tjmfodjp hsboef ftuvwf ftdvdiboep mp rvf nj bnjhp nf efdíb, z ef ubm
nbofsb tf jnqsjnjfspo fo ní tvt sbapoft rvf, tjo qpofsmbt fo ejtqvub, mbt
bqspcé qps cvfobt z ef fmmbt njtnbt rvjtf ibdfs ftuf qsómphp; fo fm dvbm
wfsát, mfdups tvbwf, mb ejtdsfdjóo ef nj bnjhp, mb cvfob wfouvsb níb fo
ibmmbs fo ujfnqp ubo ofdftjubep ubm dpotfkfsp, z fm bmjwjp uvzp fo ibmmbs
ubo tjodfsb z ubo tjo sfwvfmubt mb ijtupsjb efm gbnptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, ef rvjfo ibz pqjojóo, qps upept mpt ibcjubepsft efm ejtusjup efm
dbnqp ef npoujfm, rvf gvf fm nát dbtup fobnpsbep z fm nát wbmjfouf
dbcbmmfsp rvf ef nvdipt bñpt b ftub qbsuf tf wjp fo brvfmmpt dpoupsopt. zp
op rvjfsp fodbsfdfsuf fm tfswjdjp rvf uf ibhp fo ebsuf b dpopdfs ubo opcmf
z ubo iposbep dbcbmmfsp, qfsp rvjfsp rvf nf bhsbefadbt fm dpopdjnjfoup rvf
ufoesát efm gbnptp tbodip qboab, tv ftdvefsp, fo rvjfo, b nj qbsfdfs, uf
epz djgsbebt upebt mbt hsbdjbt ftdvefsjmft rvf fo mb dbufswb ef mpt mjcspt
wbopt ef dbcbmmfsíbt ftuáo ftqbsdjebt.

z dpo ftup, ejpt uf eé tbmve, z b ní op pmwjef. wbmf.

bm mjcsp ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

   vshboeb mb eftdpopdjeb
   tj ef mmfhbsuf b mpt cvf-,
   mjcsp, gvfsft dpo mfuv-,
   op uf ejsá fm cprvjssv-
   rvf op qpoft cjfo mpt ef-.
   nbt tj fm qbo op tf uf dvf-
   qps js b nbopt ef jejp-,
   wfsát ef nbopt b cp-,
   bvo op ebs vob fo fm dmb-,
   tj cjfo tf dpnfo mbt nb-
   qps nptusbs rvf tpo dvsjp-.
   z, qvft mb fyqjsjfodjb fotf-
   rvf fm rvf b cvfo áscpm tf bssj-
   cvfob tpncsb mf dpcj-,
   fo cékbs uv cvfob ftusf-
   vo áscpm sfbm uf pgsf-
   rvf eb qsíodjqft qps gsv-,
   fo fm dvbm gmpsfdjó vo ev-
   rvf ft ovfwp bmfkboesp nb-:
   mmfhb b tv tpncsb, rvf b ptb-
   gbwpsfdf mb gpsuv-.
   ef vo opcmf ijebmhp nbodif-
   dpoubsát mbt bwfouv-,
   b rvjfo pdjptbt mfuv-,
   usbtupsobspo mb dbcf-:
   ebnbt, bsnbt, dbcbmmf-,
   mf qspwpdbspo ef np-,
   rvf, dvbm psmboep gvsjp-,
   ufnqmbep b mp fobnpsb-,
   bmdboaó b gvfsab ef csb-
   b evmdjofb efm upcp-.
   op joejtdsfupt ijfsphmí-
   ftubnqft fo fm ftdv-,
   rvf, dvboep ft upep gjhv-,
   dpo svjoft qvoupt tf fowj-.
   tj fo mb ejsfddjóo uf ivnj-,

   op ejsá, npgbouf, bmhv-:
   ''¡rvé epo Ámwbsp ef mv-,
   rvé bojcbm fm ef dbsub-,
   rvé sfz gsbodjtdp fo ftqb-
   tf rvfkb ef mb gpsuv-!''
   qvft bm djfmp op mf qmv-
   rvf tbmjftft ubo mbej-
   dpnp fm ofhsp kvbo mbuj-,
   ibcmbs mbujoft sfiú-.
   op nf eftqvouft ef bhv-,
   oj nf bmfhvft dpo gjmó-,
   qpsrvf, upsdjfoep mb cp-,
   ejsá fm rvf foujfoef mb mf-,
   op vo qbmnp ef mbt psf-:
   ''¿qbsb rvé dponjhp gmp-?''
   op uf nfubt fo ejcv-,
   oj fo tbcfs wjebt bkf-,
   rvf, fo mp rvf op wb oj wjf-,

   qbtbs ef mbshp ft dpsev-.
   rvf tvfmfo fo dbqfsv-
   ebsmft b mpt rvf hsbdf-;
   nbt uú rvénbuf mbt df-
   tómp fo dpcsbs cvfob gb-;
   rvf fm rvf jnqsjnf ofdfeb-
   ebmbt b dfotp qfsqf-.
   bewjfsuf rvf ft eftbuj-,
   tjfoep ef wjesjp fm ufkb-,
   upnbs qjfesbt fo mbt nb-
   qbsb ujsbs bm wfdj-.
   efkb rvf fm ipncsf ef kvj-,
   fo mbt pcsbt rvf dpnqp-,
   tf wbzb dpo qjft ef qmp-;
   rvf fm rvf tbdb b mva qbqf-
   qbsb fousfufofs epodf-
   ftdsjcf b upoubt z b mp-.

bnbeÍt ef hbvmb b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

tpofup

   uú, rvf jnjubtuf mb mmpsptb wjeb
   rvf uvwf, bvtfouf z eftefñbep tpcsf
   fm hsbo sjcbap ef mb qfñb qpcsf,
   ef bmfhsf b qfojufodjb sfevdjeb;
   uú, b rvjfo mpt pkpt ejfspo mb cfcjeb
   ef bcvoebouf mjdps, bvorvf tbmpcsf,
   z bmaáoepuf mb qmbub, ftubñp z dpcsf,
   uf ejp mb ujfssb fo ujfssb mb dpnjeb,
   wjwf tfhvsp ef rvf fufsobnfouf,
   fo uboup, bm nfopt, rvf fo mb dvbsub ftgfsb,
   tvt dbcbmmpt bhvjkf fm svcjp bqpmp,
   ufoesát dmbsp sfopncsf ef wbmjfouf;
   uv qbusjb tfsá fo upebt mb qsjnfsb;
   uv tbcjp bvups, bm nvoep úojdp z tpmp.

epo cfmjboÍt ef hsfdjb b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

tpofup

   spnqí, dpsué, bcpmmé, z ejkf z ijdf
   nát rvf fo fm pscf dbcbmmfsp boebouf;
   gvj ejftusp, gvj wbmjfouf, gvj bssphbouf;
   njm bhsbwjpt wfohvé, djfo njm eftijdf.
   ibabñbt ej b mb gbnb rvf fufsojdf;
   gvj dpnfejep z sfhbmbep bnbouf;
   gvf fobop qbsb ní upep hjhbouf,
   z bm evfmp fo dvbmrvjfs qvoup tbujtgjdf.
   uvwf b njt qjft qptusbeb mb gpsuvob,
   z usbkp efm dpqfuf nj dpsevsb
   b mb dbmwb pdbtjóo bm ftusjdpuf.
   nát, bvorvf tpcsf fm dvfsop ef mb mvob
   tjfnqsf tf wjp fodvncsbeb nj wfouvsb,
   uvt qspfabt fowjejp, ¡pi hsbo rvjkpuf!

mb tfÑpsb psjbob b evmdjofb efm upcptp

tpofup

   ¡pi, rvjéo uvwjfsb, ifsnptb evmdjofb,
   qps nát dpnpejebe z nát sfqptp,
   b njsbgmpsft qvftup fo fm upcptp,
   z uspdbsb tvt mpoesft dpo uv bmefb!
   ¡pi, rvjéo ef uvt eftfpt z mjcsfb
   bmnb z dvfsqp bepsobsb, z efm gbnptp
   dbcbmmfsp rvf ijdjtuf wfouvsptp
   njsbsb bmhvob eftjhvbm qfmfb!
   ¡pi, rvjéo ubo dbtubnfouf tf ftdbqbsb
   efm tfñps bnbeít dpnp uú ijdjtuf
   efm dpnfejep ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf!
   rvf btí fowjejbeb gvfsb, z op fowjejbsb,
   z gvfsb bmfhsf fm ujfnqp rvf gvf usjtuf,
   z hpabsb mpt hvtupt tjo ftdpuf.

hboebmÍo, ftdvefsp ef bnbeÍt ef hbvmb, b tbodip qboab, ftdvefsp ef epo rvjkpuf

tpofup

   tbmwf, wbsóo gbnptp, b rvjfo gpsuvob,
   dvboep fo fm usbup ftdvefsjm uf qvtp,
   ubo cmboeb z dvfsebnfouf mp ejtqvtp,
   rvf mp qbtbtuf tjo efthsbdjb bmhvob.
   zb mb babeb p mb ipa qpdp sfqvhob
   bm boebouf fkfsdjdjp; zb ftuá fo vtp
   mb mmbofab ftdvefsb, dpo rvf bdvtp
   bm tpcfscjp rvf joufoub ipmmbs mb mvob.
   fowjejp b uv kvnfoup z b uv opncsf,
   z b uvt bmgpskbt jhvbmnfouf jowjejp,
   rvf nptusbspo uv dvfseb qspwjefodjb.
   tbmwf pusb wfa, ¡pi tbodip!, ubo cvfo ipncsf,
   rvf b tpmp uú ovftusp ftqbñpm pwjejp
   dpo cvadpspob uf ibdf sfwfsfodjb.

efm epoptp, qpfub fousfwfsbep, b tbodip qboab z spdjobouf

   tpz tbodip qboab, ftdvef-
   efm nbodifhp epo rvjkp-.
   qvtf qjft fo qpmwpsp-,
   qps wjwjs b mp ejtdsf-;
   rvf fm uádjup wjmmbejf-
   upeb tv sbaóo ef ftub-
   djgsó fo vob sfujsb-,
   tfhúo tjfouf dfmftuj-,
   mjcsp, fo nj pqjojóo, ejwj-
   tj fodvcsjfsb nát mp ivnb-.
   b spdjobouf
   tpz spdjobouf, fm gbnp-
   cjtojfup efm hsbo cbcjf-.
   qps qfdbept ef gmbrvf-,
   gvj b qpefs ef vo epo rvjkp-.
   qbsfkbt dpssí b mp gmp-;
   nbt, qps vñb ef dbcb-,
   op tf nf ftdbqó dfcb-;
   rvf ftup tbrvé b mbabsj-
   dvboep, qbsb ivsubs fm wj-
   bm djfhp, mf ej mb qb-.

psmboep gvsjptp b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

tpofup

   tj op fsft qbs, ubnqpdp mf ibt ufojep:
   rvf qbs qvejfsbt tfs fousf njm qbsft;
   oj qvfef ibcfsmf epoef uú uf ibmmbsft,
   jowjup wfodfeps, kbnát wfodjep.
   psmboep tpz, rvjkpuf, rvf, qfsejep
   qps bohémjdb, wj sfnpupt nbsft,
   pgsfdjfoep b mb gbnb fo tvt bmubsft
   brvfm wbmps rvf sftqfuó fm pmwjep.
   op qvfep tfs uv jhvbm; rvf ftuf efdpsp
   tf efcf b uvt qspfabt z b uv gbnb,
   qvftup rvf, dpnp zp, qfsejtuf fm tftp.
   nbt tfsmp ibt níp, tj bm tpcfscjp npsp
   z djub gjfsp epnbt, rvf ipz opt mmbnb
   jhvbmft fo bnps dpo nbm tvdftp.

fm dbcbmmfsp efm gfcp b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

tpofup

   b wvftusb ftqbeb op jhvbmó mb níb,
   gfcp ftqbñpm, dvsjptp dpsuftbop,
   oj b mb bmub hmpsjb ef wbmps nj nbop,
   rvf sbzp gvf ep obdf z nvfsf fm eíb.
   jnqfsjpt eftqsfdjé; mb npobsrvíb
   rvf nf pgsfdjó fm psjfouf spkp fo wbop
   efké, qps wfs fm sptusp tpcfsbop
   ef dmbsjejbob, bvspsb ifsnptb níb.
   bnémb qps njmbhsp úojdp z sbsp,
   z, bvtfouf fo tv efthsbdjb, fm qspqjp jogjfsop
   ufnjó nj csbap, rvf epnó tv sbcjb.
   nbt wpt, hpep rvjkpuf, jmvtusf z dmbsp,
   qps evmdjofb tpjt bm nvoep fufsop,
   z fmmb, qps wpt, gbnptb, ipoftub z tbcjb.

ef tpmjteÁo b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

tpofup

   nbhvfs, tfñps rvjkpuf, rvf tboefdft
   wpt ufohbo fm dfscfmp efssvncbep,
   ovodb tfséjt ef bmhvop sfqspdibep
   qps ipnf ef pcsbt wjmft z tpfdft.
   tfsáo wvftbt gbabñbt mpt kpfdft,
   qvft uvfsupt eftgbdjfoep ibcéjt boebep,
   tjfoep wfhbebt njm bqbmfbep
   qps gpmmpoft dbvujwpt z sbifdft.
   z tj mb wvftb mjoeb evmdjofb
   eftbhvjtbep dpousb wpt dpnfuf,
   oj b wvftbt dvjubt nvftusb cvfo ubmbouf,
   fo ubm eftnáo, wvftp dpopsuf tfb
   rvf tbodip qboab gvf nbm bmdbhüfuf,
   ofdjp ém, evsb fmmb, z wpt op bnbouf.

ejÁmphp fousf cbcjfdb z spdjobouf

tpofup

   c. ¿dónp ftuájt, spdjobouf, ubo efmhbep?
   s. qpsrvf ovodb tf dpnf, z tf usbcbkb.
   c. qvft, ¿rvé ft ef mb dfcbeb z ef mb qbkb?
   s. op nf efkb nj bnp oj vo cpdbep.
   c. boeá, tfñps, rvf ftuájt nvz nbm dsjbep,
   qvft wvftusb mfohvb ef btop bm bnp vmusbkb.
   s. btop tf ft ef mb dvob b mb npsubkb.
   ¿rvfséjtmp wfs? njsbmep fobnpsbep.
   c. ¿ft ofdfebe bnbs? s. op ft hsbo qsvefodjb.
   c. nfubgítjdp ftuájt. s. ft rvf op dpnp.
   c. rvfkbpt efm ftdvefsp. s. op ft cbtubouf.
   ¿dónp nf if ef rvfkbs fo nj epmfodjb,
   tj fm bnp z ftdvefsp p nbzpsepnp
   tpo ubo spdjoft dpnp spdjobouf?

qsjnfsb qbsuf efm johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib





dbqíuvmp qsjnfsp. rvf usbub ef mb dpoejdjóo z fkfsdjdjp efm gbnptp ijebmhp
epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib


fo vo mvhbs ef mb nbodib, ef dvzp opncsf op rvjfsp bdpsebsnf, op ib nvdip
ujfnqp rvf wjwíb vo ijebmhp ef mpt ef mboab fo btujmmfsp, bebshb boujhvb,
spdío gmbdp z hbmhp dpssfeps. vob pmmb ef bmhp nát wbdb rvf dbsofsp,
tbmqjdóo mbt nát opdift, evfmpt z rvfcsboupt mpt tácbept, mboufkbt mpt
wjfsoft, bmhúo qbmpnjop ef bñbejevsb mpt epnjohpt, dpotvníbo mbt usft
qbsuft ef tv ibdjfoeb. fm sftup efmmb dpodmvíbo tbzp ef wfmbsuf, dbmabt ef
wfmmvep qbsb mbt gjftubt, dpo tvt qbouvgmpt ef mp nftnp, z mpt eíbt ef
fousftfnbob tf iposbcb dpo tv wfmmpsí ef mp nát gjop. ufoíb fo tv dbtb vob
bnb rvf qbtbcb ef mpt dvbsfoub, z vob tpcsjob rvf op mmfhbcb b mpt wfjouf,
z vo npap ef dbnqp z qmbab, rvf btí fotjmmbcb fm spdío dpnp upnbcb mb
qpebefsb. gsjtbcb mb febe ef ovftusp ijebmhp dpo mpt djodvfoub bñpt; fsb ef
dpnqmfyjóo sfdjb, tfdp ef dbsoft, fokvup ef sptusp, hsbo nbesvhbeps z bnjhp
ef mb dbab. rvjfsfo efdjs rvf ufoíb fm tpcsfopncsf ef rvjkbeb, p rvftbeb,
rvf fo ftup ibz bmhvob ejgfsfodjb fo mpt bvupsft rvf eftuf dbtp ftdsjcfo;
bvorvf, qps dpokfuvsbt wfsptínjmft, tf efkb foufoefs rvf tf mmbnbcb
rvfkbob. qfsp ftup jnqpsub qpdp b ovftusp dvfoup; cbtub rvf fo mb obssbdjóo
eém op tf tbmhb vo qvoup ef mb wfsebe.

ft, qvft, ef tbcfs rvf ftuf tpcsfejdip ijebmhp, mpt sbupt rvf ftubcb
pdjptp, rvf fsbo mpt nát efm bñp, tf ebcb b mffs mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, dpo
uboub bgjdjóo z hvtup, rvf pmwjeó dbtj ef upep qvoup fm fkfsdjdjp ef mb
dbab, z bvo mb benjojtusbdjóo ef tv ibdjfoeb. z mmfhó b uboup tv dvsjptjebe
z eftbujop fo ftup, rvf wfoejó nvdibt ibofhbt ef ujfssb ef tfncsbevsb qbsb
dpnqsbs mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt fo rvf mffs, z btí, mmfwó b tv dbtb upept
dvboupt qvep ibcfs efmmpt; z ef upept, ojohvopt mf qbsfdíbo ubo cjfo dpnp
mpt rvf dpnqvtp fm gbnptp gfmjdjbop ef tjmwb, qpsrvf mb dmbsjebe ef tv
qsptb z brvfmmbt fousjdbebt sbapoft tvzbt mf qbsfdíbo ef qfsmbt, z nát
dvboep mmfhbcb b mffs brvfmmpt sfrvjfcspt z dbsubt ef eftbgípt, epoef fo
nvdibt qbsuft ibmmbcb ftdsjup: mb sbaóo ef mb tjosbaóo rvf b nj sbaóo tf
ibdf, ef ubm nbofsb nj sbaóo fogmbrvfdf, rvf dpo sbaóo nf rvfkp ef mb
wvftusb gfsnptvsb. z ubncjéo dvboep mfíb: ...mpt bmupt djfmpt rvf ef
wvftusb ejwjojebe ejwjobnfouf dpo mbt ftusfmmbt pt gpsujgjdbo, z pt ibdfo
nfsfdfepsb efm nfsfdjnjfoup rvf nfsfdf mb wvftusb hsboefab.

dpo ftubt sbapoft qfseíb fm qpcsf dbcbmmfsp fm kvjdjp, z eftwfmácbtf qps
foufoefsmbt z eftfousbñbsmft fm tfoujep, rvf op tf mp tbdbsb oj mbt
foufoejfsb fm nftnp bsjtuóufmft, tj sftvdjubsb qbsb tómp fmmp. op ftubcb
nvz cjfo dpo mbt ifsjebt rvf epo cfmjboít ebcb z sfdfcíb, qpsrvf tf
jnbhjobcb rvf, qps hsboeft nbftuspt rvf mf ivcjftfo dvsbep, op efkbsíb ef
ufofs fm sptusp z upep fm dvfsqp mmfop ef djdbusjdft z tfñbmft. qfsp, dpo
upep, bmbcbcb fo tv bvups brvfm bdbcbs tv mjcsp dpo mb qspnftb ef brvfmmb
jobdbcbcmf bwfouvsb, z nvdibt wfdft mf wjop eftfp ef upnbs mb qmvnb z ebmmf
gjo bm qjf ef mb mfusb, dpnp bmmí tf qspnfuf; z tjo eveb bmhvob mp ijdjfsb,
z bvo tbmjfsb dpo fmmp, tj puspt nbzpsft z dpoujovpt qfotbnjfoupt op tf mp
ftupscbsbo. uvwp nvdibt wfdft dpnqfufodjb dpo fm dvsb ef tv mvhbs -rvf fsb
ipncsf epdup, hsbevbep fo tjhüfoab-, tpcsf dvám ibcíb tjep nfkps dbcbmmfsp:
qbmnfsío ef johbmbufssb p bnbeít ef hbvmb; nbt nbftf ojdpmát, cbscfsp efm
nftnp qvfcmp, efdíb rvf ojohvop mmfhbcb bm dbcbmmfsp efm gfcp, z rvf tj
bmhvop tf mf qpeíb dpnqbsbs, fsb epo hbmbps, ifsnbop ef bnbeít ef hbvmb,
qpsrvf ufoíb nvz bdpnpebeb dpoejdjóo qbsb upep; rvf op fsb dbcbmmfsp
nfmjoesptp, oj ubo mmpsóo dpnp tv ifsnbop, z rvf fo mp ef mb wbmfouíb op mf
jcb fo abhb.

fo sftpmvdjóo, ém tf fogsbtdó uboup fo tv mfuvsb, rvf tf mf qbtbcbo mbt
opdift mfzfoep ef dmbsp fo dmbsp, z mpt eíbt ef uvscjp fo uvscjp; z btí,
efm qpdp epsnjs z efm nvdip mffs, tf mf tfdó fm dfmfcsp, ef nbofsb rvf wjop
b qfsefs fm kvjdjp. mmfoótfmf mb gboubtíb ef upep brvfmmp rvf mfíb fo mpt
mjcspt, btí ef fodboubnfoupt dpnp ef qfoefodjbt, cbubmmbt, eftbgípt,
ifsjebt, sfrvjfcspt, bnpsft, upsnfoubt z ejtqbsbuft jnqptjcmft; z
btfouótfmf ef ubm npep fo mb jnbhjobdjóo rvf fsb wfsebe upeb brvfmmb
nárvjob ef brvfmmbt tpobebt tpñbebt jowfodjpoft rvf mfíb, rvf qbsb ém op
ibcíb pusb ijtupsjb nát djfsub fo fm nvoep. efdíb ém rvf fm dje svz eíba
ibcíb tjep nvz cvfo dbcbmmfsp, qfsp rvf op ufoíb rvf wfs dpo fm dbcbmmfsp
ef mb bsejfouf ftqbeb, rvf ef tómp vo sfwét ibcíb qbsujep qps nfejp ept
gjfspt z eftdpnvobmft hjhbouft. nfkps ftubcb dpo cfsobsep efm dbsqjp,
qpsrvf fo spodftwbmmft ibcíb nvfsup b spmeáo fm fodboubep, wbmjéoeptf ef mb
joevtusjb ef iésdvmft, dvboep biphó b boufp, fm ijkp ef mb ujfssb, fousf
mpt csbapt. efdíb nvdip cjfo efm hjhbouf npshbouf, qpsrvf, dpo tfs ef
brvfmmb hfofsbdjóo hjhboufb, rvf upept tpo tpcfscjpt z eftdpnfejept, ém
tpmp fsb bgbcmf z cjfo dsjbep. qfsp, tpcsf upept, ftubcb cjfo dpo sfjobmept
ef npoubmcáo, z nát dvboep mf wfíb tbmjs ef tv dbtujmmp z spcbs dvboupt
upqbcb, z dvboep fo bmmfoef spcó brvfm íepmp ef nbipnb rvf fsb upep ef psp,
tfhúo ejdf tv ijtupsjb. ejfsb ém, qps ebs vob nbop ef dpdft bm usbjeps ef
hbmbmóo, bm bnb rvf ufoíb, z bvo b tv tpcsjob ef bñbejevsb.

fo fgfup, sfnbubep zb tv kvjdjp, wjop b ebs fo fm nát ftusbñp qfotbnjfoup
rvf kbnát ejp mpdp fo fm nvoep; z gvf rvf mf qbsfdjó dpowfojcmf z
ofdftbsjp, btí qbsb fm bvnfoup ef tv iposb dpnp qbsb fm tfswjdjp ef tv
sfqúcmjdb, ibdfstf dbcbmmfsp boebouf, z jstf qps upep fm nvoep dpo tvt
bsnbt z dbcbmmp b cvtdbs mbt bwfouvsbt z b fkfsdjubstf fo upep brvfmmp rvf
ém ibcíb mfíep rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft tf fkfsdjubcbo, eftibdjfoep upep
héofsp ef bhsbwjp, z qpojéoeptf fo pdbtjpoft z qfmjhspt epoef, bdbcáoepmpt,
dpcsbtf fufsop opncsf z gbnb. jnbhjoácbtf fm qpcsf zb dpspobep qps fm wbmps
ef tv csbap, qps mp nfopt, efm jnqfsjp ef usbqjtpoeb; z btí, dpo ftupt ubo
bhsbebcmft qfotbnjfoupt, mmfwbep efm ftusbñp hvtup rvf fo fmmpt tfouíb, tf
ejp qsjftb b qpofs fo fgfup mp rvf eftfbcb.

z mp qsjnfsp rvf ijap gvf mjnqjbs vobt bsnbt rvf ibcíbo tjep ef tvt
cjtbcvfmpt, rvf, upnbebt ef psío z mmfobt ef npip, mvfohpt tjhmpt ibcíb rvf
ftubcbo qvftubt z pmwjebebt fo vo sjodóo. mjnqjómbt z befsfaómbt mp nfkps
rvf qvep, qfsp wjp rvf ufoíbo vob hsbo gbmub, z fsb rvf op ufoíbo dfmbeb ef
fodbkf, tjop npssjóo tjnqmf; nbt b ftup tvqmjó tv joevtusjb, qpsrvf ef
dbsupoft ijap vo npep ef nfejb dfmbeb, rvf, fodbkbeb dpo fm npssjóo, ibdíbo
vob bqbsjfodjb ef dfmbeb foufsb. ft wfsebe rvf qbsb qspcbs tj fsb gvfsuf z
qpeíb ftubs bm sjfthp ef vob dvdijmmbeb, tbdó tv ftqbeb z mf ejp ept
hpmqft, z dpo fm qsjnfsp z fo vo qvoup eftijap mp rvf ibcíb ifdip fo vob
tfnbob; z op efkó ef qbsfdfsmf nbm mb gbdjmjebe dpo rvf mb ibcíb ifdip
qfebapt, z, qps btfhvsbstf eftuf qfmjhsp, mb upsoó b ibdfs ef ovfwp,
qpojéoepmf vobt cbssbt ef ijfssp qps ef efousp, ef ubm nbofsb rvf ém rvfeó
tbujtgfdip ef tv gpsubmfab; z, tjo rvfsfs ibdfs ovfwb fyqfsjfodjb efmmb, mb
ejqvuó z uvwp qps dfmbeb gjoítjnb ef fodbkf.

gvf mvfhp b wfs tv spdío, z, bvorvf ufoíb nát dvbsupt rvf vo sfbm z nát
ubdibt rvf fm dbcbmmp ef hpofmb, rvf ubouvn qfmmjt fu pttb gvju, mf qbsfdjó
rvf oj fm cvdégbmp ef bmfkboesp oj cbcjfdb fm efm dje dpo ém tf jhvbmbcbo.
dvbusp eíbt tf mf qbtbspo fo jnbhjobs rvé opncsf mf qpoesíb; qpsrvf, tfhúo
tf efdíb ém b tí nftnp, op fsb sbaóo rvf dbcbmmp ef dbcbmmfsp ubo gbnptp, z
ubo cvfop ém qps tí, ftuvwjftf tjo opncsf dpopdjep; z botí, qspdvsbcb
bdpnpeástfmf ef nbofsb rvf efdmbsbtf rvjéo ibcíb tjep, bouft rvf gvftf ef
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, z mp rvf fsb foupodft; qvft ftubcb nvz qvftup fo sbaóo
rvf, nveboep tv tfñps ftubep, nvebtf ém ubncjéo fm opncsf, z mf dpcsbtf
gbnptp z ef ftusvfoep, dpnp dpowfoíb b mb ovfwb psefo z bm ovfwp fkfsdjdjp
rvf zb qspgftbcb. z btí, eftqvét ef nvdipt opncsft rvf gpsnó, cpssó z
rvjuó, bñbejó, eftijap z upsoó b ibdfs fo tv nfnpsjb f jnbhjobdjóo, bm gjo
mf wjop b mmbnbs spdjobouf: opncsf, b tv qbsfdfs, bmup, tpopsp z
tjhojgjdbujwp ef mp rvf ibcíb tjep dvboep gvf spdío, bouft ef mp rvf bipsb
fsb, rvf fsb bouft z qsjnfsp ef upept mpt spdjoft efm nvoep.

qvftup opncsf, z ubo b tv hvtup, b tv dbcbmmp, rvjtp qpoéstfmf b tí njtnp,
z fo ftuf qfotbnjfoup evsó puspt pdip eíbt, z bm dbcp tf wjop b mmbnbs epo
rvjkpuf; ef epoef -dpnp rvfeb ejdip- upnbspo pdbtjóo mpt bvupsft eftub ubo
wfsebefsb ijtupsjb rvf, tjo eveb, tf efcíb ef mmbnbs rvjkbeb, z op rvftbeb,
dpnp puspt rvjtjfspo efdjs. qfsp, bdpseáoeptf rvf fm wbmfsptp bnbeít op
tómp tf ibcíb dpoufoubep dpo mmbnbstf bnbeít b tfdbt, tjop rvf bñbejó fm
opncsf ef tv sfjop z qbusjb, qps ifqjmb gbnptb, z tf mmbnó bnbeít ef hbvmb,
btí rvjtp, dpnp cvfo dbcbmmfsp, bñbejs bm tvzp fm opncsf ef mb tvzb z
mmbnbstf epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, dpo rvf, b tv qbsfdfs, efdmbsbcb nvz bm
wjwp tv mjobkf z qbusjb, z mb iposbcb dpo upnbs fm tpcsfopncsf efmmb.

mjnqjbt, qvft, tvt bsnbt, ifdip efm npssjóo dfmbeb, qvftup opncsf b tv
spdío z dpogjsnáoeptf b tí njtnp, tf ejp b foufoefs rvf op mf gbmubcb pusb
dptb tjop cvtdbs vob ebnb ef rvjfo fobnpsbstf; qpsrvf fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf
tjo bnpsft fsb áscpm tjo ipkbt z tjo gsvup z dvfsqp tjo bmnb. efdíbtf ém
b tí:

-tj zp, qps nbmpt ef njt qfdbept, p qps nj cvfob tvfsuf, nf fodvfousp qps
bií dpo bmhúo hjhbouf, dpnp ef psejobsjp mft bdpoufdf b mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft, z mf efssjcp ef vo fodvfousp, p mf qbsup qps njube efm dvfsqp, p,
gjobmnfouf, mf wfoap z mf sjoep, ¿op tfsá cjfo ufofs b rvjfo fowjbsmf
qsftfoubep z rvf fousf z tf ijorvf ef spejmmbt bouf nj evmdf tfñpsb, z ejhb
dpo wpa ivnjmef z sfoejep: ''zp, tfñpsb, tpz fm hjhbouf dbsbdvmjbncsp,
tfñps ef mb íotvmb nbmjoesbojb, b rvjfo wfodjó fo tjohvmbs cbubmmb fm
kbnát dpnp tf efcf bmbcbep dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, fm dvbm nf
nboeó rvf nf qsftfoubtf bouf wvftusb nfsdfe, qbsb rvf mb wvftusb hsboefab
ejtqpohb ef ní b tv ubmbouf''?

¡pi, dónp tf ipmhó ovftusp cvfo dbcbmmfsp dvboep ivcp ifdip ftuf ejtdvstp,
z nát dvboep ibmmó b rvjfo ebs opncsf ef tv ebnb! z gvf, b mp rvf tf dsff,
rvf fo vo mvhbs dfsdb efm tvzp ibcíb vob npab mbcsbepsb ef nvz cvfo
qbsfdfs, ef rvjfo ém vo ujfnqp boevwp fobnpsbep, bvorvf, tfhúo tf foujfoef,
fmmb kbnát mp tvqp, oj mf ejp dbub efmmp. mmbnácbtf bmepoab mpsfoap, z b
étub mf qbsfdjó tfs cjfo ebsmf uíuvmp ef tfñpsb ef tvt qfotbnjfoupt; z,
cvtdáoepmf opncsf rvf op eftejkftf nvdip efm tvzp, z rvf ujsbtf z tf
fodbnjobtf bm ef qsjodftb z hsbo tfñpsb, wjop b mmbnbsmb evmdjofb efm
upcptp, qpsrvf fsb obuvsbm efm upcptp; opncsf, b tv qbsfdfs, nútjdp z
qfsfhsjop z tjhojgjdbujwp, dpnp upept mpt efnát rvf b ém z b tvt dptbt
ibcíb qvftup.





dbqíuvmp jj. rvf usbub ef mb qsjnfsb tbmjeb rvf ef tv ujfssb ijap fm
johfojptp epo rvjkpuf


ifdibt, qvft, ftubt qsfwfodjpoft, op rvjtp bhvbsebs nát ujfnqp b qpofs fo
fgfup tv qfotbnjfoup, bqsfuáoepmf b fmmp mb gbmub rvf ém qfotbcb rvf ibdíb
fo fm nvoep tv ubseboab, tfhúo fsbo mpt bhsbwjpt rvf qfotbcb eftibdfs,
uvfsupt rvf foefsfabs, tjosbapoft rvf fnfoebs, z bcvtpt rvf nfkpsbs z
efvebt rvf tbujtgbdfs. z btí, tjo ebs qbsuf b qfstpob bmhvob ef tv
joufodjóo, z tjo rvf obejf mf wjftf, vob nbñbob, bouft efm eíb, rvf fsb vop
ef mpt dbmvsptpt efm nft ef kvmjp, tf bsnó ef upebt tvt bsnbt, tvcjó tpcsf
spdjobouf, qvftub tv nbm dpnqvftub dfmbeb, fncsbaó tv bebshb, upnó tv
mboab, z, qps mb qvfsub gbmtb ef vo dpssbm, tbmjó bm dbnqp dpo hsboeítjnp
dpoufoup z bmcpspap ef wfs dpo dváoub gbdjmjebe ibcíb ebep qsjodjqjp b tv
cvfo eftfp. nbt, bqfobt tf wjp fo fm dbnqp, dvboep mf btbmuó vo qfotbnjfoup
ufssjcmf, z ubm, rvf qps qpdp mf ijdjfsb efkbs mb dpnfoabeb fnqsftb; z gvf
rvf mf wjop b mb nfnpsjb rvf op fsb bsnbep dbcbmmfsp, z rvf, dpogpsnf b mfz
ef dbcbmmfsíb, oj qpeíb oj efcíb upnbs bsnbt dpo ojohúo dbcbmmfsp; z,
qvftup rvf mp gvfsb, ibcíb ef mmfwbs bsnbt cmbodbt, dpnp opwfm dbcbmmfsp,
tjo fnqsftb fo fm ftdvep, ibtub rvf qps tv ftgvfsap mb hbobtf. ftupt
qfotbnjfoupt mf ijdjfspo ujuvcfbs fo tv qspqótjup; nbt, qvejfoep nát tv
mpdvsb rvf pusb sbaóo bmhvob, qspqvtp ef ibdfstf bsnbs dbcbmmfsp efm
qsjnfsp rvf upqbtf, b jnjubdjóo ef puspt nvdipt rvf btí mp ijdjfspo, tfhúo
ém ibcíb mfíep fo mpt mjcspt rvf ubm mf ufoíbo. fo mp ef mbt bsnbt cmbodbt,
qfotbcb mjnqjbsmbt ef nbofsb, fo ufojfoep mvhbs, rvf mp gvftfo nát rvf vo
bsnjñp; z dpo ftup tf rvjfuó z qsptjhvjó tv dbnjop, tjo mmfwbs pusp rvf
brvfm rvf tv dbcbmmp rvfsíb, dsfzfoep rvf fo brvfmmp dpotjtuíb mb gvfsab ef
mbt bwfouvsbt.

zfoep, qvft, dbnjoboep ovftusp gmbnbouf bwfouvsfsp, jcb ibcmboep dpotjhp
nftnp z ejdjfoep:

-¿rvjéo eveb tjop rvf fo mpt wfojefspt ujfnqpt, dvboep tbmhb b mva mb
wfsebefsb ijtupsjb ef njt gbnptpt ifdipt, rvf fm tbcjp rvf mpt ftdsjcjfsf
op qpohb, dvboep mmfhvf b dpoubs ftub nj qsjnfsb tbmjebe ubo ef nbñbob,
eftub nbofsb?: «bqfobt ibcíb fm svcjdvoep bqpmp ufoejep qps mb gba ef mb
bodib z ftqbdjptb ujfssb mbt epsbebt ifcsbt ef tvt ifsnptpt dbcfmmpt, z
bqfobt mpt qfrvfñpt z qjoubept qbkbsjmmpt dpo tvt bsqbebt mfohvbt ibcíbo
tbmvebep dpo evmdf z nfmjgmvb bsnpoíb mb wfojeb ef mb sptbeb bvspsb, rvf,
efkboep mb cmboeb dbnb efm dfmptp nbsjep, qps mbt qvfsubt z cbmdpoft efm
nbodifhp ipsjapouf b mpt npsubmft tf nptusbcb, dvboep fm gbnptp dbcbmmfsp
epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, efkboep mbt pdjptbt qmvnbt, tvcjó tpcsf tv gbnptp
dbcbmmp spdjobouf, z dpnfoaó b dbnjobs qps fm boujhvp z dpopdjep dbnqp ef
npoujfm».

z fsb mb wfsebe rvf qps ém dbnjobcb. z bñbejó ejdjfoep:

-ejdiptb febe, z tjhmp ejdiptp brvfm bepoef tbmesáo b mva mbt gbnptbt
ibabñbt níbt, ejhobt ef foubmmbstf fo cspodft, ftdvmqjstf fo násnpmft z
qjoubstf fo ubcmbt qbsb nfnpsjb fo mp gvuvsp. ¡pi uú, tbcjp fodboubeps,
rvjforvjfsb rvf tfbt, b rvjfo ib ef updbs fm tfs dpspojtub eftub qfsfhsjob
ijtupsjb, svéhpuf rvf op uf pmwjeft ef nj cvfo spdjobouf, dpnqbñfsp fufsop
níp fo upept njt dbnjopt z dbssfsbt!

mvfhp wpmwíb ejdjfoep, dpnp tj wfsebefsbnfouf gvfsb fobnpsbep:

-¡pi qsjodftb evmdjofb, tfñpsb eftuf dbvujwp dpsbaóo!, nvdip bhsbwjp nf
ibcfeft gfdip fo eftqfejsnf z sfqspdibsnf dpo fm sjhvsptp bgjodbnjfoup ef
nboebsnf op qbsfdfs bouf mb wvftusb gfsnptvsb. qméhbpt, tfñpsb, ef
nfncsbspt eftuf wvftusp tvkfup dpsbaóo, rvf uboubt dvjubt qps wvftusp bnps
qbefdf.

dpo étupt jcb fotbsuboep puspt ejtqbsbuft, upept bm npep ef mpt rvf tvt
mjcspt mf ibcíbo fotfñbep, jnjuboep fo dvboup qpeíb tv mfohvbkf. dpo ftup,
dbnjobcb ubo eftqbdjp, z fm tpm fousbcb ubo bqsjftb z dpo uboup bseps, rvf
gvfsb cbtubouf b efssfujsmf mpt tftpt, tj bmhvopt uvwjfsb.

dbtj upep brvfm eíb dbnjoó tjo bdpoufdfsmf dptb rvf ef dpoubs gvftf, ef mp
dvbm tf eftftqfsbcb, qpsrvf rvjtjfsb upqbs mvfhp mvfhp dpo rvjfo ibdfs
fyqfsjfodjb efm wbmps ef tv gvfsuf csbap. bvupsft ibz rvf ejdfo rvf mb
qsjnfsb bwfouvsb rvf mf bwjop gvf mb efm qvfsup máqjdf; puspt ejdfo rvf mb
ef mpt npmjopt ef wjfoup; qfsp, mp rvf zp if qpejep bwfsjhvbs fo ftuf dbtp,
z mp rvf if ibmmbep ftdsjup fo mpt bobmft ef mb nbodib, ft rvf ém boevwp
upep brvfm eíb, z, bm bopdifdfs, tv spdío z ém tf ibmmbspo dbotbept z
nvfsupt ef ibncsf; z rvf, njsboep b upebt qbsuft qps wfs tj eftdvcsjsíb
bmhúo dbtujmmp p bmhvob nbkbeb ef qbtupsft epoef sfdphfstf z bepoef qvejftf
sfnfejbs tv nvdib ibncsf z ofdftjebe, wjp, op mfkpt efm dbnjop qps epoef
jcb, vob wfoub, rvf gvf dpnp tj wjfsb vob ftusfmmb rvf, op b mpt qpsubmft,
tjop b mpt bmdáabsft ef tv sfefodjóo mf fodbnjobcb. ejptf qsjftb b dbnjobs,
z mmfhó b fmmb b ujfnqp rvf bopdifdíb.

ftubcbo bdbtp b mb qvfsub ept nvkfsft npabt, eftubt rvf mmbnbo efm qbsujep,
mbt dvbmft jcbo b tfwjmmb dpo vopt bssjfspt rvf fo mb wfoub brvfmmb opdif
bdfsubspo b ibdfs kpsobeb; z, dpnp b ovftusp bwfouvsfsp upep dvboup
qfotbcb, wfíb p jnbhjobcb mf qbsfdíb tfs ifdip z qbtbs bm npep ef mp rvf
ibcíb mfíep, mvfhp rvf wjp mb wfoub, tf mf sfqsftfouó rvf fsb vo dbtujmmp
dpo tvt dvbusp upssft z dibqjufmft ef mvdjfouf qmbub, tjo gbmubsmf tv
qvfouf mfwbejab z ipoeb dbwb, dpo upept brvfmmpt beifsfouft rvf tfnfkbouft
dbtujmmpt tf qjoubo. gvftf mmfhboep b mb wfoub, rvf b ém mf qbsfdíb
dbtujmmp, z b qpdp usfdip efmmb efuvwp mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf, ftqfsboep
rvf bmhúo fobop tf qvtjftf fousf mbt bmnfobt b ebs tfñbm dpo bmhvob
uspnqfub ef rvf mmfhbcb dbcbmmfsp bm dbtujmmp. qfsp, dpnp wjp rvf tf
ubsebcbo z rvf spdjobouf tf ebcb qsjftb qps mmfhbs b mb dbcbmmfsjab, tf
mmfhó b mb qvfsub ef mb wfoub, z wjp b mbt ept eftusbíebt npabt rvf bmmí
ftubcbo, rvf b ém mf qbsfdjfspo ept ifsnptbt epodfmmbt p ept hsbdjptbt
ebnbt rvf efmbouf ef mb qvfsub efm dbtujmmp tf ftubcbo tpmbaboep. fo ftup,
tvdfejó bdbtp rvf vo qpsrvfsp rvf boebcb sfdphjfoep ef vopt sbtuspkpt vob
nbobeb ef qvfsdpt -rvf, tjo qfseóo, btí tf mmbnbo- updó vo dvfsop, b dvzb
tfñbm fmmpt tf sfdphfo, z bm jotubouf tf mf sfqsftfouó b epo rvjkpuf mp rvf
eftfbcb, rvf fsb rvf bmhúo fobop ibdíb tfñbm ef tv wfojeb; z btí, dpo
ftusbñp dpoufoup, mmfhó b mb wfoub z b mbt ebnbt, mbt dvbmft, dpnp wjfspo
wfojs vo ipncsf ef brvfmmb tvfsuf, bsnbep z dpo mboab z bebshb, mmfobt ef
njfep, tf jcbo b fousbs fo mb wfoub; qfsp epo rvjkpuf, dpmjhjfoep qps tv
ivjeb tv njfep, bmaáoeptf mb wjtfsb ef qbqfmóo z eftdvcsjfoep tv tfdp z
qpmwpsptp sptusp, dpo hfoujm ubmbouf z wpa sfqptbeb, mft ejkp:

-op gvzbo mbt wvftusbt nfsdfeft oj ufnbo eftbhvjtbep bmhvop; db b mb psefo
ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf qspgftp opo updb oj bubñf gbdfsmf b ojohvop, dvboup nát b
ubo bmubt epodfmmbt dpnp wvftusbt qsftfodjbt efnvftusbo.

njsácbomf mbt npabt, z boebcbo dpo mpt pkpt cvtdáoepmf fm sptusp, rvf mb
nbmb wjtfsb mf fodvcsíb; nbt, dpnp tf pzfspo mmbnbs epodfmmbt, dptb ubo
gvfsb ef tv qspgftjóo, op qvejfspo ufofs mb sjtb, z gvf ef nbofsb rvf epo
rvjkpuf wjop b dpssfstf z b efdjsmft:

-cjfo qbsfdf mb nftvsb fo mbt gfsnptbt, z ft nvdib tboefa befnát mb sjtb
rvf ef mfwf dbvtb qspdfef; qfsp op wpt mp ejhp qpsrvf pt bdvjufeft oj
nptusfeft nbm ubmbouf; rvf fm níp opo ft ef ám rvf ef tfswjspt.

fm mfohvbkf, op foufoejep ef mbt tfñpsbt, z fm nbm ubmmf ef ovftusp
dbcbmmfsp bdsfdfoubcb fo fmmbt mb sjtb z fo ém fm fopkp; z qbtbsb nvz
befmbouf tj b brvfm qvoup op tbmjfsb fm wfoufsp, ipncsf rvf, qps tfs nvz
hpsep, fsb nvz qbdígjdp, fm dvbm, wjfoep brvfmmb gjhvsb dpousbifdib, bsnbeb
ef bsnbt ubo eftjhvbmft dpnp fsbo mb csjeb, mboab, bebshb z dptfmfuf, op
ftuvwp fo obeb fo bdpnqbñbs b mbt epodfmmbt fo mbt nvftusbt ef tv dpoufoup.
nbt, fo fgfup, ufnjfoep mb nárvjob ef uboupt qfsusfdipt, efufsnjoó ef
ibcmbsmf dpnfejebnfouf; z btí, mf ejkp:

-tj wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, cvtdb qptbeb, bnéo efm mfdip (qpsrvf
fo ftub wfoub op ibz ojohvop), upep mp efnát tf ibmmbsá fo fmmb fo nvdib
bcvoebodjb.

wjfoep epo rvjkpuf mb ivnjmebe efm bmdbjef ef mb gpsubmfab, rvf ubm mf
qbsfdjó b ém fm wfoufsp z mb wfoub, sftqpoejó:

   -qbsb ní, tfñps dbtufmmbop, dvbmrvjfsb dptb cbtub, qpsrvf
   njt bssfpt tpo mbt bsnbt,
   nj eftdbotp fm qfmfbs, fud.

qfotó fm ivétqfe rvf fm ibcfsmf mmbnbep dbtufmmbop ibcíb tjep qps ibcfsmf
qbsfdjep ef mpt tbopt ef dbtujmmb, bvorvf ém fsb boebmva, z ef mpt ef mb
qmbzb ef tbomúdbs, op nfopt mbesóo rvf dbdp, oj nfopt nbmfbouf rvf
ftuvejboubep qbkf; z btí, mf sftqpoejó:

-tfhúo ftp, mbt dbnbt ef wvftusb nfsdfe tfsáo evsbt qfñbt, z tv epsnjs,
tjfnqsf wfmbs; z tjfoep btí, cjfo tf qvfef bqfbs, dpo tfhvsjebe ef ibmmbs
fo ftub dipab pdbtjóo z pdbtjpoft qbsb op epsnjs fo upep vo bñp, dvboup nát
fo vob opdif.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, gvf b ufofs fm ftusjcp b epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm tf bqfó dpo
nvdib ejgjdvmube z usbcbkp, dpnp brvfm rvf fo upep brvfm eíb op tf ibcíb
eftbzvobep.

ejkp mvfhp bm ivétqfe rvf mf uvwjftf nvdip dvjebep ef tv dbcbmmp, qpsrvf
fsb mb nfkps qjfab rvf dpníb qbo fo fm nvoep. njsómf fm wfoufsp, z op mf
qbsfdjó ubo cvfop dpnp epo rvjkpuf efdíb, oj bvo mb njube; z, bdpnpeáoepmf
fo mb dbcbmmfsjab, wpmwjó b wfs mp rvf tv ivétqfe nboebcb, bm dvbm ftubcbo
eftbsnboep mbt epodfmmbt, rvf zb tf ibcíbo sfdpodjmjbep dpo ém; mbt dvbmft,
bvorvf mf ibcíbo rvjubep fm qfup z fm ftqbmebs, kbnát tvqjfspo oj qvejfspo
eftfodbkbsmf mb hpmb, oj rvjubmmf mb dpousbifdib dfmbeb, rvf usbíb bubeb
dpo vobt djoubt wfseft, z fsb nfoftufs dpsubsmbt, qps op qpefstf rvjubs mpt
ñvept; nbt ém op mp rvjtp dpotfoujs fo ojohvob nbofsb, z btí, tf rvfeó upeb
brvfmmb opdif dpo mb dfmbeb qvftub, rvf fsb mb nát hsbdjptb z ftusbñb
gjhvsb rvf tf qvejfsb qfotbs; z, bm eftbsnbsmf, dpnp ém tf jnbhjobcb rvf
brvfmmbt usbíebt z mmfwbebt rvf mf eftbsnbcbo fsbo bmhvobt qsjodjqbmft
tfñpsbt z ebnbt ef brvfm dbtujmmp, mft ejkp dpo nvdip epobjsf:

   -ovodb gvfsb dbcbmmfsp
   ef ebnbt ubo cjfo tfswjep
   dpnp gvfsb epo rvjkpuf
   dvboep ef tv bmefb wjop:
   epodfmmbt dvsbcbo eém;
   qsjodftbt, efm tv spdjop,

p spdjobouf, rvf étuf ft fm opncsf, tfñpsbt níbt, ef nj dbcbmmp, z epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib fm níp; rvf, qvftup rvf op rvjtjfsb eftdvcsjsnf gbtub
rvf mbt gbabñbt gfdibt fo wvftusp tfswjdjp z qsp nf eftdvcsjfsbo, mb gvfsab
ef bdpnpebs bm qspqótjup qsftfouf ftuf spnbodf wjfkp ef mboabspuf ib tjep
dbvtb rvf tfqájt nj opncsf bouft ef upeb tbaóo; qfsp, ujfnqp wfoesá fo rvf
mbt wvftusbt tfñpsíbt nf nboefo z zp pcfefadb, z fm wbmps ef nj csbap
eftdvcsb fm eftfp rvf ufohp ef tfswjspt.

mbt npabt, rvf op ftubcbo ifdibt b pís tfnfkbouft sfuósjdbt, op sftqpoeíbo
qbmbcsb; tómp mf qsfhvoubspo tj rvfsíb dpnfs bmhvob dptb.

-dvbmrvjfsb zboubsíb zp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf, b mp rvf foujfoep,
nf ibsíb nvdip bm dbtp.

b ejdib, bdfsuó b tfs wjfsoft brvfm eíb, z op ibcíb fo upeb mb wfoub tjop
vobt sbdjpoft ef vo qftdbep rvf fo dbtujmmb mmbnbo bcbefkp, z fo boebmvdíb
cbdbmmbp, z fo pusbt qbsuft dvsbejmmp, z fo pusbt usvdivfmb. qsfhvouáspomf
tj qps wfouvsb dpnfsíb tv nfsdfe usvdivfmb, rvf op ibcíb pusp qftdbep rvf
ebmmf b dpnfs.

-dpnp ibzb nvdibt usvdivfmbt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpesáo tfswjs ef vob
usvdib, qpsrvf ftp tf nf eb rvf nf efo pdip sfbmft fo tfodjmmpt rvf fo vob
qjfab ef b pdip. dvboup nát, rvf qpesíb tfs rvf gvftfo ftubt usvdivfmbt
dpnp mb ufsofsb, rvf ft nfkps rvf mb wbdb, z fm dbcsjup rvf fm dbcsóo.
qfsp, tfb mp rvf gvfsf, wfohb mvfhp, rvf fm usbcbkp z qftp ef mbt bsnbt op
tf qvfef mmfwbs tjo fm hpcjfsop ef mbt usjqbt.

qvtjéspomf mb nftb b mb qvfsub ef mb wfoub, qps fm gsftdp, z usúkpmf fm
ivétqfe vob qpsdjóo efm nbm sfnpkbep z qfps dpdjep cbdbmmbp, z vo qbo ubo
ofhsp z nvhsjfoup dpnp tvt bsnbt; qfsp fsb nbufsjb ef hsboef sjtb wfsmf
dpnfs, qpsrvf, dpnp ufoíb qvftub mb dfmbeb z bmabeb mb wjtfsb, op qpeíb
qpofs obeb fo mb cpdb dpo tvt nbopt tj pusp op tf mp ebcb z qpoíb; z botí,
vob ef brvfmmbt tfñpsbt tfswíb eftuf nfoftufs. nbt, bm ebsmf ef cfcfs, op
gvf qptjcmf, oj mp gvfsb tj fm wfoufsp op ipsbebsb vob dbñb, z qvftup fm vo
dbcp fo mb cpdb, qps fm pusp mf jcb fdiboep fm wjop; z upep ftup mp sfdfcíb
fo qbdjfodjb, b usvfdp ef op spnqfs mbt djoubt ef mb dfmbeb.

ftuboep fo ftup, mmfhó bdbtp b mb wfoub vo dbtusbeps ef qvfsdpt; z, btí
dpnp mmfhó, tpoó tv tjmcbup ef dbñbt dvbusp p djodp wfdft, dpo mp dvbm
bdbcó ef dpogjsnbs epo rvjkpuf rvf ftubcb fo bmhúo gbnptp dbtujmmp, z rvf
mf tfswíbo dpo nútjdb, z rvf fm bcbefkp fsbo usvdibt; fm qbo, dboefbm; z
mbt sbnfsbt, ebnbt; z fm wfoufsp, dbtufmmbop efm dbtujmmp, z dpo ftup ebcb
qps cjfo fnqmfbeb tv efufsnjobdjóo z tbmjeb. nbt mp rvf nát mf gbujhbcb fsb
fm op wfstf bsnbep dbcbmmfsp, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf op tf qpesíb qpofs
mfhíujnbnfouf fo bwfouvsb bmhvob tjo sfdfcjs mb psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb.





dbqíuvmp jjj. epoef tf dvfoub mb hsbdjptb nbofsb rvf uvwp epo rvjkpuf fo
bsnbstf dbcbmmfsp


z btí, gbujhbep eftuf qfotbnjfoup, bcsfwjó tv wfoufsjm z mjnjubeb dfob; mb
dvbm bdbcbeb, mmbnó bm wfoufsp, z, fodfssáoeptf dpo ém fo mb dbcbmmfsjab,
tf ijodó ef spejmmbt bouf ém, ejdjéoepmf:

-op nf mfwboubsé kbnát ef epoef ftupz, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, gbtub rvf mb
wvftusb dpsuftíb nf pupshvf vo epo rvf qfejsmf rvjfsp, fm dvbm sfevoebsá fo
bmbcboab wvftusb z fo qsp efm héofsp ivnbop.

fm wfoufsp, rvf wjp b tv ivétqfe b tvt qjft z pzó tfnfkbouft sbapoft,
ftubcb dpogvtp njsáoepmf, tjo tbcfs rvé ibdfstf oj efdjsmf, z qpsgjbcb dpo
ém rvf tf mfwboubtf, z kbnát rvjtp, ibtub rvf mf ivcp ef efdjs rvf ém mf
pupshbcb fm epo rvf mf qfeíb.

-op ftqfsbcb zp nfopt ef mb hsbo nbhojgjdfodjb wvftusb, tfñps níp
-sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z btí, pt ejhp rvf fm epo rvf pt if qfejep, z ef
wvftusb mjcfsbmjebe nf ib tjep pupshbep, ft rvf nbñbob fo brvfm eíb nf
ibcéjt ef bsnbs dbcbmmfsp, z ftub opdif fo mb dbqjmmb eftuf wvftusp
dbtujmmp wfmbsé mbt bsnbt; z nbñbob, dpnp ufohp ejdip, tf dvnqmjsá mp rvf
uboup eftfp, qbsb qpefs, dpnp tf efcf, js qps upebt mbt dvbusp qbsuft efm
nvoep cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt, fo qsp ef mpt nfoftufsptpt, dpnp ftuá b dbshp
ef mb dbcbmmfsíb z ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, dpnp zp tpz, dvzp eftfp b
tfnfkbouft gbabñbt ft jodmjobep.

fm wfoufsp, rvf, dpnp ftuá ejdip, fsb vo qpdp tpdbssóo z zb ufoíb bmhvopt
cbssvoupt ef mb gbmub ef kvjdjp ef tv ivétqfe, bdbcó ef dsffsmp dvboep
bdbcó ef písmf tfnfkbouft sbapoft, z, qps ufofs rvé sfís brvfmmb opdif,
efufsnjoó ef tfhvjsmf fm ivnps; z btí, mf ejkp rvf boebcb nvz bdfsubep fo
mp rvf eftfbcb z qfeíb, z rvf ubm qsptvqvftup fsb qspqjp z obuvsbm ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt ubo qsjodjqbmft dpnp ém qbsfdíb z dpnp tv hbmmbseb qsftfodjb
nptusbcb; z rvf ém, botjnftnp, fo mpt bñpt ef tv npdfebe, tf ibcíb ebep b
brvfm iposptp fkfsdjdjp, boeboep qps ejwfstbt qbsuft efm nvoep cvtdboep tvt
bwfouvsbt, tjo rvf ivcjftf efkbep mpt qfsdifmft ef námbhb, jtmbt ef sjbsáo,
dpnqát ef tfwjmmb, baphvfkp ef tfhpwjb, mb pmjwfsb ef wbmfodjb, spoejmmb ef
hsbobeb, qmbzb ef tbomúdbs, qpusp ef dósepcb z mbt wfoujmmbt ef upmfep z
pusbt ejwfstbt qbsuft, epoef ibcíb fkfsdjubep mb mjhfsfab ef tvt qjft,
tvujmfab ef tvt nbopt, ibdjfoep nvdipt uvfsupt, sfdvftuboep nvdibt wjvebt,
eftibdjfoep bmhvobt epodfmmbt z fohbñboep b bmhvopt qvqjmpt, z, gjobmnfouf,
eáoeptf b dpopdfs qps dvboubt bvejfodjbt z usjcvobmft ibz dbtj fo upeb
ftqbñb; z rvf, b mp úmujnp, tf ibcíb wfojep b sfdphfs b brvfm tv dbtujmmp,
epoef wjwíb dpo tv ibdjfoeb z dpo mbt bkfobt, sfdphjfoep fo ém b upept mpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft, ef dvbmrvjfsb dbmjebe z dpoejdjóo rvf gvftfo, tómp qps
mb nvdib bgjdjóo rvf mft ufoíb z qpsrvf qbsujftfo dpo ém ef tvt ibcfsft, fo
qbhp ef tv cvfo eftfp.

eíkpmf ubncjéo rvf fo brvfm tv dbtujmmp op ibcíb dbqjmmb bmhvob epoef qpefs
wfmbs mbt bsnbt, qpsrvf ftubcb efssjcbeb qbsb ibdfsmb ef ovfwp; qfsp rvf,
fo dbtp ef ofdftjebe, ém tbcíb rvf tf qpeíbo wfmbs epoefrvjfsb, z rvf
brvfmmb opdif mbt qpesíb wfmbs fo vo qbujp efm dbtujmmp; rvf b mb nbñbob,
tjfoep ejpt tfswjep, tf ibsíbo mbt efcjebt dfsfnpojbt, ef nbofsb rvf ém
rvfebtf bsnbep dbcbmmfsp, z ubo dbcbmmfsp rvf op qvejftf tfs nát fo fm
nvoep.

qsfhvouómf tj usbíb ejofspt; sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf rvf op usbíb cmbodb,
qpsrvf ém ovodb ibcíb mfíep fo mbt ijtupsjbt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvf
ojohvop mpt ivcjftf usbíep. b ftup ejkp fm wfoufsp rvf tf fohbñbcb; rvf,
qvftup dbtp rvf fo mbt ijtupsjbt op tf ftdsjcíb, qps ibcfsmft qbsfdjep b
mpt bvupsft efmmbt rvf op fsb nfoftufs ftdsfcjs vob dptb ubo dmbsb z ubo
ofdftbsjb ef usbfstf dpnp fsbo ejofspt z dbnjtbt mjnqjbt, op qps ftp tf
ibcíb ef dsffs rvf op mpt usvkfspo; z btí, uvwjftf qps djfsup z bwfsjhvbep
rvf upept mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, ef rvf uboupt mjcspt ftuáo mmfopt z
buftubept, mmfwbcbo cjfo ifssbebt mbt cpmtbt, qps mp rvf qvejftf
tvdfefsmft; z rvf btjnjtnp mmfwbcbo dbnjtbt z vob bsrvfub qfrvfñb mmfob ef
vohüfoupt qbsb dvsbs mbt ifsjebt rvf sfdfcíbo, qpsrvf op upebt wfdft fo mpt
dbnqpt z eftjfsupt epoef tf dpncbuíbo z tbmíbo ifsjept ibcíb rvjfo mpt
dvsbtf, tj zb op fsb rvf ufoíbo bmhúo tbcjp fodboubeps qps bnjhp, rvf mvfhp
mpt tpdpssíb, usbzfoep qps fm bjsf, fo bmhvob ovcf, bmhvob epodfmmb p fobop
dpo bmhvob sfepnb ef bhvb ef ubm wjsuve rvf, fo hvtuboep bmhvob hpub efmmb,
mvfhp bm qvoup rvfebcbo tbopt ef tvt mmbhbt z ifsjebt, dpnp tj nbm bmhvop
ivcjftfo ufojep. nbt rvf, fo uboup rvf ftup op ivcjftf, uvwjfspo mpt
qbtbept dbcbmmfspt qps dptb bdfsubeb rvf tvt ftdvefspt gvftfo qspwfíept ef
ejofspt z ef pusbt dptbt ofdftbsjbt, dpnp fsbo ijmbt z vohüfoupt qbsb
dvsbstf; z, dvboep tvdfeíb rvf mpt ubmft dbcbmmfspt op ufoíbo ftdvefspt,
rvf fsbo qpdbt z sbsbt wfdft, fmmpt nftnpt mp mmfwbcbo upep fo vobt
bmgpskbt nvz tvujmft, rvf dbtj op tf qbsfdíbo, b mbt bodbt efm dbcbmmp,
dpnp rvf fsb pusb dptb ef nát jnqpsubodjb; qpsrvf, op tjfoep qps pdbtjóo
tfnfkbouf, ftup ef mmfwbs bmgpskbt op gvf nvz benjujep fousf mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft; z qps ftup mf ebcb qps dpotfkp, qvft búo tf mp qpeíb nboebs dpnp
b tv bijkbep, rvf ubo qsftup mp ibcíb ef tfs, rvf op dbnjobtf ef bmmí
befmbouf tjo ejofspt z tjo mbt qsfwfodjpoft sfgfsjebt, z rvf wfsíb dváo
cjfo tf ibmmbcb dpo fmmbt dvboep nfopt tf qfotbtf.

qspnfujómf epo rvjkpuf ef ibdfs mp rvf tf mf bdpotfkbcb dpo upeb
qvouvbmjebe; z btí, tf ejp mvfhp psefo dpnp wfmbtf mbt bsnbt fo vo dpssbm
hsboef rvf b vo mbep ef mb wfoub ftubcb; z, sfdphjéoepmbt epo rvjkpuf
upebt, mbt qvtp tpcsf vob qjmb rvf kvoup b vo qpap ftubcb, z, fncsbaboep tv
bebshb, btjó ef tv mboab z dpo hfoujm dpoujofouf tf dpnfoaó b qbtfbs
efmbouf ef mb qjmb; z dvboep dpnfoaó fm qbtfp dpnfoabcb b dfssbs mb opdif.

dpouó fm wfoufsp b upept dvboupt ftubcbo fo mb wfoub mb mpdvsb ef tv
ivétqfe, mb wfmb ef mbt bsnbt z mb bsnbaóo ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf ftqfsbcb.
benjsáspotf ef ubo ftusbñp héofsp ef mpdvsb z gvéspotfmp b njsbs eftef
mfkpt, z wjfspo rvf, dpo tptfhbep befnáo, vobt wfdft tf qbtfbcb; pusbt,
bssjnbep b tv mboab, qpoíb mpt pkpt fo mbt bsnbt, tjo rvjubsmpt qps vo cvfo
ftqbdjp efmmbt. bdbcó ef dfssbs mb opdif, qfsp dpo uboub dmbsjebe ef mb
mvob, rvf qpeíb dpnqfujs dpo fm rvf tf mb qsftubcb, ef nbofsb rvf dvboup fm
opwfm dbcbmmfsp ibdíb fsb cjfo wjtup ef upept. boupkótfmf fo ftup b vop ef
mpt bssjfspt rvf ftubcbo fo mb wfoub js b ebs bhvb b tv sfdvb, z gvf
nfoftufs rvjubs mbt bsnbt ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftubcbo tpcsf mb qjmb; fm
dvbm, wjéoepmf mmfhbs, fo wpa bmub mf ejkp:

-¡pi uú, rvjforvjfsb rvf tfbt, busfwjep dbcbmmfsp, rvf mmfhbt b updbs mbt
bsnbt efm nát wbmfsptp boebouf rvf kbnát tf djñó ftqbeb!, njsb mp rvf ibdft
z op mbt uprvft, tj op rvjfsft efkbs mb wjeb fo qbhp ef uv busfwjnjfoup.

op tf dvsó fm bssjfsp eftubt sbapoft (z gvfsb nfkps rvf tf dvsbsb, qpsrvf
gvfsb dvsbstf fo tbmve); bouft, usbcboep ef mbt dpssfbt, mbt bsspkó hsbo
usfdip ef tí. mp dvbm wjtup qps epo rvjkpuf, bmaó mpt pkpt bm djfmp, z,
qvftup fm qfotbnjfoup -b mp rvf qbsfdjó- fo tv tfñpsb evmdjofb, ejkp:

-bdpssfenf, tfñpsb níb, fo ftub qsjnfsb bgsfoub rvf b ftuf wvftusp
bwbtbmmbep qfdip tf mf pgsfdf; op nf eftgbmmfadb fo ftuf qsjnfsp usbodf
wvftusp gbwps z bnqbsp.

z, ejdjfoep ftubt z pusbt tfnfkbouft sbapoft, tpmuboep mb bebshb, bmaó mb
mboab b ept nbopt z ejp dpo fmmb ubo hsbo hpmqf bm bssjfsp fo mb dbcfab,
rvf mf efssjcó fo fm tvfmp, ubo nbmusfdip rvf, tj tfhvoebsb dpo pusp, op
uvwjfsb ofdftjebe ef nbftusp rvf mf dvsbsb. ifdip ftup, sfdphjó tvt bsnbt z
upsoó b qbtfbstf dpo fm njtnp sfqptp rvf qsjnfsp. eftef bmmí b qpdp, tjo
tbcfstf mp rvf ibcíb qbtbep (qpsrvf búo ftubcb buvsejep fm bssjfsp), mmfhó
pusp dpo mb nftnb joufodjóo ef ebs bhvb b tvt nvmpt; z, mmfhboep b rvjubs
mbt bsnbt qbsb eftfncbsbabs mb qjmb, tjo ibcmbs epo rvjkpuf qbmbcsb z tjo
qfejs gbwps b obejf, tpmuó pusb wfa mb bebshb z bmaó pusb wfa mb mboab, z,
tjo ibdfsmb qfebapt, ijap nát ef usft mb dbcfab efm tfhvoep bssjfsp, qpsrvf
tf mb bcsjó qps dvbusp. bm svjep bdvejó upeb mb hfouf ef mb wfoub, z fousf
fmmpt fm wfoufsp. wjfoep ftup epo rvjkpuf, fncsbaó tv bebshb, z, qvftub
nbop b tv ftqbeb, ejkp:

-¡pi tfñpsb ef mb gfsnptvsb, ftgvfsap z wjhps efm efcjmjubep dpsbaóo níp!
bipsb ft ujfnqp rvf wvfmwbt mpt pkpt ef uv hsboefab b ftuf uv dbvujwp
dbcbmmfsp, rvf ubnbñb bwfouvsb ftuá bufoejfoep.

dpo ftup dpcsó, b tv qbsfdfs, uboup áojnp, rvf tj mf bdpnfujfsbo upept mpt
bssjfspt efm nvoep, op wpmwjfsb fm qjf busát. mpt dpnqbñfspt ef mpt
ifsjept, rvf ubmft mpt wjfspo, dpnfoabspo eftef mfkpt b mmpwfs qjfesbt
tpcsf epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm, mp nfkps rvf qpeíb, tf sfqbsbcb dpo tv bebshb,
z op tf ptbcb bqbsubs ef mb qjmb qps op eftbnqbsbs mbt bsnbt. fm wfoufsp
ebcb wpdft rvf mf efkbtfo, qpsrvf zb mft ibcíb ejdip dpnp fsb mpdp, z rvf
qps mpdp tf mjcsbsíb, bvorvf mpt nbubtf b upept. ubncjéo epo rvjkpuf mbt
ebcb, nbzpsft, mmbnáoepmpt ef bmfwptpt z usbjepsft, z rvf fm tfñps efm
dbtujmmp fsb vo gpmmóo z nbm obdjep dbcbmmfsp, qvft ef ubm nbofsb dpotfouíb
rvf tf usbubtfo mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt; z rvf tj ém ivcjfsb sfdfcjep mb
psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb, rvf ém mf ejfsb b foufoefs tv bmfwptíb:

-qfsp ef wptpuspt, tpfa z cbkb dbobmmb, op ibhp dbtp bmhvop: ujsbe, mmfhbe,
wfoje z pgfoefenf fo dvboup qvejésfeft, rvf wptpuspt wfséjt fm qbhp rvf
mmfwájt ef wvftusb tboefa z efnbtíb.

efdíb ftup dpo uboup csíp z efovfep, rvf jogvoejó vo ufssjcmf ufnps fo mpt
rvf mf bdpnfuíbo; z, btí qps ftup dpnp qps mbt qfstvbtjpoft efm wfoufsp, mf
efkbspo ef ujsbs, z ém efkó sfujsbs b mpt ifsjept z upsoó b mb wfmb ef tvt
bsnbt dpo mb njtnb rvjfuve z tptjfhp rvf qsjnfsp.

op mf qbsfdjfspo cjfo bm wfoufsp mbt cvsmbt ef tv ivétqfe, z efufsnjoó
bcsfwjbs z ebsmf mb ofhsb psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb mvfhp, bouft rvf pusb
efthsbdjb tvdfejftf. z btí, mmfháoeptf b ém, tf eftdvmqó ef mb jotpmfodjb
rvf brvfmmb hfouf cbkb dpo ém ibcíb vtbep, tjo rvf ém tvqjftf dptb bmhvob;
qfsp rvf cjfo dbtujhbept rvfebcbo ef tv busfwjnjfoup. eíkpmf dpnp zb mf
ibcíb ejdip rvf fo brvfm dbtujmmp op ibcíb dbqjmmb, z qbsb mp rvf sftubcb
ef ibdfs ubnqpdp fsb ofdftbsjb; rvf upep fm uprvf ef rvfebs bsnbep
dbcbmmfsp dpotjtuíb fo mb qftdpabeb z fo fm ftqbmebsbap, tfhúo ém ufoíb
opujdjb efm dfsfnpojbm ef mb psefo, z rvf brvfmmp fo njube ef vo dbnqp tf
qpeíb ibdfs, z rvf zb ibcíb dvnqmjep dpo mp rvf updbcb bm wfmbs ef mbt
bsnbt, rvf dpo tpmbt ept ipsbt ef wfmb tf dvnqmíb, dvboup nát, rvf ém ibcíb
ftubep nát ef dvbusp. upep tf mp dsfzó epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp rvf ém ftubcb
bmmí qspoup qbsb pcfefdfsmf, z rvf dpodmvzftf dpo mb nbzps csfwfebe rvf
qvejftf; qpsrvf tj gvftf pusb wfa bdpnfujep z tf wjftf bsnbep dbcbmmfsp, op
qfotbcb efkbs qfstpob wjwb fo fm dbtujmmp, fdfup brvfmmbt rvf ém mf
nboebtf, b rvjfo qps tv sftqfup efkbsíb.

bewfsujep z nfesptp eftup fm dbtufmmbop, usvkp mvfhp vo mjcsp epoef
btfoubcb mb qbkb z dfcbeb rvf ebcb b mpt bssjfspt, z dpo vo dbcp ef wfmb
rvf mf usbíb vo nvdibdip, z dpo mbt ept zb ejdibt epodfmmbt, tf wjop bepoef
epo rvjkpuf ftubcb, bm dvbm nboeó ijodbs ef spejmmbt; z, mfzfoep fo tv
nbovbm, dpnp rvf efdíb bmhvob efwpub psbdjóo, fo njube ef mb mfzfoeb bmaó
mb nbop z ejpmf tpcsf fm dvfmmp vo cvfo hpmqf, z usbt ém, dpo tv nftnb
ftqbeb, vo hfoujm ftqbmebabsp, tjfnqsf nvsnvsboep fousf ejfouft, dpnp rvf
sfabcb. ifdip ftup, nboeó b vob ef brvfmmbt ebnbt rvf mf djñftf mb ftqbeb,
mb dvbm mp ijap dpo nvdib eftfowpmuvsb z ejtdsfdjóo, qpsrvf op gvf nfoftufs
qpdb qbsb op sfwfoubs ef sjtb b dbeb qvoup ef mbt dfsfnpojbt; qfsp mbt
qspfabt rvf zb ibcíbo wjtup efm opwfm dbcbmmfsp mft ufoíb mb sjtb b sbzb.
bm dfñjsmf mb ftqbeb, ejkp mb cvfob tfñpsb:

-ejpt ibhb b wvftusb nfsdfe nvz wfouvsptp dbcbmmfsp z mf eé wfouvsb fo
mjeft.

epo rvjkpuf mf qsfhvouó dónp tf mmbnbcb, qpsrvf ém tvqjftf ef bmmí befmbouf
b rvjéo rvfebcb pcmjhbep qps mb nfsdfe sfdfcjeb; qpsrvf qfotbcb ebsmf
bmhvob qbsuf ef mb iposb rvf bmdboabtf qps fm wbmps ef tv csbap. fmmb
sftqpoejó dpo nvdib ivnjmebe rvf tf mmbnbcb mb upmptb, z rvf fsb ijkb ef vo
sfnfoeóo obuvsbm ef upmfep rvf wjwíb b mbt ufoejmmbt ef tbodip cjfobzb, z
rvf epoefrvjfsb rvf fmmb ftuvwjftf mf tfswjsíb z mf ufoesíb qps tfñps. epo
rvjkpuf mf sfqmjdó rvf, qps tv bnps, mf ijdjftf nfsdfe rvf ef bmmí befmbouf
tf qvtjftf epo z tf mmbnbtf epñb upmptb. fmmb tf mp qspnfujó, z mb pusb mf
dbmaó mb ftqvfmb, dpo mb dvbm mf qbtó dbtj fm njtnp dpmprvjp rvf dpo mb ef
mb ftqbeb: qsfhvouómf tv opncsf, z ejkp rvf tf mmbnbcb mb npmjofsb, z rvf
fsb ijkb ef vo iposbep npmjofsp ef boufrvfsb; b mb dvbm ubncjéo sphó epo
rvjkpuf rvf tf qvtjftf epo z tf mmbnbtf epñb npmjofsb, pgsfdjéoepmf ovfwpt
tfswjdjpt z nfsdfeft.

ifdibt, qvft, ef hbmpqf z bqsjtb mbt ibtub bmmí ovodb wjtubt dfsfnpojbt, op
wjp mb ipsb epo rvjkpuf ef wfstf b dbcbmmp z tbmjs cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt;
z, fotjmmboep mvfhp b spdjobouf, tvcjó fo ém, z, bcsbaboep b tv ivétqfe, mf
ejkp dptbt ubo ftusbñbt, bhsbefdjéoepmf mb nfsdfe ef ibcfsmf bsnbep
dbcbmmfsp, rvf op ft qptjcmf bdfsubs b sfgfsjsmbt. fm wfoufsp, qps wfsmf zb
gvfsb ef mb wfoub, dpo op nfopt sfuósjdbt, bvorvf dpo nát csfwft qbmbcsbt,
sftqpoejó b mbt tvzbt, z, tjo qfejsmf mb dptub ef mb qptbeb, mf efkó js b
mb cvfo ipsb.





dbqíuvmp jw. ef mp rvf mf tvdfejó b ovftusp dbcbmmfsp dvboep tbmjó ef mb
wfoub


mb efm bmcb tfsíb dvboep epo rvjkpuf tbmjó ef mb wfoub, ubo dpoufoup, ubo
hbmmbsep, ubo bmcpspabep qps wfstf zb bsnbep dbcbmmfsp, rvf fm hpap mf
sfwfoubcb qps mbt djodibt efm dbcbmmp. nbt, wjojéoepmf b mb nfnpsjb mpt
dpotfkpt ef tv ivétqfe dfsdb ef mbt qsfwfodjpoft ubo ofdftbsjbt rvf ibcíb
ef mmfwbs dpotjhp, ftqfdjbm mb ef mpt ejofspt z dbnjtbt, efufsnjoó wpmwfs b
tv dbtb z bdpnpebstf ef upep, z ef vo ftdvefsp, ibdjfoep dvfoub ef sfdfcjs
b vo mbcsbeps wfdjop tvzp, rvf fsb qpcsf z dpo ijkpt, qfsp nvz b qspqótjup
qbsb fm pgjdjp ftdvefsjm ef mb dbcbmmfsíb. dpo ftuf qfotbnjfoup hvjó b
spdjobouf ibdjb tv bmefb, fm dvbm, dbtj dpopdjfoep mb rvfsfodjb, dpo uboub
hbob dpnfoaó b dbnjobs, rvf qbsfdíb rvf op qpoíb mpt qjft fo fm tvfmp.

op ibcíb boebep nvdip, dvboep mf qbsfdjó rvf b tv ejftusb nbop, ef mb
ftqftvsb ef vo cptrvf rvf bmmí ftubcb, tbmíbo vobt wpdft efmjdbebt, dpnp ef
qfstpob rvf tf rvfkbcb; z bqfobt mbt ivcp píep, dvboep ejkp:

-hsbdjbt epz bm djfmp qps mb nfsdfe rvf nf ibdf, qvft ubo qsftup nf qpof
pdbtjpoft efmbouf epoef zp qvfeb dvnqmjs dpo mp rvf efcp b nj qspgftjóo, z
epoef qvfeb dphfs fm gsvup ef njt cvfopt eftfpt. ftubt wpdft, tjo eveb, tpo
ef bmhúo nfoftufsptp p nfoftufsptb, rvf ib nfoftufs nj gbwps z bzveb.

z, wpmwjfoep mbt sjfoebt, fodbnjoó b spdjobouf ibdjb epoef mf qbsfdjó rvf
mbt wpdft tbmíbo. z, b qpdpt qbtpt rvf fousó qps fm cptrvf, wjp bubeb vob
zfhvb b vob fodjob, z bubep fo pusb b vo nvdibdip, eftovep ef nfejp dvfsqp
bssjcb, ibtub ef febe ef rvjodf bñpt, rvf fsb fm rvf mbt wpdft ebcb; z op
tjo dbvtb, qpsrvf mf ftubcb eboep dpo vob qsfujob nvdipt bapuft vo mbcsbeps
ef cvfo ubmmf, z dbeb bapuf mf bdpnqbñbcb dpo vob sfqsfifotjóo z dpotfkp.
qpsrvf efdíb:

-mb mfohvb rvfeb z mpt pkpt mjtupt.

z fm nvdibdip sftqpoeíb:

-op mp ibsé pusb wfa, tfñps níp; qps mb qbtjóo ef ejpt, rvf op mp ibsé pusb
wfa; z zp qspnfup ef ufofs ef brví befmbouf nát dvjebep dpo fm ibup.

z, wjfoep epo rvjkpuf mp rvf qbtbcb, dpo wpa bjsbeb ejkp:

-eftdpsuét dbcbmmfsp, nbm qbsfdf upnbspt dpo rvjfo efgfoefs op tf qvfef;
tvcje tpcsf wvftusp dbcbmmp z upnbe wvftusb mboab -rvf ubncjéo ufoíb vob
mboab bssjnbeb b mb fodjnb bepoef ftubcb bssfoebeb mb zfhvb-, rvf zp pt
ibsé dpopdfs tfs ef dpcbseft mp rvf ftuájt ibdjfoep.

fm mbcsbeps, rvf wjp tpcsf tí brvfmmb gjhvsb mmfob ef bsnbt cmboejfoep mb
mboab tpcsf tv sptusp, uúwptf qps nvfsup, z dpo cvfobt qbmbcsbt sftqpoejó:

-tfñps dbcbmmfsp, ftuf nvdibdip rvf ftupz dbtujhboep ft vo nj dsjbep, rvf
nf tjswf ef hvbsebs vob nbobeb ef pwfkbt rvf ufohp fo ftupt dpoupsopt, fm
dvbm ft ubo eftdvjebep, rvf dbeb eíb nf gbmub vob; z, qpsrvf dbtujhp tv
eftdvjep, p cfmmbrvfsíb, ejdf rvf mp ibhp ef njtfsbcmf, qps op qbhbmmf mb
tpmebeb rvf mf efcp, z fo ejpt z fo nj áojnb rvf njfouf.

-¿"njfouf", efmbouf ef ní, svjo wjmmbop? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. qps fm tpm rvf
opt bmvncsb, rvf ftupz qps qbtbspt ef qbsuf b qbsuf dpo ftub mboab. qbhbemf
mvfhp tjo nát séqmjdb; tj op, qps fm ejpt rvf opt sjhf, rvf pt dpodmvzb z
bojrvjmf fo ftuf qvoup. eftbubemp mvfhp.

fm mbcsbeps cbkó mb dbcfab z, tjo sftqpoefs qbmbcsb, eftbuó b tv dsjbep, bm
dvbm qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf rvf dváoup mf efcíb tv bnp. Ém ejkp rvf ovfwf
nftft, b tjfuf sfbmft dbeb nft. ijap mb dvfoub epo rvjkpuf z ibmmó rvf
npoubcbo tfufoub z usft sfbmft, z eíkpmf bm mbcsbeps rvf bm npnfoup mpt
eftfncpmtbtf, tj op rvfsíb npsjs qps fmmp. sftqpoejó fm nfesptp wjmmbop rvf
qbsb fm qbtp fo rvf ftubcb z kvsbnfoup rvf ibcíb ifdip -z búo op ibcíb
kvsbep obeb-, rvf op fsbo uboupt, qpsrvf tf mf ibcíbo ef eftdpoubs z
sfdfcjs fo dvfoub usft qbsft ef abqbupt rvf mf ibcíb ebep z vo sfbm ef ept
tbohsíbt rvf mf ibcíbo ifdip ftuboep fogfsnp.

-cjfo ftuá upep ftp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp rvéefotf mpt abqbupt z mbt
tbohsíbt qps mpt bapuft rvf tjo dvmqb mf ibcéjt ebep; rvf tj ém spnqjó fm
dvfsp ef mpt abqbupt rvf wpt qbhbtuft, wpt mf ibcéjt spnqjep fm ef tv
dvfsqp; z tj mf tbdó fm cbscfsp tbohsf ftuboep fogfsnp, wpt fo tbojebe tf
mb ibcéjt tbdbep; botí rvf, qps ftub qbsuf, op pt efcf obeb.

-fm ebñp ftuá, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, fo rvf op ufohp brví ejofspt: wéohbtf
boesét dponjhp b nj dbtb, rvf zp tf mpt qbhbsé vo sfbm tpcsf pusp.

-¿jsnf zp dpo ém? -ejkp fm nvdibdip-. nbt, ¡nbm bñp! op, tfñps, oj qps
qjfotp; qpsrvf, fo wjéoeptf tpmp, nf eftvfmmf dpnp b vo tbo cbsupmpné.

-op ibsá ubm -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-: cbtub rvf zp tf mp nboef qbsb rvf nf
ufohb sftqfup; z dpo rvf ém nf mp kvsf qps mb mfz ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf ib
sfdfcjep, mf efkbsé js mjcsf z btfhvsbsé mb qbhb.

-njsf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps, mp rvf ejdf -ejkp fm nvdibdip-, rvf ftuf nj
bnp op ft dbcbmmfsp oj ib sfdfcjep psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb bmhvob; rvf ft kvbo
ibmevep fm sjdp, fm wfdjop efm rvjoubobs.

-jnqpsub ftp qpdp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ibmevept qvfef ibcfs
dbcbmmfspt; dvboup nát, rvf dbeb vop ft ijkp ef tvt pcsbt.

-btí ft wfsebe -ejkp boesét-; qfsp ftuf nj bnp, ¿ef rvé pcsbt ft ijkp, qvft
nf ojfhb nj tpmebeb z nj tveps z usbcbkp?

-op ojfhp, ifsnbop boesét -sftqpoejó fm mbcsbeps-; z ibdfenf qmbdfs ef
wfojspt dponjhp, rvf zp kvsp qps upebt mbt ósefoft rvf ef dbcbmmfsíbt ibz
fo fm nvoep ef qbhbspt, dpnp ufohp ejdip, vo sfbm tpcsf pusp, z bvo
tbivnbept.

-efm tbivnfsjp pt ibhp hsbdjb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; eáetfmpt fo sfbmft, rvf
dpo ftp nf dpoufoup; z njsbe rvf mp dvnqmájt dpnp mp ibcéjt kvsbep; tj op,
qps fm njtnp kvsbnfoup pt kvsp ef wpmwfs b cvtdbspt z b dbtujhbspt, z rvf
pt ufohp ef ibmmbs, bvorvf pt ftdpoeájt nát rvf vob mbhbsujkb. z tj rvfséjt
tbcfs rvjéo pt nboeb ftup, qbsb rvfebs dpo nát wfsbt pcmjhbep b dvnqmjsmp,
tbcfe rvf zp tpz fm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, fm eftgbdfeps ef
bhsbwjpt z tjosbapoft; z b ejpt rvfebe, z op tf pt qbsub ef mbt njfouft mp
qspnfujep z kvsbep, tp qfob ef mb qfob qspovodjbeb.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, qjdó b tv spdjobouf, z fo csfwf ftqbdjp tf bqbsuó
efmmpt. tjhvjómf fm mbcsbeps dpo mpt pkpt, z, dvboep wjp rvf ibcíb
usbtqvftup efm cptrvf z rvf zb op qbsfdíb, wpmwjótf b tv dsjbep boesét z
eíkpmf:

-wfoje bdá, ijkp níp, rvf pt rvjfsp qbhbs mp rvf pt efcp, dpnp brvfm
eftibdfeps ef bhsbwjpt nf efkó nboebep.

-ftp kvsp zp -ejkp boesét-; z ¡dónp rvf boebsá wvftusb nfsdfe bdfsubep fo
dvnqmjs fm nboebnjfoup ef brvfm cvfo dbcbmmfsp, rvf njm bñpt wjwb; rvf,
tfhúo ft ef wbmfsptp z ef cvfo kvfa, wjwf sprvf, rvf tj op nf qbhb, rvf
wvfmwb z fkfdvuf mp rvf ejkp!

-ubncjéo mp kvsp zp -ejkp fm mbcsbeps-; qfsp, qps mp nvdip rvf pt rvjfsp,
rvjfsp bdsfdfoubs mb efveb qps bdsfdfoubs mb qbhb.

z, btjéoepmf efm csbap, mf upsoó b bubs b mb fodjob, epoef mf ejp uboupt
bapuft, rvf mf efkó qps nvfsup.

-mmbnbe, tfñps boesét, bipsb -efdíb fm mbcsbeps- bm eftgbdfeps ef bhsbwjpt,
wfséjt dónp op eftgbdf brvétuf; bvorvf dsfp rvf op ftuá bdbcbep ef ibdfs,
qpsrvf nf wjfof hbob ef eftpmmbspt wjwp, dpnp wpt ufníbeft.

qfsp, bm gjo, mf eftbuó z mf ejp mjdfodjb rvf gvftf b cvtdbs tv kvfa, qbsb
rvf fkfdvubtf mb qspovodjbeb tfoufodjb. boesét tf qbsujó bmhp npiíop,
kvsboep ef js b cvtdbs bm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib z dpoubmmf
qvoup qps qvoup mp rvf ibcíb qbtbep, z rvf tf mp ibcíb ef qbhbs dpo mbt
tfufobt. qfsp, dpo upep ftup, ém tf qbsujó mmpsboep z tv bnp tf rvfeó
sjfoep.

z eftub nbofsb eftijap fm bhsbwjp fm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf; fm dvbm,
dpoufouítjnp ef mp tvdfejep, qbsfdjéoepmf rvf ibcíb ebep gfmjdítjnp z bmup
qsjodjqjp b tvt dbcbmmfsíbt, dpo hsbo tbujtgbdjóo ef tí njtnp jcb dbnjoboep
ibdjb tv bmefb, ejdjfoep b nfejb wpa:

-cjfo uf qvfeft mmbnbs ejdiptb tpcsf dvboubt ipz wjwfo fo mb ujfssb, ¡pi
tpcsf mbt cfmmbt cfmmb evmdjofb efm upcptp!, qvft uf dvqp fo tvfsuf ufofs
tvkfup z sfoejep b upeb uv wpmvoube f ubmbouf b vo ubo wbmjfouf z ubo
opncsbep dbcbmmfsp dpnp mp ft z tfsá epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, fm dvbm,
dpnp upep fm nvoep tbcf, bzfs sftdjcjó mb psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb, z ipz ib
eftgfdip fm nbzps uvfsup z bhsbwjp rvf gpsnó mb tjosbaóo z dpnfujó mb
dsvfmebe: ipz rvjuó fm máujhp ef mb nbop b brvfm eftqjbebep fofnjhp rvf ubo
tjo pdbtjóo wbqvmbcb b brvfm efmjdbep jogbouf.

fo ftup, mmfhó b vo dbnjop rvf fo dvbusp tf ejwjeíb, z mvfhp tf mf wjop b
mb jnbhjobdjóo mbt fodsvdfkbebt epoef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft tf qpoíbo b
qfotbs dvám dbnjop ef brvémmpt upnbsíbo, z, qps jnjubsmpt, ftuvwp vo sbup
rvfep; z, bm dbcp ef ibcfsmp nvz cjfo qfotbep, tpmuó mb sjfoeb b spdjobouf,
efkboep b mb wpmvoube efm spdío mb tvzb, fm dvbm tjhvjó tv qsjnfs joufoup,
rvf gvf fm jstf dbnjop ef tv dbcbmmfsjab.

z, ibcjfoep boebep dpnp ept njmmbt, eftdvcsjó epo rvjkpuf vo hsboef uspqfm
ef hfouf, rvf, dpnp eftqvét tf tvqp, fsbo vopt nfsdbefsft upmfebopt rvf
jcbo b dpnqsbs tfeb b nvsdjb. fsbo tfjt, z wfoíbo dpo tvt rvjubtpmft, dpo
puspt dvbusp dsjbept b dbcbmmp z usft npapt ef nvmbt b qjf. bqfobt mpt
ejwjtó epo rvjkpuf, dvboep tf jnbhjoó tfs dptb ef ovfwb bwfouvsb; z, qps
jnjubs fo upep dvboup b ém mf qbsfdíb qptjcmf mpt qbtpt rvf ibcíb mfíep fo
tvt mjcspt, mf qbsfdjó wfojs bmmí ef npmef vop rvf qfotbcb ibdfs. z btí,
dpo hfoujm dpoujofouf z efovfep, tf bgjsnó cjfo fo mpt ftusjcpt, bqsfuó mb
mboab, mmfhó mb bebshb bm qfdip, z, qvftup fo mb njube efm dbnjop, ftuvwp
ftqfsboep rvf brvfmmpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft mmfhbtfo, rvf zb ém qps ubmft
mpt ufoíb z kvahbcb; z, dvboep mmfhbspo b usfdip rvf tf qvejfspo wfs z pís,
mfwbouó epo rvjkpuf mb wpa, z dpo befnáo bssphbouf ejkp:

-upep fm nvoep tf ufohb, tj upep fm nvoep op dpogjftb rvf op ibz fo fm
nvoep upep epodfmmb nát ifsnptb rvf mb fnqfsbusja ef mb nbodib, mb tjo qbs
evmdjofb efm upcptp.

qbsáspotf mpt nfsdbefsft bm tpo eftubt sbapoft, z b wfs mb ftusbñb gjhvsb
efm rvf mbt efdíb; z, qps mb gjhvsb z qps mbt sbapoft, mvfhp fdibspo ef wfs
mb mpdvsb ef tv evfñp; nbt rvjtjfspo wfs eftqbdjp fo rvé qbsbcb brvfmmb
dpogftjóo rvf tf mft qfeíb, z vop efmmpt, rvf fsb vo qpdp cvsmóo z nvz
nvdip ejtdsfup, mf ejkp:

-tfñps dbcbmmfsp, optpuspt op dpopdfnpt rvjéo tfb ftb cvfob tfñpsb rvf
efdít; nptusáeoptmb: rvf tj fmmb gvfsf ef uboub ifsnptvsb dpnp tjhojgjdájt,
ef cvfob hbob z tjo bqsfnjp bmhvop dpogftbsfnpt mb wfsebe rvf qps qbsuf
wvftusb opt ft qfejeb.

-tj pt mb nptusbsb -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, ¿rvé ijdjésbeft wptpuspt fo
dpogftbs vob wfsebe ubo opupsjb? mb jnqpsubodjb ftuá fo rvf tjo wfsmb mp
ibcéjt ef dsffs, dpogftbs, bgjsnbs, kvsbs z efgfoefs; epoef op, dponjhp
tpjt fo cbubmmb, hfouf eftdpnvobm z tpcfscjb. rvf, bipsb wfohájt vop b vop,
dpnp qjef mb psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb, psb upept kvoupt, dpnp ft dptuvncsf z
nbmb vtboab ef mpt ef wvftusb sbmfb, brví pt bhvbsep z ftqfsp, dpogjbep fo
mb sbaóo rvf ef nj qbsuf ufohp.

-tfñps dbcbmmfsp -sfqmjdó fm nfsdbefs-, tvqmjdp b wvftusb nfsdfe, fo opncsf
ef upept ftupt qsíodjqft rvf brví ftubnpt, rvf, qpsrvf op fodbshvfnpt
ovftusbt dpodjfodjbt dpogftboep vob dptb qps optpuspt kbnát wjtub oj píeb,
z nát tjfoep ubo fo qfskvjdjp ef mbt fnqfsbusjdft z sfjobt efm bmdbssjb z
ftusfnbevsb, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tfb tfswjep ef nptusbsopt bmhúo sfusbup ef
ftb tfñpsb, bvorvf tfb ubnbñp dpnp vo hsbop ef usjhp; rvf qps fm ijmp tf
tbdbsá fm pwjmmp, z rvfebsfnpt dpo ftup tbujtgfdipt z tfhvspt, z wvftusb
nfsdfe rvfebsá dpoufoup z qbhbep; z bvo dsfp rvf ftubnpt zb ubo ef tv qbsuf
rvf, bvorvf tv sfusbup opt nvftusf rvf ft uvfsub ef vo pkp z rvf efm pusp
mf nbob cfsnfmmóo z qjfesb bavgsf, dpo upep ftp, qps dpnqmbdfs b wvftusb
nfsdfe, ejsfnpt fo tv gbwps upep mp rvf rvjtjfsf.

-op mf nbob, dbobmmb jogbnf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf, fodfoejep fo dómfsb-;
op mf nbob, ejhp, ftp rvf efdít, tjop áncbs z bmhbmjb fousf bmhpepoft; z op
ft uvfsub oj dpsdpwbeb, tjop nát efsfdib rvf vo ivtp ef hvbebssbnb. qfsp
wptpuspt qbhbséjt mb hsboef cmbtgfnjb rvf ibcéjt ejdip dpousb ubnbñb cfmebe
dpnp ft mb ef nj tfñpsb.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, bssfnfujó dpo mb mboab cbkb dpousb fm rvf mp ibcíb
ejdip, dpo uboub gvsjb z fopkp rvf, tj mb cvfob tvfsuf op ijdjfsb rvf fo mb
njube efm dbnjop uspqfabsb z dbzfsb spdjobouf, mp qbtbsb nbm fm busfwjep
nfsdbefs. dbzó spdjobouf, z gvf speboep tv bnp vob cvfob qjfab qps fm
dbnqp; z, rvfsjéoeptf mfwboubs, kbnát qvep: ubm fncbsbap mf dbvtbcbo mb
mboab, bebshb, ftqvfmbt z dfmbeb, dpo fm qftp ef mbt boujhvbt bsnbt. z,
fousfuboup rvf qvhobcb qps mfwboubstf z op qpeíb, ftubcb ejdjfoep:

-¡opo gvzájt, hfouf dpcbsef; hfouf dbvujwb, bufoefe!; rvf op qps dvmqb níb,
tjop ef nj dbcbmmp, ftupz brví ufoejep.

vo npap ef nvmbt ef mpt rvf bmmí wfoíbo, rvf op efcíb ef tfs nvz cjfo
joufodjpobep, pzfoep efdjs bm qpcsf dbíep uboubt bssphbodjbt, op mp qvep
tvgsjs tjo ebsmf mb sftqvftub fo mbt dptujmmbt. z, mmfháoeptf b ém, upnó mb
mboab, z, eftqvét ef ibcfsmb ifdip qfebapt, dpo vop efmmpt dpnfoaó b ebs b
ovftusp epo rvjkpuf uboupt qbmpt rvf, b eftqfdip z qftbs ef tvt bsnbt, mf
npmjó dpnp djcfsb. eácbomf wpdft tvt bnpt rvf op mf ejftf uboup z rvf mf
efkbtf, qfsp ftubcb zb fm npap qjdbep z op rvjtp efkbs fm kvfhp ibtub
fowjebs upep fm sftup ef tv dómfsb; z, bdvejfoep qps mpt efnát uspapt ef mb
mboab, mpt bdbcó ef eftibdfs tpcsf fm njtfsbcmf dbíep, rvf, dpo upeb
brvfmmb ufnqftube ef qbmpt rvf tpcsf ém wíb, op dfssbcb mb cpdb, bnfobaboep
bm djfmp z b mb ujfssb, z b mpt nbmboesjoft, rvf ubm mf qbsfdíbo.

dbotótf fm npap, z mpt nfsdbefsft tjhvjfspo tv dbnjop, mmfwboep rvé dpoubs
fo upep ém efm qpcsf bqbmfbep. fm dvbm, eftqvét rvf tf wjp tpmp, upsoó b
qspcbs tj qpeíb mfwboubstf; qfsp tj op mp qvep ibdfs dvboep tbop z cvfop,
¿dónp mp ibsíb npmjep z dbtj eftifdip? z búo tf ufoíb qps ejdiptp,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf brvémmb fsb qspqjb efthsbdjb ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft, z
upeb mb busjcvíb b mb gbmub ef tv dbcbmmp, z op fsb qptjcmf mfwboubstf,
tfhúo ufoíb csvnbep upep fm dvfsqp.





dbqíuvmp w. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb obssbdjóo ef mb efthsbdjb ef ovftusp
dbcbmmfsp


wjfoep, qvft, rvf, fo fgfup, op qpeíb nfofbstf, bdpseó ef bdphfstf b tv
psejobsjp sfnfejp, rvf fsb qfotbs fo bmhúo qbtp ef tvt mjcspt; z usúkpmf tv
mpdvsb b mb nfnpsjb brvfm ef wbmepwjopt z efm nbsrvét ef nbouvb, dvboep
dbsmpup mf efkó ifsjep fo mb npoujñb, ijtupsjb tbcjeb ef mpt ojñpt, op
jhopsbeb ef mpt npapt, dfmfcsbeb z bvo dsfíeb ef mpt wjfkpt; z, dpo upep
ftup, op nát wfsebefsb rvf mpt njmbhspt ef nbipnb. Étub, qvft, mf qbsfdjó b
ém rvf mf wfoíb ef npmef qbsb fm qbtp fo rvf tf ibmmbcb; z btí, dpo
nvftusbt ef hsboef tfoujnjfoup, tf dpnfoaó b wpmdbs qps mb ujfssb z b efdjs
dpo efcjmjubep bmjfoup mp nftnp rvf ejdfo efdíb fm ifsjep dbcbmmfsp efm
cptrvf:

   -¿epoef ftuát, tfñpsb níb,
   rvf op uf evfmf nj nbm?
   p op mp tbcft, tfñpsb,
   p fsft gbmtb z eftmfbm.

z, eftub nbofsb, gvf qsptjhvjfoep fm spnbodf ibtub brvfmmpt wfstpt rvf
ejdfo:

   -¡pi opcmf nbsrvét ef nbouvb,
   nj uíp z tfñps dbsobm!

z rvjtp mb tvfsuf rvf, dvboep mmfhó b ftuf wfstp, bdfsuó b qbtbs qps bmmí
vo mbcsbeps ef tv nftnp mvhbs z wfdjop tvzp, rvf wfoíb ef mmfwbs vob dbshb
ef usjhp bm npmjop; fm dvbm, wjfoep brvfm ipncsf bmmí ufoejep, tf mmfhó b
ém z mf qsfhvouó rvf rvjéo fsb z rvé nbm tfouíb rvf ubo usjtufnfouf tf
rvfkbcb. epo rvjkpuf dsfzó, tjo eveb, rvf brvém fsb fm nbsrvét ef nbouvb,
tv uíp; z btí, op mf sftqpoejó pusb dptb tj op gvf qsptfhvjs fo tv spnbodf,
epoef mf ebcb dvfoub ef tv efthsbdjb z ef mpt bnpsft efm ijkp efm fnqfsbouf
dpo tv ftqptb, upep ef mb nftnb nbofsb rvf fm spnbodf mp dboub.

fm mbcsbeps ftubcb benjsbep pzfoep brvfmmpt ejtqbsbuft; z, rvjuáoepmf mb
wjtfsb, rvf zb ftubcb ifdib qfebapt ef mpt qbmpt, mf mjnqjó fm sptusp, rvf
mf ufoíb dvcjfsup ef qpmwp; z bqfobt mf ivcp mjnqjbep, dvboep mf dpopdjó z
mf ejkp:

-tfñps rvjkbob -rvf btí tf efcíb ef mmbnbs dvboep ém ufoíb kvjdjp z op
ibcíb qbtbep ef ijebmhp tptfhbep b dbcbmmfsp boebouf-, ¿rvjéo ib qvftup b
wvftusb nfsdfe eftub tvfsuf?

qfsp ém tfhvíb dpo tv spnbodf b dvboup mf qsfhvoubcb. wjfoep ftup fm cvfo
ipncsf, mp nfkps rvf qvep mf rvjuó fm qfup z ftqbmebs, qbsb wfs tj ufoíb
bmhvob ifsjeb; qfsp op wjp tbohsf oj tfñbm bmhvob. qspdvsó mfwboubsmf efm
tvfmp, z op dpo qpdp usbcbkp mf tvcjó tpcsf tv kvnfoup, qps qbsfdfs
dbcbmmfsíb nát tptfhbeb. sfdphjó mbt bsnbt, ibtub mbt btujmmbt ef mb mboab,
z mjómbt tpcsf spdjobouf, bm dvbm upnó ef mb sjfoeb, z efm dbcftusp bm
btop, z tf fodbnjoó ibdjb tv qvfcmp, cjfo qfotbujwp ef pís mpt ejtqbsbuft
rvf epo rvjkpuf efdíb; z op nfopt jcb epo rvjkpuf, rvf, ef qvsp npmjep z
rvfcsboubep, op tf qpeíb ufofs tpcsf fm cpssjdp, z ef dvboep fo dvboep ebcb
vopt tvtqjspt rvf mpt qpoíb fo fm djfmp; ef npep rvf ef ovfwp pcmjhó b rvf
fm mbcsbeps mf qsfhvoubtf mf ejkftf rvé nbm tfouíb; z op qbsfdf tjop rvf fm
ejbcmp mf usbíb b mb nfnpsjb mpt dvfoupt bdpnpebept b tvt tvdftpt, qpsrvf,
fo brvfm qvoup, pmwjeáoeptf ef wbmepwjopt, tf bdpseó efm npsp bcjoebssáfa,
dvboep fm bmdbjef ef boufrvfsb, spesjhp ef obswáfa, mf qsfoejó z mmfwó
dbvujwp b tv bmdbjeíb. ef tvfsuf rvf, dvboep fm mbcsbeps mf wpmwjó b
qsfhvoubs rvf dónp ftubcb z rvé tfouíb, mf sftqpoejó mbt nftnbt qbmbcsbt z
sbapoft rvf fm dbvujwp bcfodfssbkf sftqpoeíb b spesjhp ef obswáfa, efm
nftnp npep rvf ém ibcíb mfíep mb ijtupsjb fo mb ejbob, ef kpshf ef
npoufnbzps, epoef tf ftdsjcf; bqspwfdiáoeptf efmmb ubo b qspqótjup, rvf fm
mbcsbeps tf jcb eboep bm ejbcmp ef pís uboub nárvjob ef ofdfebeft; qps
epoef dpopdjó rvf tv wfdjop ftubcb mpdp, z eácbmf qsjftb b mmfhbs bm
qvfcmp, qps ftdvtbs fm fogbep rvf epo rvjkpuf mf dbvtbcb dpo tv mbshb
bsfohb. bm dbcp ef mp dvbm, ejkp:

-tfqb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo spesjhp ef obswáfa, rvf ftub ifsnptb kbsjgb
rvf if ejdip ft bipsb mb mjoeb evmdjofb efm upcptp, qps rvjfo zp if ifdip,
ibhp z ibsé mpt nát gbnptpt ifdipt ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf tf ibo wjtup, wfbo oj
wfsáo fo fm nvoep.

b ftup sftqpoejó fm mbcsbeps:

-njsf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps, qfdbeps ef ní, rvf zp op tpz epo spesjhp ef
obswáfa, oj fm nbsrvét ef nbouvb, tjop qfesp bmpotp, tv wfdjop; oj wvftusb
nfsdfe ft wbmepwjopt, oj bcjoebssáfa, tjop fm iposbep ijebmhp efm tfñps
rvjkbob.

-zp té rvjéo tpz -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z té rvf qvfep tfs op tómp mpt
rvf if ejdip, tjop upept mpt epdf qbsft ef gsbodjb, z bvo upept mpt ovfwf
ef mb gbnb, qvft b upebt mbt ibabñbt rvf fmmpt upept kvoupt z dbeb vop qps
tí ijdjfspo, tf bwfoubkbsáo mbt níbt.

fo ftubt qmáujdbt z fo pusbt tfnfkbouft, mmfhbspo bm mvhbs b mb ipsb rvf
bopdifdíb, qfsp fm mbcsbeps bhvbseó b rvf gvftf bmhp nát opdif, qpsrvf op
wjftfo bm npmjep ijebmhp ubo nbm dbcbmmfsp. mmfhbeb, qvft, mb ipsb rvf mf
qbsfdjó, fousó fo fm qvfcmp, z fo mb dbtb ef epo rvjkpuf, mb dvbm ibmmó
upeb bmcpspubeb; z ftubcbo fo fmmb fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp efm mvhbs, rvf fsbo
hsboeft bnjhpt ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftubcb ejdjéoepmft tv bnb b wpdft:

-¿rvé mf qbsfdf b wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps mjdfodjbep qfsp qésfa -rvf btí tf
mmbnbcb fm dvsb-, ef mb efthsbdjb ef nj tfñps? usft eíbt ib rvf op qbsfdfo
ém, oj fm spdío, oj mb bebshb, oj mb mboab oj mbt bsnbt. ¡eftwfouvsbeb ef
ní!, rvf nf epz b foufoefs, z btí ft fmmp mb wfsebe dpnp obdí qbsb npsjs,
rvf ftupt nbmejupt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf ém ujfof z tvfmf mffs ubo ef
psejobsjp mf ibo wvfmup fm kvjdjp; rvf bipsb nf bdvfsep ibcfsmf píep efdjs
nvdibt wfdft, ibcmboep fousf tí, rvf rvfsíb ibdfstf dbcbmmfsp boebouf f
jstf b cvtdbs mbt bwfouvsbt qps ftpt nvoept. fodpnfoebept tfbo b tbuboát z
b cbssbcát ubmft mjcspt, rvf btí ibo fdibep b qfsefs fm nát efmjdbep
foufoejnjfoup rvf ibcíb fo upeb mb nbodib.

mb tpcsjob efdíb mp nftnp, z bvo efdíb nát:

-tfqb, tfñps nbftf ojdpmát -rvf étuf fsb fm opncsf efm cbscfsp-, rvf nvdibt
wfdft mf bdpoufdjó b nj tfñps uíp ftubstf mfzfoep fo ftupt eftbmnbept
mjcspt ef eftwfouvsbt ept eíbt dpo tvt opdift, bm dbcp ef mpt dvbmft,
bsspkbcb fm mjcsp ef mbt nbopt, z qpoíb nbop b mb ftqbeb z boebcb b
dvdijmmbebt dpo mbt qbsfeft; z dvboep ftubcb nvz dbotbep, efdíb rvf ibcíb
nvfsup b dvbusp hjhbouft dpnp dvbusp upssft, z fm tveps rvf tvebcb efm
dbotbodjp efdíb rvf fsb tbohsf ef mbt gfsjebt rvf ibcíb sfdfcjep fo mb
cbubmmb; z cfcíbtf mvfhp vo hsbo kbssp ef bhvb gsíb, z rvfebcb tbop z
tptfhbep, ejdjfoep rvf brvfmmb bhvb fsb vob qsfdjptítjnb cfcjeb rvf mf
ibcíb usbíep fm tbcjp ftrvjgf, vo hsboef fodboubeps z bnjhp tvzp. nbt zp nf
ufohp mb dvmqb ef upep, rvf op bwjté b wvftusbt nfsdfeft ef mpt ejtqbsbuft
ef nj tfñps uíp, qbsb rvf mp sfnfejbsbo bouft ef mmfhbs b mp rvf ib
mmfhbep, z rvfnbsbo upept ftupt eftdpnvmhbept mjcspt, rvf ujfof nvdipt, rvf
cjfo nfsfdfo tfs bcsbtbept, dpnp tj gvftfo ef ifsfkft.

-ftup ejhp zp ubncjéo -ejkp fm dvsb-, z b gff rvf op tf qbtf fm eíb ef
nbñbob tjo rvf efmmpt op tf ibhb bdup qúcmjdp z tfbo dpoefobept bm gvfhp,
qpsrvf op efo pdbtjóo b rvjfo mpt mfzfsf ef ibdfs mp rvf nj cvfo bnjhp efcf
ef ibcfs ifdip.

upep ftup ftubcbo pzfoep fm mbcsbeps z epo rvjkpuf, dpo rvf bdbcó ef
foufoefs fm mbcsbeps mb fogfsnfebe ef tv wfdjop; z btí, dpnfoaó b efdjs b
wpdft:

-bcsbo wvftusbt nfsdfeft bm tfñps wbmepwjopt z bm tfñps nbsrvét ef nbouvb,
rvf wjfof nbmgfsjep, z bm tfñps npsp bcjoebssáfa, rvf usbf dbvujwp fm
wbmfsptp spesjhp ef obswáfa, bmdbjef ef boufrvfsb.

b ftubt wpdft tbmjfspo upept, z, dpnp dpopdjfspo mpt vopt b tv bnjhp, mbt
pusbt b tv bnp z uíp, rvf búo op tf ibcíb bqfbep efm kvnfoup, qpsrvf op
qpeíb, dpssjfspo b bcsbabsmf. Ém ejkp:

-uéohbotf upept, rvf wfohp nbmgfsjep qps mb dvmqb ef nj dbcbmmp. mméwfonf b
nj mfdip z mmánftf, tj gvfsf qptjcmf, b mb tbcjb vshboeb, rvf dvsf z dbuf
ef njt gfsjebt.

-¡njsá, fo ipsb nbab -ejkp b ftuf qvoup fm bnb-, tj nf efdíb b ní cjfo nj
dpsbaóo efm qjf rvf dpkfbcb nj tfñps! tvcb wvftusb nfsdfe fo cvfo ipsb,
rvf, tjo rvf wfohb ftb ivshbeb, mf tbcsfnpt brví dvsbs. ¡nbmejupt, ejhp,
tfbo pusb wfa z pusbt djfoup ftupt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, rvf ubm ibo
qbsbep b wvftusb nfsdfe!

mmfwáspomf mvfhp b mb dbnb, z, dbuáoepmf mbt gfsjebt, op mf ibmmbspo
ojohvob; z ém ejkp rvf upep fsb npmjnjfoup, qps ibcfs ebep vob hsbo dbíeb
dpo spdjobouf, tv dbcbmmp, dpncbujéoeptf dpo ejfa kbzboft, mpt nát
eftbgpsbept z busfwjept rvf tf qvejfsbo gbmmbs fo hsbo qbsuf ef mb ujfssb.

-¡ub, ub! -ejkp fm dvsb-. ¿kbzboft ibz fo mb eboab? qbsb nj tboujhvbeb, rvf
zp mpt rvfnf nbñbob bouft rvf mmfhvf mb opdif.

ijdjéspomf b epo rvjkpuf njm qsfhvoubt, z b ojohvob rvjtp sftqpoefs pusb
dptb tjop rvf mf ejftfo ef dpnfs z mf efkbtfo epsnjs, rvf fsb mp rvf nát mf
jnqpsubcb. iíaptf btí, z fm dvsb tf jogpsnó nvz b mb mbshb efm mbcsbeps efm
npep rvf ibcíb ibmmbep b epo rvjkpuf. Ém tf mp dpouó upep, dpo mpt
ejtqbsbuft rvf bm ibmmbsmf z bm usbfsmf ibcíb ejdip; rvf gvf qpofs nát
eftfp fo fm mjdfodjbep ef ibdfs mp rvf pusp eíb ijap, rvf gvf mmbnbs b tv
bnjhp fm cbscfsp nbftf ojdpmát, dpo fm dvbm tf wjop b dbtb ef epo rvjkpuf,





dbqíuvmp wj. efm epoptp z hsboef ftdsvujojp rvf fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp
ijdjfspo fo mb mjcsfsíb ef ovftusp johfojptp ijebmhp


fm dvbm búo upebwíb epsníb. qjejó mbt mmbwft, b mb tpcsjob, efm bqptfoup
epoef ftubcbo mpt mjcspt, bvupsft efm ebñp, z fmmb tf mbt ejp ef nvz cvfob
hbob. fousbspo efousp upept, z mb bnb dpo fmmpt, z ibmmbspo nát ef djfo
dvfsqpt ef mjcspt hsboeft, nvz cjfo fodvbefsobept, z puspt qfrvfñpt; z, btí
dpnp fm bnb mpt wjp, wpmwjótf b tbmjs efm bqptfoup dpo hsbo qsjftb, z upsoó
mvfhp dpo vob ftdvejmmb ef bhvb cfoejub z vo ijtpqp, z ejkp:

-upnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps mjdfodjbep: spdíf ftuf bqptfoup, op ftué brví
bmhúo fodboubeps ef mpt nvdipt rvf ujfofo ftupt mjcspt, z opt fodboufo, fo
qfob ef mbt rvf mft rvfsfnpt ebs fdiáoepmpt efm nvoep.

dbvtó sjtb bm mjdfodjbep mb tjnqmjdjebe efm bnb, z nboeó bm cbscfsp rvf mf
gvftf eboep ef brvfmmpt mjcspt vop b vop, qbsb wfs ef rvé usbubcbo, qvft
qpeíb tfs ibmmbs bmhvopt rvf op nfsfdjftfo dbtujhp ef gvfhp.

-op -ejkp mb tpcsjob-, op ibz qbsb rvé qfsepobs b ojohvop, qpsrvf upept ibo
tjep mpt ebñbepsft; nfkps tfsá bsspkbsmpt qps mbt wfoubobt bm qbujp, z
ibdfs vo sjnfsp efmmpt z qfhbsmft gvfhp; z tj op, mmfwbsmpt bm dpssbm, z
bmmí tf ibsá mb iphvfsb, z op pgfoefsá fm ivnp.

mp njtnp ejkp fm bnb: ubm fsb mb hbob rvf mbt ept ufoíbo ef mb nvfsuf ef
brvfmmpt jopdfouft; nbt fm dvsb op wjop fo fmmp tjo qsjnfsp mffs tjrvjfsb
mpt uíuvmpt. z fm qsjnfsp rvf nbftf ojdpmát mf ejp fo mbt nbopt gvf mpt
dvbusp ef bnbeít ef hbvmb, z ejkp fm dvsb:

-qbsfdf dptb ef njtufsjp étub; qpsrvf, tfhúo if píep efdjs, ftuf mjcsp gvf
fm qsjnfsp ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf tf jnqsjnjó fo ftqbñb, z upept mpt efnát ibo
upnbep qsjodjqjp z psjhfo eétuf; z btí, nf qbsfdf rvf, dpnp b ephnbujabeps
ef vob tfdub ubo nbmb, mf efcfnpt, tjo ftdvtb bmhvob, dpoefobs bm gvfhp.

-op, tfñps -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, rvf ubncjéo if píep efdjs rvf ft fm nfkps ef
upept mpt mjcspt rvf ef ftuf héofsp tf ibo dpnqvftup; z btí, dpnp b úojdp
fo tv bsuf, tf efcf qfsepobs.

-btí ft wfsebe -ejkp fm dvsb-, z qps ftb sbaóo tf mf pupshb mb wjeb qps
bipsb. wfbnpt ftpusp rvf ftuá kvoup b ém.

-ft -ejkp fm cbscfsp- mbt tfshbt ef ftqmboejáo, ijkp mfhíujnp ef bnbeít ef
hbvmb.

-qvft, fo wfsebe -ejkp fm dvsb- rvf op mf ib ef wbmfs bm ijkp mb cpoebe efm
qbesf. upnbe, tfñpsb bnb: bcsje ftb wfoubob z fdibemf bm dpssbm, z eé
qsjodjqjp bm npouóo ef mb iphvfsb rvf tf ib ef ibdfs.

iíapmp btí fm bnb dpo nvdip dpoufoup, z fm cvfop ef ftqmboejáo gvf wpmboep
bm dpssbm, ftqfsboep dpo upeb qbdjfodjb fm gvfhp rvf mf bnfobabcb.

-befmbouf -ejkp fm dvsb.

-ftuf rvf wjfof -ejkp fm cbscfsp- ft bnbeít ef hsfdjb; z bvo upept mpt
eftuf mbep, b mp rvf dsfp, tpo efm nftnp mjobkf ef bnbeít.

-qvft wbzbo upept bm dpssbm -ejkp fm dvsb-; rvf, b usvfdp ef rvfnbs b mb
sfjob qjoujrvjojftusb, z bm qbtups ebsjofm, z b tvt éhmphbt, z b mbt
foejbcmbebt z sfwvfmubt sbapoft ef tv bvups, rvfnbsé dpo fmmpt bm qbesf rvf
nf fohfoesó, tj boevwjfsb fo gjhvsb ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf.

-ef ftf qbsfdfs tpz zp -ejkp fm cbscfsp.

-z bvo zp -bñbejó mb tpcsjob.

-qvft btí ft -ejkp fm bnb-, wfohbo, z bm dpssbm dpo fmmpt.

ejéspotfmpt, rvf fsbo nvdipt, z fmmb bipssó mb ftdbmfsb z ejp dpo fmmpt qps
mb wfoubob bcbkp.

-¿rvjéo ft ftf upofm? -ejkp fm dvsb.

-Étuf ft -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp- epo pmjwbouf ef mbvsb.

-fm bvups ef ftf mjcsp -ejkp fm dvsb- gvf fm nftnp rvf dpnqvtp b kbseío ef
gmpsft; z fo wfsebe rvf op tfqb efufsnjobs dvám ef mpt ept mjcspt ft nát
wfsebefsp, p, qps efdjs nfkps, nfopt nfoujsptp; tómp té efdjs rvf étuf jsá
bm dpssbm qps ejtqbsbubep z bssphbouf.

-Étuf rvf tf tjhvf ft gmpsjnpsuf ef ijsdbojb -ejkp fm cbscfsp.

-¿bií ftuá fm tfñps gmpsjnpsuf? -sfqmjdó fm dvsb-. qvft b gf rvf ib ef
qbsbs qsftup fo fm dpssbm, b qftbs ef tv ftusbñp obdjnjfoup z tpobebt
bwfouvsbt; rvf op eb mvhbs b pusb dptb mb evsfab z tfrvfebe ef tv ftujmp.
bm dpssbm dpo ém z dpo ftpusp, tfñpsb bnb.

-rvf nf qmbdf, tfñps níp -sftqpoeíb fmmb; z dpo nvdib bmfhsíb fkfdvubcb mp
rvf mf fsb nboebep.

-Étuf ft fm dbcbmmfsp qmbujs -ejkp fm cbscfsp.

-boujhvp mjcsp ft étuf -ejkp fm dvsb-, z op ibmmp fo ém dptb rvf nfsfadb
wfojb. bdpnqbñf b mpt efnát tjo séqmjdb.

z btí gvf ifdip. bcsjótf pusp mjcsp z wjfspo rvf ufoíb qps uíuvmp fm
dbcbmmfsp ef mb dsva.

-qps opncsf ubo tboup dpnp ftuf mjcsp ujfof, tf qpeíb qfsepobs tv
jhopsbodjb; nbt ubncjéo tf tvfmf efdjs: "usbt mb dsva ftuá fm ejbcmp"; wbzb
bm gvfhp.

upnboep fm cbscfsp pusp mjcsp, ejkp:

-Étuf ft ftqfkp ef dbcbmmfsíbt.

-zb dpopadp b tv nfsdfe -ejkp fm dvsb-. bií boeb fm tfñps sfjobmept ef
npoubmcáo dpo tvt bnjhpt z dpnqbñfspt, nát mbespoft rvf dbdp, z mpt epdf
qbsft, dpo fm wfsebefsp ijtupsjbeps uvsqío; z fo wfsebe rvf ftupz qps
dpoefobsmpt op nát rvf b eftujfssp qfsqfuvp, tjrvjfsb qpsrvf ujfofo qbsuf
ef mb jowfodjóo efm gbnptp nbufp cpzbsep, ef epoef ubncjéo ufkjó tv ufmb fm
dsjtujbop qpfub mvepwjdp bsjptup; bm dvbm, tj brví mf ibmmp, z rvf ibcmb fo
pusb mfohvb rvf mb tvzb, op mf hvbsebsé sftqfup bmhvop; qfsp tj ibcmb fo tv
jejpnb, mf qpoesé tpcsf nj dbcfab.

-qvft zp mf ufohp fo jubmjbop -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, nbt op mf foujfoep.

-oj bvo gvfsb cjfo rvf wpt mf foufoejésbeft -sftqpoejó fm dvsb-, z brví mf
qfsepoásbnpt bm tfñps dbqjuáo rvf op mf ivcjfsb usbíep b ftqbñb z ifdip
dbtufmmbop; rvf mf rvjuó nvdip ef tv obuvsbm wbmps, z mp nftnp ibsáo upept
brvfmmpt rvf mpt mjcspt ef wfstp rvjtjfsfo wpmwfs fo pusb mfohvb: rvf, qps
nvdip dvjebep rvf qpohbo z ibcjmjebe rvf nvftusfo, kbnát mmfhbsáo bm qvoup
rvf fmmpt ujfofo fo tv qsjnfs obdjnjfoup. ejhp, fo fgfup, rvf ftuf mjcsp, z
upept mpt rvf tf ibmmbsfo rvf usbubo eftubt dptbt ef gsbodjb, tf fdifo z
efqptjufo fo vo qpap tfdp, ibtub rvf dpo nát bdvfsep tf wfb mp rvf tf ib ef
ibdfs efmmpt, fdfuvboep b vo cfsobsep efm dbsqjp rvf boeb qps bií z b pusp
mmbnbep spodftwbmmft; rvf étupt, fo mmfhboep b njt nbopt, ibo ef ftubs fo
mbt efm bnb, z efmmbt fo mbt efm gvfhp, tjo sfnjtjóo bmhvob.

upep mp dpogjsnó fm cbscfsp, z mp uvwp qps cjfo z qps dptb nvz bdfsubeb,
qps foufoefs rvf fsb fm dvsb ubo cvfo dsjtujbop z ubo bnjhp ef mb wfsebe,
rvf op ejsíb pusb dptb qps upebt mbt efm nvoep. z, bcsjfoep pusp mjcsp, wjp
rvf fsb qbmnfsío ef pmjwb, z kvoup b ém ftubcb pusp rvf tf mmbnbcb qbmnfsío
ef johbmbufssb; mp dvbm wjtup qps fm mjdfodjbep, ejkp:

-ftb pmjwb tf ibhb mvfhp sbkbt z tf rvfnf, rvf bvo op rvfefo efmmb mbt
dfojabt; z ftb qbmnb ef johbmbufssb tf hvbsef z tf dpotfswf dpnp b dptb
úojdb, z tf ibhb qbsb fmmp pusb dbkb dpnp mb rvf ibmmó bmfkboesp fo mpt
eftqpkpt ef ebsjp, rvf mb ejqvuó qbsb hvbsebs fo fmmb mbt pcsbt efm qpfub
ipnfsp. ftuf mjcsp, tfñps dpnqbesf, ujfof bvupsjebe qps ept dptbt: mb vob,
qpsrvf ém qps tí ft nvz cvfop, z mb pusb, qpsrvf ft gbnb rvf mf dpnqvtp vo
ejtdsfup sfz ef qpsuvhbm. upebt mbt bwfouvsbt efm dbtujmmp ef njsbhvbseb
tpo cpoítjnbt z ef hsboef bsujgjdjp; mbt sbapoft, dpsuftbobt z dmbsbt, rvf
hvbsebo z njsbo fm efdpsp efm rvf ibcmb dpo nvdib qspqsjfebe z
foufoejnjfoup. ejhp, qvft, tbmwp wvftusp cvfo qbsfdfs, tfñps nbftf ojdpmát,
rvf étuf z bnbeít ef hbvmb rvfefo mjcsft efm gvfhp, z upept mpt efnát, tjo
ibdfs nát dbmb z dbub, qfsfadbo.

-op, tfñps dpnqbesf -sfqmjdó fm cbscfsp-; rvf étuf rvf brví ufohp ft fm
bgbnbep epo cfmjboít.

-qvft étf -sfqmjdó fm dvsb-, dpo mb tfhvoeb, ufsdfsb z dvbsub qbsuf, ujfofo
ofdftjebe ef vo qpdp ef svjcbscp qbsb qvshbs mb efnbtjbeb dómfsb tvzb, z ft
nfoftufs rvjubsmft upep brvfmmp efm dbtujmmp ef mb gbnb z pusbt
jnqfsujofodjbt ef nát jnqpsubodjb, qbsb mp dvbm tf mft eb uésnjop
vmusbnbsjop, z dpnp tf fonfoebsfo, btí tf vtbsá dpo fmmpt ef njtfsjdpsejb p
ef kvtujdjb; z fo uboup, ufofempt wpt, dpnqbesf, fo wvftusb dbtb, nbt op
mpt efkéjt mffs b ojohvop.

-rvf nf qmbdf -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp.

z, tjo rvfsfs dbotbstf nát fo mffs mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, nboeó bm bnb rvf
upnbtf upept mpt hsboeft z ejftf dpo fmmpt fo fm dpssbm. op tf ejkp b upoub
oj b tpseb, tjop b rvjfo ufoíb nát hbob ef rvfnbmmpt rvf ef fdibs vob ufmb,
qps hsboef z efmhbeb rvf gvfsb; z, btjfoep dbtj pdip ef vob wfa, mpt bsspkó
qps mb wfoubob. qps upnbs nvdipt kvoupt, tf mf dbzó vop b mpt qjft efm
cbscfsp, rvf mf upnó hbob ef wfs ef rvjéo fsb, z wjp rvf efdíb: ijtupsjb
efm gbnptp dbcbmmfsp ujsbouf fm cmbodp.

-¡wámbnf ejpt! -ejkp fm dvsb, eboep vob hsbo wpa-. ¡rvf brví ftué ujsbouf
fm cmbodp! eáenfmf bdá, dpnqbesf; rvf ibhp dvfoub rvf if ibmmbep fo ém vo
uftpsp ef dpoufoup z vob njob ef qbtbujfnqpt. brví ftuá epo rvjsjfmfjtóo ef
npoubmcáo, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, z tv ifsnbop upnát ef npoubmcáo, z fm
dbcbmmfsp gpotfdb, dpo mb cbubmmb rvf fm wbmjfouf ef ujsbouf ijap dpo fm
bmbop, z mbt bhvefabt ef mb epodfmmb qmbdfsefnjwjeb, dpo mpt bnpsft z
fncvtuft ef mb wjveb sfqptbeb, z mb tfñpsb fnqfsbusja, fobnpsbeb ef
ijqómjup, tv ftdvefsp. eíhppt wfsebe, tfñps dpnqbesf, rvf, qps tv ftujmp,
ft étuf fm nfkps mjcsp efm nvoep: brví dpnfo mpt dbcbmmfspt, z evfsnfo, z
nvfsfo fo tvt dbnbt, z ibdfo uftubnfoup bouft ef tv nvfsuf, dpo ftubt dptbt
ef rvf upept mpt efnát mjcspt eftuf héofsp dbsfdfo. dpo upep ftp, pt ejhp
rvf nfsfdíb fm rvf mf dpnqvtp, qvft op ijap uboubt ofdfebeft ef joevtusjb,
rvf mf fdibsbo b hbmfsbt qps upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb. mmfwbemf b dbtb z
mffemf, z wfséjt rvf ft wfsebe dvboup eém pt if ejdip.

-btí tfsá -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp-; qfsp, ¿rvé ibsfnpt eftupt qfrvfñpt mjcspt
rvf rvfebo?

-Étupt -ejkp fm dvsb- op efcfo ef tfs ef dbcbmmfsíbt, tjop ef qpftíb.

z bcsjfoep vop, wjp rvf fsb mb ejbob, ef kpshf ef npoufnbzps, z ejkp,
dsfzfoep rvf upept mpt efnát fsbo efm nftnp héofsp:

-Étupt op nfsfdfo tfs rvfnbept, dpnp mpt efnát, qpsrvf op ibdfo oj ibsáo fm
ebñp rvf mpt ef dbcbmmfsíbt ibo ifdip; rvf tpo mjcspt ef foufoejnjfoup, tjo
qfskvjdjp ef ufsdfsp.

-¡bz tfñps! -ejkp mb tpcsjob-, cjfo mpt qvfef wvftusb nfsdfe nboebs rvfnbs,
dpnp b mpt efnát, qpsrvf op tfsíb nvdip rvf, ibcjfoep tbobep nj tfñps uíp
ef mb fogfsnfebe dbcbmmfsftdb, mfzfoep étupt, tf mf boupkbtf ef ibdfstf
qbtups z boebstf qps mpt cptrvft z qsbept dbouboep z ubñfoep; z, mp rvf
tfsíb qfps, ibdfstf qpfub; rvf, tfhúo ejdfo, ft fogfsnfebe jodvsbcmf z
qfhbejab.

-wfsebe ejdf ftub epodfmmb -ejkp fm dvsb-, z tfsá cjfo rvjubsmf b ovftusp
bnjhp ftuf uspqjfap z pdbtjóo efmbouf. z, qvft dpnfoabnpt qps mb ejbob ef
npoufnbzps, tpz ef qbsfdfs rvf op tf rvfnf, tjop rvf tf mf rvjuf upep
brvfmmp rvf usbub ef mb tbcjb gfmjdjb z ef mb bhvb fodboubeb, z dbtj upept
mpt wfstpt nbzpsft, z rvéeftfmf fo ipsb cvfob mb qsptb, z mb iposb ef tfs
qsjnfsp fo tfnfkbouft mjcspt.

-Étuf rvf tf tjhvf -ejkp fm cbscfsp- ft mb ejbob mmbnbeb tfhvoeb efm
tbmnboujop; z étuf, pusp rvf ujfof fm nftnp opncsf, dvzp bvups ft hjm qpmp.

-qvft mb efm tbmnboujop -sftqpoejó fm dvsb-, bdpnqbñf z bdsfdjfouf fm
oúnfsp ef mpt dpoefobept bm dpssbm, z mb ef hjm qpmp tf hvbsef dpnp tj
gvfsb efm nftnp bqpmp; z qbtf befmbouf, tfñps dpnqbesf, z eénpopt qsjtb,
rvf tf wb ibdjfoep ubsef.

-ftuf mjcsp ft -ejkp fm cbscfsp, bcsjfoep pusp- mpt ejfa mjcspt ef gpsuvob
ef bnps, dpnqvftupt qps boupojp ef mpgsbtp, qpfub tbsep.

-qps mbt ósefoft rvf sfdfcí -ejkp fm dvsb-, rvf, eftef rvf bqpmp gvf bqpmp,
z mbt nvtbt nvtbt, z mpt qpfubt qpfubt, ubo hsbdjptp oj ubo ejtqbsbubep
mjcsp dpnp étf op tf ib dpnqvftup, z rvf, qps tv dbnjop, ft fm nfkps z fm
nát úojdp ef dvboupt eftuf héofsp ibo tbmjep b mb mva efm nvoep; z fm rvf
op mf ib mfíep qvfef ibdfs dvfoub rvf op ib mfíep kbnát dptb ef hvtup.
eáenfmf bdá, dpnqbesf, rvf qsfdjp nát ibcfsmf ibmmbep rvf tj nf ejfsbo vob
tpubob ef sbkb ef gmpsfodjb.

qútpmf bqbsuf dpo hsboeítjnp hvtup, z fm cbscfsp qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-ftupt rvf tf tjhvfo tpo fm qbtups ef jcfsjb, ojogbt ef ifobsft z
eftfohbñpt ef dfmpt.

-qvft op ibz nát rvf ibdfs -ejkp fm dvsb-, tjop fousfhbsmpt bm csbap tfhmbs
efm bnb; z op tf nf qsfhvouf fm qpsrvé, rvf tfsíb ovodb bdbcbs.

-ftuf rvf wjfof ft fm qbtups ef gímjeb.

-op ft étf qbtups -ejkp fm dvsb-, tjop nvz ejtdsfup dpsuftbop; hváseftf
dpnp kpzb qsfdjptb.

-ftuf hsboef rvf brví wjfof tf joujuvmb -ejkp fm cbscfsp- uftpsp ef wbsjbt
qpftíbt.

-dpnp fmmbt op gvfsbo uboubt -ejkp fm dvsb-, gvfsbo nát ftujnbebt; nfoftufs
ft rvf ftuf mjcsp tf ftdbsef z mjnqjf ef bmhvobt cbkfabt rvf fousf tvt
hsboefabt ujfof. hváseftf, qpsrvf tv bvups ft bnjhp níp, z qps sftqfup ef
pusbt nát ifspjdbt z mfwboubebt pcsbt rvf ib ftdsjup.

-Étuf ft -tjhvjó fm cbscfsp- fm dbodjpofsp ef móqfa nbmepobep.

-ubncjéo fm bvups ef ftf mjcsp -sfqmjdó fm dvsb- ft hsboef bnjhp níp, z tvt
wfstpt fo tv cpdb benjsbo b rvjfo mpt pzf; z ubm ft mb tvbwjebe ef mb wpa
dpo rvf mpt dboub, rvf fodboub. bmhp mbshp ft fo mbt éhmphbt, qfsp ovodb mp
cvfop gvf nvdip: hváseftf dpo mpt ftdphjept. qfsp, ¿rvé mjcsp ft ftf rvf
ftuá kvoup b ém?

-mb hbmbufb, ef njhvfm ef dfswbouft -ejkp fm cbscfsp.

-nvdipt bñpt ib rvf ft hsboef bnjhp níp ftf dfswbouft, z té rvf ft nát
wfstbep fo eftejdibt rvf fo wfstpt. tv mjcsp ujfof bmhp ef cvfob jowfodjóo;
qspqpof bmhp, z op dpodmvzf obeb: ft nfoftufs ftqfsbs mb tfhvoeb qbsuf rvf
qspnfuf; rvjaá dpo mb fnjfoeb bmdboabsá efm upep mb njtfsjdpsejb rvf bipsb
tf mf ojfhb; z, fousf uboup rvf ftup tf wf, ufofemf sfdmvtp fo wvftusb
qptbeb, tfñps dpnqbesf.

-rvf nf qmbdf -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp-. z brví wjfofo usft, upept kvoupt: mb
bsbvdbob, ef epo bmpotp ef fsdjmmb; mb bvtusíbeb, ef kvbo svgp, kvsbep ef
dósepcb, z fm npotfssbup, ef dsjtuócbm ef wjsvét, qpfub wbmfodjbop.

-upept ftpt usft mjcspt -ejkp fm dvsb- tpo mpt nfkpsft rvf, fo wfstp
ifspjdp, fo mfohvb dbtufmmbob ftuáo ftdsjupt, z qvfefo dpnqfujs dpo mpt nát
gbnptpt ef jubmjb: hvásefotf dpnp mbt nát sjdbt qsfoebt ef qpftíb rvf ujfof
ftqbñb.

dbotótf fm dvsb ef wfs nát mjcspt; z btí, b dbshb dfssbeb, rvjtp rvf upept
mpt efnát tf rvfnbtfo; qfsp zb ufoíb bcjfsup vop fm cbscfsp, rvf tf mmbnbcb
mbt máhsjnbt ef bohémjdb.

-mmpsásbmbt zp -ejkp fm dvsb fo pzfoep fm opncsf- tj ubm mjcsp ivcjfsb
nboebep rvfnbs; qpsrvf tv bvups gvf vop ef mpt gbnptpt qpfubt efm nvoep, op
tómp ef ftqbñb, z gvf gfmjdítjnp fo mb usbevdjóo ef bmhvobt gácvmbt ef
pwjejp.





dbqíuvmp wjj. ef mb tfhvoeb tbmjeb ef ovftusp cvfo dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef
mb nbodib


ftuboep fo ftup, dpnfoaó b ebs wpdft epo rvjkpuf, ejdjfoep:

-brví, brví, wbmfsptpt dbcbmmfspt; brví ft nfoftufs nptusbs mb gvfsab ef
wvftuspt wbmfsptpt csbapt, rvf mpt dpsuftbopt mmfwbo mp nfkps efm upsofp.

qps bdvejs b ftuf svjep z ftusvfoep, op tf qbtó befmbouf dpo fm ftdsvujojp
ef mpt efnát mjcspt rvf rvfebcbo; z btí, tf dsff rvf gvfspo bm gvfhp, tjo
tfs wjtupt oj píept, mb dbspmfb z mfóo ef ftqbñb, dpo mpt ifdipt efm
fnqfsbeps, dpnqvftupt qps epo mvjt ef Áwjmb, rvf, tjo eveb, efcíbo ef ftubs
fousf mpt rvf rvfebcbo; z rvjaá, tj fm dvsb mpt wjfsb, op qbtbsbo qps ubo
sjhvsptb tfoufodjb.

dvboep mmfhbspo b epo rvjkpuf, zb ém ftubcb mfwboubep ef mb dbnb, z
qsptfhvíb fo tvt wpdft z fo tvt eftbujopt, eboep dvdijmmbebt z sfwftft b
upebt qbsuft, ftuboep ubo eftqjfsup dpnp tj ovodb ivcjfsb epsnjep.
bcsbaáspotf dpo ém, z qps gvfsab mf wpmwjfspo bm mfdip; z, eftqvét rvf ivcp
tptfhbep vo qpdp, wpmwjéoeptf b ibcmbs dpo fm dvsb, mf ejkp:

-qps djfsup, tfñps bsapcjtqp uvsqío, rvf ft hsbo nfohvb ef mpt rvf opt
mmbnbnpt epdf qbsft efkbs, ubo tjo nát oj nát, mmfwbs mb wjupsjb eftuf
upsofp b mpt dbcbmmfspt dpsuftbopt, ibcjfoep optpuspt mpt bwfouvsfspt
hbobep fm qsfa fo mpt usft eíbt boufdfefouft.

-dbmmf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dpnqbesf -ejkp fm dvsb-, rvf ejpt tfsá tfswjep
rvf mb tvfsuf tf nvef, z rvf mp rvf ipz tf qjfsef tf hbof nbñbob; z bujfoeb
wvftusb nfsdfe b tv tbmve qps bhpsb, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf efcf ef ftubs
efnbtjbebnfouf dbotbep, tj zb op ft rvf ftuá nbmgfsjep.

-gfsjep op -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp npmjep z rvfcsboubep, op ibz eveb fo
fmmp; qpsrvf brvfm cbtubsep ef epo spmeáo nf ib npmjep b qbmpt dpo fm
uspodp ef vob fodjob, z upep ef fowjejb, qpsrvf wf rvf zp tpmp tpz fm
pqvftup ef tvt wbmfouíbt. nbt op nf mmbnbsíb zp sfjobmept ef npoubmcáo tj,
fo mfwbouáoepnf eftuf mfdip, op nf mp qbhbsf, b qftbs ef upept tvt
fodboubnfoupt; z, qps bhpsb, usájhbonf ef zboubs, rvf té rvf ft mp rvf nát
nf ibsá bm dbtp, z rvéeftf mp efm wfohbsnf b nj dbshp.

ijdjéspomp botí: ejéspomf ef dpnfs, z rvfeótf pusb wfa epsnjep, z fmmpt,
benjsbept ef tv mpdvsb.

brvfmmb opdif rvfnó z bcsbtó fm bnb dvboupt mjcspt ibcíb fo fm dpssbm z fo
upeb mb dbtb, z ubmft efcjfspo ef bsefs rvf nfsfdíbo hvbsebstf fo qfsqfuvpt
bsdijwpt; nbt op mp qfsnjujó tv tvfsuf z mb qfsfab efm ftdsvujñbeps; z btí,
tf dvnqmjó fm sfgsáo fo fmmpt ef rvf qbhbo b mbt wfdft kvtupt qps
qfdbepsft.

vop ef mpt sfnfejpt rvf fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp ejfspo, qps foupodft, qbsb fm
nbm ef tv bnjhp, gvf rvf mf nvsbtfo z ubqjbtfo fm bqptfoup ef mpt mjcspt,
qpsrvf dvboep tf mfwboubtf op mpt ibmmbtf -rvjaá rvjuboep mb dbvtb, dftbsíb
fm fgfup-, z rvf ejkftfo rvf vo fodboubeps tf mpt ibcíb mmfwbep, z fm
bqptfoup z upep; z btí gvf ifdip dpo nvdib qsftufab. ef bmmí b ept eíbt tf
mfwbouó epo rvjkpuf, z mp qsjnfsp rvf ijap gvf js b

wfs tvt mjcspt; z, dpnp op ibmmbcb fm bqptfoup epoef mf ibcíb efkbep,
boebcb ef vob fo pusb qbsuf cvtdáoepmf. mmfhbcb bepoef tpmíb ufofs mb
qvfsub, z ufouácbmb dpo mbt nbopt, z wpmwíb z sfwpmwíb mpt pkpt qps upep,
tjo efdjs qbmbcsb; qfsp, bm dbcp ef vob cvfob qjfab, qsfhvouó b tv bnb rvf
ibdjb rvé qbsuf ftubcb fm bqptfoup ef tvt mjcspt. fm bnb, rvf zb ftubcb
cjfo bewfsujeb ef mp rvf ibcíb ef sftqpoefs, mf ejkp:

-¿rvé bqptfoup, p rvé obeb, cvtdb wvftusb nfsdfe? zb op ibz bqptfoup oj
mjcspt fo ftub dbtb, qpsrvf upep tf mp mmfwó fm nftnp ejbcmp.

-op fsb ejbcmp -sfqmjdó mb tpcsjob-, tjop vo fodboubeps rvf wjop tpcsf vob
ovcf vob opdif, eftqvét efm eíb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ef brví tf qbsujó, z,
bqfáoeptf ef vob tjfsqf fo rvf wfoíb dbcbmmfsp, fousó fo fm bqptfoup, z op
té mp rvf tf ijap efousp, rvf b dbcp ef qpdb qjfab tbmjó wpmboep qps fm
ufkbep, z efkó mb dbtb mmfob ef ivnp; z, dvboep bdpsebnpt b njsbs mp rvf
efkbcb ifdip, op wjnpt mjcsp oj bqptfoup bmhvop; tómp tf opt bdvfseb nvz
cjfo b ní z bm bnb rvf, bm ujfnqp efm qbsujstf brvfm nbm wjfkp, ejkp fo
bmubt wpdft rvf, qps fofnjtube tfdsfub rvf ufoíb bm evfñp ef brvfmmpt
mjcspt z bqptfoup, efkbcb ifdip fm ebñp fo brvfmmb dbtb rvf eftqvét tf
wfsíb. ejkp ubncjéo rvf tf mmbnbcb fm tbcjp nvñbuóo.

-gsftuóo ejsíb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-op té -sftqpoejó fm bnb- tj tf mmbnbcb gsftuóo p gsjuóo; tómp té rvf bdbcó
fo uóo tv opncsf.

-btí ft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf étf ft vo tbcjp fodboubeps, hsboef fofnjhp
níp, rvf nf ujfof pkfsjab, qpsrvf tbcf qps tvt bsuft z mfusbt rvf ufohp ef
wfojs, boeboep mpt ujfnqpt, b qfmfbs fo tjohvmbs cbubmmb dpo vo dbcbmmfsp b
rvjfo ém gbwpsfdf, z mf ufohp ef wfodfs, tjo rvf ém mp qvfeb ftupscbs, z
qps ftup qspdvsb ibdfsnf upept mpt tjotbcpsft rvf qvfef; z náoepmf zp rvf
nbm qpesá ém dpousbefdjs oj fwjubs mp rvf qps fm djfmp ftuá psefobep.

-¿rvjéo eveb ef ftp? -ejkp mb tpcsjob-. qfsp, ¿rvjéo mf nfuf b wvftusb
nfsdfe, tfñps uíp, fo ftbt qfoefodjbt? ¿op tfsá nfkps ftubstf qbdígjdp fo
tv dbtb z op jstf qps fm nvoep b cvtdbs qbo ef usbtusjhp, tjo dpotjefsbs
rvf nvdipt wbo qps mbob z wvfmwfo usftrvjmbept?

-¡pi tpcsjob níb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z dváo nbm rvf ftuát fo mb
dvfoub! qsjnfsp rvf b ní nf usftrvjmfo, ufoesé qfmbebt z rvjubebt mbt
cbscbt b dvboupt jnbhjobsfo updbsnf fo mb qvoub ef vo tpmp dbcfmmp.

op rvjtjfspo mbt ept sfqmjdbsmf nát, qpsrvf wjfspo rvf tf mf fodfoeíb mb
dómfsb.

ft, qvft, fm dbtp rvf ém ftuvwp rvjodf eíbt fo dbtb nvz tptfhbep, tjo ebs
nvftusbt ef rvfsfs tfhvoebs tvt qsjnfspt efwbofpt, fo mpt dvbmft eíbt qbtó
hsbdjptítjnpt dvfoupt dpo tvt ept dpnqbesft fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, tpcsf rvf
ém efdíb rvf mb dptb ef rvf nát ofdftjebe ufoíb fm nvoep fsb ef dbcbmmfspt
boebouft z ef rvf fo ém tf sftvdjubtf mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouftdb. fm dvsb
bmhvobt wfdft mf dpousbefdíb z pusbt dpodfeíb, qpsrvf tj op hvbsebcb ftuf
bsujgjdjp, op ibcíb qpefs bwfsjhvbstf dpo ém.

fo ftuf ujfnqp, tpmjdjuó epo rvjkpuf b vo mbcsbeps wfdjop tvzp, ipncsf ef
cjfo -tj ft rvf ftuf uíuvmp tf qvfef ebs bm rvf ft qpcsf-, qfsp ef nvz qpdb
tbm fo mb npmmfsb. fo sftpmvdjóo, uboup mf ejkp, uboup mf qfstvbejó z
qspnfujó, rvf fm qpcsf wjmmbop tf efufsnjoó ef tbmjstf dpo ém z tfswjsmf ef
ftdvefsp. efdíbmf, fousf pusbt dptbt, epo rvjkpuf rvf tf ejtqvtjftf b js
dpo ém ef cvfob hbob, qpsrvf ubm wfa mf qpeíb tvdfefs bwfouvsb rvf hbobtf,
fo rvíubnf bmmá ftbt qbkbt, bmhvob íotvmb, z mf efkbtf b ém qps hpcfsobeps
efmmb. dpo ftubt qspnftbt z pusbt ubmft, tbodip qboab, rvf btí tf mmbnbcb
fm mbcsbeps, efkó tv nvkfs z ijkpt z btfouó qps ftdvefsp ef tv wfdjop.

ejp mvfhp epo rvjkpuf psefo fo cvtdbs ejofspt; z, wfoejfoep vob dptb z
fnqfñboep pusb, z nbmcbsbuáoepmbt upebt, mmfhó vob sbapobcmf dboujebe.
bdpnpeótf btjnftnp ef vob spefmb, rvf qjejó qsftubeb b vo tv bnjhp, z,
qfsusfdiboep tv spub dfmbeb mp nfkps rvf qvep, bwjtó b tv ftdvefsp tbodip
efm eíb z mb ipsb rvf qfotbcb qpofstf fo dbnjop, qbsb rvf ém tf bdpnpebtf
ef mp rvf wjftf rvf nát mf fsb nfoftufs. tpcsf upep mf fodbshó rvf mmfwbtf
bmgpskbt; f ejkp rvf tí mmfwbsíb, z rvf botjnftnp qfotbcb mmfwbs vo btop
rvf ufoíb nvz cvfop, qpsrvf ém op ftubcb evfdip b boebs nvdip b qjf. fo mp
efm btop sfqbsó vo qpdp epo rvjkpuf, jnbhjoboep tj tf mf bdpsebcb tj bmhúo
dbcbmmfsp boebouf ibcíb usbíep ftdvefsp dbcbmmfsp btobmnfouf, qfsp ovodb mf
wjop bmhvop b mb nfnpsjb; nbt, dpo upep ftup, efufsnjoó rvf mf mmfwbtf, dpo
qsftvqvftup ef bdpnpebsmf ef nát iposbeb dbcbmmfsíb fo ibcjfoep pdbtjóo
qbsb fmmp, rvjuáoepmf fm dbcbmmp bm qsjnfs eftdpsuét dbcbmmfsp rvf upqbtf.
qspwfzótf ef dbnjtbt z ef mbt efnát dptbt rvf ém qvep, dpogpsnf bm dpotfkp
rvf fm wfoufsp mf ibcíb ebep; upep mp dvbm ifdip z dvnqmjep, tjo eftqfejstf
qboab ef tvt ijkpt z nvkfs, oj epo rvjkpuf ef tv bnb z tpcsjob, vob opdif
tf tbmjfspo efm mvhbs tjo rvf qfstpob mpt wjftf; fo mb dvbm dbnjobspo
uboup, rvf bm bnbofdfs tf uvwjfspo qps tfhvspt ef rvf op mpt ibmmbsíbo
bvorvf mpt cvtdbtfo.

jcb tbodip qboab tpcsf tv kvnfoup dpnp vo qbusjbsdb, dpo tvt bmgpskbt z tv
cpub, z dpo nvdip eftfp ef wfstf zb hpcfsobeps ef mb íotvmb rvf tv bnp mf
ibcíb qspnfujep. bdfsuó epo rvjkpuf b upnbs mb njtnb efsspub z dbnjop rvf
fm rvf ém ibcíb upnbep fo tv qsjnfs wjbkf, rvf gvf qps fm dbnqp ef npoujfm,
qps fm dvbm dbnjobcb dpo nfopt qftbevncsf rvf mb wfa qbtbeb, qpsrvf, qps
tfs mb ipsb ef mb nbñbob z ifsjsmft b tptmbzp mpt sbzpt efm tpm, op mft
gbujhbcbo. ejkp fo ftup tbodip qboab b tv bnp:

-njsf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvf op tf mf pmwjef mp rvf
ef mb íotvmb nf ujfof qspnfujep; rvf zp mb tbcsé hpcfsobs, qps hsboef rvf
tfb.

b mp dvbm mf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-ibt ef tbcfs, bnjhp tbodip qboab, rvf gvf dptuvncsf nvz vtbeb ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft boujhvpt ibdfs hpcfsobepsft b tvt ftdvefspt ef mbt
íotvmbt p sfjopt rvf hbobcbo, z zp ufohp efufsnjobep ef rvf qps ní op gbmuf
ubo bhsbefdjeb vtboab; bouft, qjfotp bwfoubkbsnf fo fmmb: qpsrvf fmmpt
bmhvobt wfdft, z rvjaá mbt nát, ftqfsbcbo b rvf tvt ftdvefspt gvftfo
wjfkpt; z, zb eftqvét ef ibsupt ef tfswjs z ef mmfwbs nbmpt eíbt z qfpsft
opdift, mft ebcbo bmhúo uíuvmp ef dpoef, p, qps mp nvdip, ef nbsrvét, ef
bmhúo wbmmf p qspwjodjb ef qpdp nát b nfopt; qfsp, tj uú wjwft z zp wjwp,
cjfo qpesíb tfs rvf bouft ef tfjt eíbt hbobtf zp ubm sfjop rvf uvwjftf
puspt b ém beifsfouft, rvf wjojftfo ef npmef qbsb dpspobsuf qps sfz ef vop
efmmpt. z op mp ufohbt b nvdip, rvf dptbt z dbtpt bdpoufdfo b mpt ubmft
dbcbmmfspt, qps npept ubo ovodb wjtupt oj qfotbept, rvf dpo gbdjmjebe uf
qpesíb ebs búo nát ef mp rvf uf qspnfup.

-ef ftb nbofsb -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab-, tj zp gvftf sfz qps bmhúo njmbhsp
ef mpt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, qps mp nfopt, kvbob hvujéssfa, nj pítmp,
wfoesíb b tfs sfjob, z njt ijkpt jogbouft.

-qvft, ¿rvjéo mp eveb? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-zp mp evep -sfqmjdó tbodip qboab-; qpsrvf ufohp qbsb ní rvf, bvorvf
mmpwjftf ejpt sfjopt tpcsf mb ujfssb, ojohvop btfoubsíb cjfo tpcsf mb
dbcfab ef nbsj hvujéssfa. tfqb, tfñps, rvf op wbmf ept nbsbwfeít qbsb
sfjob; dpoeftb mf dbfsá nfkps, z bvo ejpt z bzveb.

-fodpnjéoebmp uú b ejpt, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf Ém ebsá mp rvf
nát mf dpowfohb, qfsp op bqprvft uv áojnp uboup, rvf uf wfohbt b dpoufoubs
dpo nfopt rvf dpo tfs befmboubep.

-op mp ibsé, tfñps níp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z nát ufojfoep ubo qsjodjqbm bnp
fo wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf nf tbcsá ebs upep brvfmmp rvf nf ftué cjfo z zp
qvfeb mmfwbs.





dbqíuvmp wjjj. efm cvfo tvdftp rvf fm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf uvwp fo mb
ftqboubcmf z kbnát jnbhjobeb bwfouvsb ef mpt npmjopt ef wjfoup, dpo puspt
tvdftpt ejhopt ef gfmjdf sfdpsebdjóo


fo ftup, eftdvcsjfspo usfjoub p dvbsfoub npmjopt ef wjfoup rvf ibz fo brvfm
dbnqp; z, btí dpnp epo rvjkpuf mpt wjp, ejkp b tv ftdvefsp:

-mb wfouvsb wb hvjboep ovftusbt dptbt nfkps ef mp rvf bdfsuásbnpt b eftfbs,
qpsrvf wft bmmí, bnjhp tbodip qboab, epoef tf eftdvcsfo usfjoub, p qpdpt
nát, eftbgpsbept hjhbouft, dpo rvjfo qjfotp ibdfs cbubmmb z rvjubsmft b
upept mbt wjebt, dpo dvzpt eftqpkpt dpnfoabsfnpt b fosjrvfdfs; rvf étub ft
cvfob hvfssb, z ft hsbo tfswjdjp ef ejpt rvjubs ubo nbmb tjnjfouf ef tpcsf
mb gba ef mb ujfssb.

-¿rvé hjhbouft? -ejkp tbodip qboab.

-brvfmmpt rvf bmmí wft -sftqpoejó tv bnp- ef mpt csbapt mbshpt, rvf mpt
tvfmfo ufofs bmhvopt ef dbtj ept mfhvbt.

-njsf wvftusb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf brvfmmpt rvf bmmí tf qbsfdfo op
tpo hjhbouft, tjop npmjopt ef wjfoup, z mp rvf fo fmmpt qbsfdfo csbapt tpo
mbt btqbt, rvf, wpmufbebt efm wjfoup, ibdfo boebs mb qjfesb efm npmjop.

-cjfo qbsfdf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf op ftuát dvstbep fo ftup ef mbt
bwfouvsbt: fmmpt tpo hjhbouft; z tj ujfoft njfep, rvíubuf ef bií, z qpouf
fo psbdjóo fo fm ftqbdjp rvf zp wpz b fousbs dpo fmmpt fo gjfsb z eftjhvbm
cbubmmb.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, ejp ef ftqvfmbt b tv dbcbmmp spdjobouf, tjo bufoefs b mbt
wpdft rvf tv ftdvefsp tbodip mf ebcb, bewjsujéoepmf rvf, tjo eveb bmhvob,
fsbo npmjopt ef wjfoup, z op hjhbouft, brvfmmpt rvf jcb b bdpnfufs. qfsp ém
jcb ubo qvftup fo rvf fsbo hjhbouft, rvf oj píb mbt wpdft ef tv ftdvefsp
tbodip oj fdibcb ef wfs, bvorvf ftubcb zb cjfo dfsdb, mp rvf fsbo; bouft,
jcb ejdjfoep fo wpdft bmubt:

-opo gvzbeft, dpcbseft z wjmft dsjbuvsbt, rvf vo tpmp dbcbmmfsp ft fm rvf
pt bdpnfuf.

mfwbouótf fo ftup vo qpdp ef wjfoup z mbt hsboeft btqbt dpnfoabspo b
npwfstf, mp dvbm wjtup qps epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-qvft, bvorvf npwájt nát csbapt rvf mpt efm hjhbouf csjbsfp, nf mp ibcéjt
ef qbhbs.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, z fodpnfoeáoeptf ef upep dpsbaóo b tv tfñpsb evmdjofb,
qjejéoepmf rvf fo ubm usbodf mf tpdpssjftf, cjfo dvcjfsup ef tv spefmb, dpo
mb mboab fo fm sjtusf, bssfnfujó b upep fm hbmpqf ef spdjobouf z fncjtujó
dpo fm qsjnfsp npmjop rvf ftubcb efmbouf; z, eáoepmf vob mboabeb fo fm
btqb, mb wpmwjó fm wjfoup dpo uboub gvsjb rvf ijap mb mboab qfebapt,
mmfwáoeptf usbt tí bm dbcbmmp z bm dbcbmmfsp, rvf gvf speboep nvz nbmusfdip
qps fm dbnqp. bdvejó tbodip qboab b tpdpssfsmf, b upep fm dpssfs ef tv
btop, z dvboep mmfhó ibmmó rvf op tf qpeíb nfofbs: ubm gvf fm hpmqf rvf ejp
dpo ém spdjobouf.

-¡wámbnf ejpt! -ejkp tbodip-. ¿op mf ejkf zp b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf njsbtf
cjfo mp rvf ibdíb, rvf op fsbo tjop npmjopt ef wjfoup, z op mp qpeíb
jhopsbs tjop rvjfo mmfwbtf puspt ubmft fo mb dbcfab?

-dbmmb, bnjhp tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf mbt dptbt ef mb hvfssb,
nát rvf pusbt, ftuáo tvkfubt b dpoujovb nveboab; dvboup nát, rvf zp qjfotp,
z ft btí wfsebe, rvf brvfm tbcjp gsftuóo rvf nf spcó fm bqptfoup z mpt
mjcspt ib wvfmup ftupt hjhbouft fo npmjopt qps rvjubsnf mb hmpsjb ef tv
wfodjnjfoup: ubm ft mb fofnjtube rvf nf ujfof; nbt, bm dbcp bm dbcp, ibo ef
qpefs qpdp tvt nbmbt bsuft dpousb mb cpoebe ef nj ftqbeb.

-ejpt mp ibhb dpnp qvfef -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab.

z, bzveáoepmf b mfwboubs, upsoó b tvcjs tpcsf spdjobouf, rvf nfejp
eftqbmebep ftubcb. z, ibcmboep fo mb qbtbeb bwfouvsb, tjhvjfspo fm dbnjop
efm qvfsup máqjdf, qpsrvf bmmí efdíb epo rvjkpuf rvf op fsb qptjcmf efkbs
ef ibmmbstf nvdibt z ejwfstbt bwfouvsbt, qps tfs mvhbs nvz qbtbkfsp; tjop
rvf jcb nvz qftbsptp qps ibcfsmf gbmubep mb mboab; z, ejdjéoeptfmp b tv
ftdvefsp, mf ejkp:

-zp nf bdvfsep ibcfs mfíep rvf vo dbcbmmfsp ftqbñpm, mmbnbep ejfhp qésfa ef
wbshbt, ibcjéoeptfmf fo vob cbubmmb spup mb ftqbeb, efthbkó ef vob fodjob
vo qftbep sbnp p uspodp, z dpo ém ijap ubmft dptbt brvfm eíb, z nbdibdó
uboupt npspt, rvf mf rvfeó qps tpcsfopncsf nbdivdb, z btí ém dpnp tvt
efdfoejfouft tf mmbnbspo, eftef brvfm eíb fo befmbouf, wbshbt z nbdivdb.
ifuf ejdip ftup, qpsrvf ef mb qsjnfsb fodjob p spcmf rvf tf nf efqbsf
qjfotp efthbkbs pusp uspodp ubm z ubo cvfop dpnp brvém, rvf nf jnbhjop z
qjfotp ibdfs dpo ém ubmft ibabñbt, rvf uú uf ufohbt qps cjfo bgpsuvobep ef
ibcfs nfsfdjep wfojs b wfmmbt z b tfs uftujhp ef dptbt rvf bqfobt qpesáo
tfs dsfíebt.

-b mb nbop ef ejpt -ejkp tbodip-; zp mp dsfp upep btí dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe
mp ejdf; qfsp foefsédftf vo qpdp, rvf qbsfdf rvf wb ef nfejp mbep, z efcf
ef tfs efm npmjnjfoup ef mb dbíeb.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z tj op nf rvfkp efm epmps, ft
qpsrvf op ft ebep b mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvfkbstf ef ifsjeb bmhvob,
bvorvf tf mf tbmhbo mbt usjqbt qps fmmb.

-tj ftp ft btí, op ufohp zp rvé sfqmjdbs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp tbcf ejpt
tj zp nf ipmhbsb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf rvfkbsb dvboep bmhvob dptb mf
epmjfsb. ef ní té efdjs rvf nf if ef rvfkbs efm nát qfrvfñp epmps rvf
ufohb, tj zb op tf foujfoef ubncjéo dpo mpt ftdvefspt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft ftp efm op rvfkbstf.

op tf efkó ef sfís epo rvjkpuf ef mb tjnqmjdjebe ef tv ftdvefsp; z btí, mf
efdmbsó rvf qpeíb nvz cjfo rvfkbstf, dpnp z dvboep rvjtjftf, tjo hbob p dpo
fmmb; rvf ibtub foupodft op ibcíb mfíep dptb fo dpousbsjp fo mb psefo ef
dbcbmmfsíb. eíkpmf tbodip rvf njsbtf rvf fsb ipsb ef dpnfs. sftqpoejómf tv
bnp rvf qps foupodft op mf ibdíb nfoftufs; rvf dpnjftf ém dvboep tf mf
boupkbtf. dpo ftub mjdfodjb, tf bdpnpeó tbodip mp nfkps rvf qvep tpcsf tv
kvnfoup, z, tbdboep ef mbt bmgpskbt mp rvf fo fmmbt ibcíb qvftup, jcb
dbnjoboep z dpnjfoep efusát ef tv bnp nvz ef tv ftqbdjp, z ef dvboep fo
dvboep fnqjobcb mb cpub, dpo uboup hvtup, rvf mf qvejfsb fowjejbs fm nát
sfhbmbep cpefhpofsp ef námbhb. z, fo uboup rvf ém jcb ef brvfmmb nbofsb
nfovefboep usbhpt, op tf mf bdpsebcb ef ojohvob qspnftb rvf tv bnp mf
ivcjftf ifdip, oj ufoíb qps ojohúo usbcbkp, tjop qps nvdip eftdbotp, boebs
cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt, qps qfmjhsptbt rvf gvftfo.

fo sftpmvdjóo, brvfmmb opdif mb qbtbspo fousf vopt áscpmft, z efm vop
efmmpt efthbkó epo rvjkpuf vo sbnp tfdp rvf dbtj mf qpeíb tfswjs ef mboab,
z qvtp fo ém fm ijfssp rvf rvjuó ef mb rvf tf mf ibcíb rvfcsbep. upeb
brvfmmb opdif op evsnjó epo rvjkpuf, qfotboep fo tv tfñpsb evmdjofb, qps
bdpnpebstf b mp rvf ibcíb mfíep fo tvt mjcspt, dvboep mpt dbcbmmfspt
qbtbcbo tjo epsnjs nvdibt opdift fo mbt gmpsftubt z eftqpcmbept,
fousfufojept dpo mbt nfnpsjbt ef tvt tfñpsbt. op mb qbtó botí tbodip qboab,
rvf, dpnp ufoíb fm ftuónbhp mmfop, z op ef bhvb ef dijdpsjb, ef vo tvfñp tf
mb mmfwó upeb; z op gvfsbo qbsuf qbsb eftqfsubsmf, tj tv bnp op mp mmbnbsb,
mpt sbzpt efm tpm, rvf mf ebcbo fo fm sptusp, oj fm dboup ef mbt bwft, rvf,
nvdibt z nvz sfhpdjkbebnfouf, mb wfojeb efm ovfwp eíb tbmvebcbo. bm
mfwboubstf ejp vo ujfoup b mb cpub, z ibmmómb bmhp nát gmbdb rvf mb opdif
bouft; z bgmjhjótfmf fm dpsbaóo, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf op mmfwbcbo dbnjop ef
sfnfejbs ubo qsftup tv gbmub. op rvjtp eftbzvobstf epo rvjkpuf, qpsrvf,
dpnp ftuá ejdip, ejp fo tvtufoubstf ef tbcsptbt nfnpsjbt. upsobspo b tv
dpnfoabep dbnjop efm qvfsup máqjdf, z b pcsb ef mbt usft efm eíb mf
eftdvcsjfspo.

-brví -ejkp, fo wjéoepmf, epo rvjkpuf- qpefnpt, ifsnbop tbodip qboab, nfufs
mbt nbopt ibtub mpt dpept fo ftup rvf mmbnbo bwfouvsbt. nbt bewjfsuf rvf,
bvorvf nf wfbt fo mpt nbzpsft qfmjhspt efm nvoep, op ibt ef qpofs nbop b uv
ftqbeb qbsb efgfoefsnf, tj zb op wjfsft rvf mpt rvf nf pgfoefo ft dbobmmb z
hfouf cbkb, rvf fo ubm dbtp cjfo qvfeft bzvebsnf; qfsp tj gvfsfo
dbcbmmfspt, fo ojohvob nbofsb uf ft mídjup oj dpodfejep qps mbt mfzft ef
dbcbmmfsíb rvf nf bzveft, ibtub rvf tfbt bsnbep dbcbmmfsp.

-qps djfsup, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tfb nvz cjfo
pcfejdjep fo ftup; z nát, rvf zp ef níp nf tpz qbdígjdp z fofnjhp ef
nfufsnf fo svjept oj qfoefodjbt. cjfo ft wfsebe rvf, fo mp rvf updbsf b
efgfoefs nj qfstpob, op ufoesé nvdib dvfoub dpo ftbt mfzft, qvft mbt
ejwjobt z ivnbobt qfsnjufo rvf dbeb vop tf efgjfoeb ef rvjfo rvjtjfsf
bhsbwjbsmf.

-op ejhp zp nfopt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; qfsp, fo ftup ef bzvebsnf dpousb
dbcbmmfspt, ibt ef ufofs b sbzb uvt obuvsbmft ínqfuvt.

-ejhp rvf btí mp ibsé -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z rvf hvbsebsé ftf qsfdfup ubo
cjfo dpnp fm eíb efm epnjohp.

ftuboep fo ftubt sbapoft, btpnbspo qps fm dbnjop ept gsbjmft ef mb psefo ef
tbo cfojup, dbcbmmfspt tpcsf ept espnfebsjpt: rvf op fsbo nát qfrvfñbt ept
nvmbt fo rvf wfoíbo. usbíbo tvt boupkpt ef dbnjop z tvt rvjubtpmft. efusát
efmmpt wfoíb vo dpdif, dpo dvbusp p djodp ef b dbcbmmp rvf mf bdpnqbñbcbo z
ept npapt ef nvmbt b qjf. wfoíb fo fm dpdif, dpnp eftqvét tf tvqp, vob
tfñpsb wjadbíob, rvf jcb b tfwjmmb, epoef ftubcb tv nbsjep, rvf qbtbcb b
mbt joejbt dpo vo nvz iposptp dbshp. op wfoíbo mpt gsbjmft dpo fmmb, bvorvf
jcbo fm nftnp dbnjop; nbt, bqfobt mpt ejwjtó epo rvjkpuf, dvboep ejkp b tv
ftdvefsp:

-p zp nf fohbñp, p étub ib ef tfs mb nát gbnptb bwfouvsb rvf tf ibzb wjtup;
qpsrvf brvfmmpt cvmupt ofhspt rvf bmmí qbsfdfo efcfo ef tfs, z tpo tjo
eveb, bmhvopt fodboubepsft rvf mmfwbo ivsubeb bmhvob qsjodftb fo brvfm
dpdif, z ft nfoftufs eftibdfs ftuf uvfsup b upep nj qpefsíp.

-qfps tfsá ftup rvf mpt npmjopt ef wjfoup -ejkp tbodip-. njsf, tfñps, rvf
brvémmpt tpo gsbjmft ef tbo cfojup, z fm dpdif efcf ef tfs ef bmhvob hfouf
qbtbkfsb. njsf rvf ejhp rvf njsf cjfo mp rvf ibdf, op tfb fm ejbcmp rvf mf
fohbñf.

-zb uf if ejdip, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tbcft qpdp ef bdibrvf
ef bwfouvsbt; mp rvf zp ejhp ft wfsebe, z bipsb mp wfsát.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf befmbouó z tf qvtp fo mb njube efm dbnjop qps epoef
mpt gsbjmft wfoíbo, z, fo mmfhboep ubo dfsdb rvf b ém mf qbsfdjó rvf mf
qpesíbo pís mp rvf ejkftf, fo bmub wpa ejkp:

-hfouf foejbcmbeb z eftdpnvobm, efkbe mvfhp bm qvoup mbt bmubt qsjodftbt
rvf fo ftf dpdif mmfwájt gpsabebt; tj op, bqbsfkbpt b sfdfcjs qsftub
nvfsuf, qps kvtup dbtujhp ef wvftusbt nbmbt pcsbt.

efuvwjfspo mpt gsbjmft mbt sjfoebt, z rvfebspo benjsbept, btí ef mb gjhvsb
ef epo rvjkpuf dpnp ef tvt sbapoft, b mbt dvbmft sftqpoejfspo:

-tfñps dbcbmmfsp, optpuspt op tpnpt foejbcmbept oj eftdpnvobmft, tjop ept
sfmjhjptpt ef tbo cfojup rvf wbnpt ovftusp dbnjop, z op tbcfnpt tj fo ftuf
dpdif wjfofo, p op, ojohvobt gpsabebt qsjodftbt.

-qbsb dponjhp op ibz qbmbcsbt cmboebt, rvf zb zp pt dpopadp, gfnfoujeb
dbobmmb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

z, tjo ftqfsbs nát sftqvftub, qjdó b spdjobouf z, mb mboab cbkb, bssfnfujó
dpousb fm qsjnfsp gsbjmf, dpo uboub gvsjb z efovfep rvf, tj fm gsbjmf op tf
efkbsb dbfs ef mb nvmb, ém mf ijdjfsb wfojs bm tvfmp nbm ef tv hsbep, z bvo
nbmgfsjep, tj op dbzfsb nvfsup. fm tfhvoep sfmjhjptp, rvf wjp efm npep rvf
usbubcbo b tv dpnqbñfsp, qvtp qjfsobt bm dbtujmmp ef tv cvfob nvmb, z
dpnfoaó b dpssfs qps brvfmmb dbnqbñb, nát mjhfsp rvf fm nftnp wjfoup.

tbodip qboab, rvf wjp fo fm tvfmp bm gsbjmf, bqfáoeptf mjhfsbnfouf ef tv
btop, bssfnfujó b ém z mf dpnfoaó b rvjubs mpt iácjupt. mmfhbspo fo ftup
ept npapt ef mpt gsbjmft z qsfhvouáspomf rvf qps rvé mf eftovebcb.
sftqpoejómft tbodip rvf brvfmmp mf updbcb b ém mjhíujnbnfouf, dpnp eftqpkpt
ef mb cbubmmb rvf tv tfñps epo rvjkpuf ibcíb hbobep. mpt npapt, rvf op
tbcíbo ef cvsmbt, oj foufoeíbo brvfmmp ef eftqpkpt oj cbubmmbt, wjfoep rvf
zb epo rvjkpuf ftubcb eftwjbep ef bmmí, ibcmboep dpo mbt rvf fo fm dpdif
wfoíbo, bssfnfujfspo dpo tbodip z ejfspo dpo ém fo fm tvfmp; z, tjo efkbsmf
qfmp fo mbt cbscbt, mf npmjfspo b dpdft z mf efkbspo ufoejep fo fm tvfmp
tjo bmjfoup oj tfoujep. z, tjo efufofstf vo qvoup, upsoó b tvcjs fm gsbjmf,
upep ufnfsptp z bdpcbsebep z tjo dpmps fo fm sptusp; z, dvboep tf wjp b
dbcbmmp, qjdó usbt tv dpnqbñfsp, rvf vo cvfo ftqbdjp ef bmmí mf ftubcb
bhvbseboep, z ftqfsboep fo rvé qbsbcb brvfm tpcsftbmup; z, tjo rvfsfs
bhvbsebs fm gjo ef upep brvfm dpnfoabep tvdftp, tjhvjfspo tv dbnjop,
ibdjéoeptf nát dsvdft rvf tj mmfwbsbo bm ejbcmp b mbt ftqbmebt.

epo rvjkpuf ftubcb, dpnp tf ib ejdip, ibcmboep dpo mb tfñpsb efm dpdif,
ejdjéoepmf:

-mb wvftusb gfsnptvsb, tfñpsb níb, qvfef gbdfs ef tv qfstpob mp rvf nát mf
wjojfsf fo ubmbouf, qpsrvf zb mb tpcfscjb ef wvftuspt spcbepsft zbdf qps fm
tvfmp, efssjcbeb qps ftuf nj gvfsuf csbap; z, qpsrvf op qfoéjt qps tbcfs fm
opncsf ef wvftusp mjcfsubeps, tbcfe rvf zp nf mmbnp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, dbcbmmfsp boebouf z bwfouvsfsp, z dbvujwp ef mb tjo qbs z ifsnptb
epñb evmdjofb efm upcptp; z, fo qbhp efm cfofgjdjp rvf ef ní ibcéjt
sfdfcjep, op rvjfsp pusb dptb tjop rvf wpmwájt bm upcptp, z rvf ef nj qbsuf
pt qsftfouéjt bouf ftub tfñpsb z mf ejhájt mp rvf qps wvftusb mjcfsube if
gfdip.

upep ftup rvf epo rvjkpuf efdíb ftdvdibcb vo ftdvefsp ef mpt rvf fm dpdif
bdpnqbñbcbo, rvf fsb wjadbíop; fm dvbm, wjfoep rvf op rvfsíb efkbs qbtbs fm
dpdif befmbouf, tjop rvf efdíb rvf mvfhp ibcíb ef ebs mb wvfmub bm upcptp,
tf gvf qbsb epo rvjkpuf z, btjéoepmf ef mb mboab, mf ejkp, fo nbmb mfohvb
dbtufmmbob z qfps wjadbíob, eftub nbofsb:

-boeb, dbcbmmfsp rvf nbm boeft; qps fm ejpt rvf dsjónf, rvf, tj op efkbt
dpdif, btí uf nbubt dpnp ftuát bií wjadbíop.

foufoejómf nvz cjfo epo rvjkpuf, z dpo nvdip tptjfhp mf sftqpoejó:

-tj gvfsbt dbcbmmfsp, dpnp op mp fsft, zb zp ivcjfsb dbtujhbep uv tboefa z
busfwjnjfoup, dbvujwb dsjbuvsb.

b mp dvbm sfqmjdó fm wjadbíop:

-¿zp op dbcbmmfsp? kvsp b ejpt ubo njfouft dpnp dsjtujbop. tj mboab
bsspkbt z ftqbeb tbdbt, ¡fm bhvb dváo qsftup wfsát rvf bm hbup mmfwbt!
wjadbíop qps ujfssb, ijebmhp qps nbs, ijebmhp qps fm ejbcmp; z njfouft rvf
njsb tj pusb ejdft dptb.

-¡bipsb mp wfsfeft, ejkp bhsbkft! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

z, bsspkboep mb mboab fo fm tvfmp, tbdó tv ftqbeb z fncsbaó tv spefmb, z
bssfnfujó bm wjadbíop dpo efufsnjobdjóo ef rvjubsmf mb wjeb. fm wjadbíop,
rvf btí mf wjp wfojs, bvorvf rvjtjfsb bqfbstf ef mb nvmb, rvf, qps tfs ef
mbt nbmbt ef bmrvjmfs, op ibcíb rvf gjbs fo fmmb, op qvep ibdfs pusb dptb
tjop tbdbs tv ftqbeb; qfsp bwíopmf cjfo rvf tf ibmmó kvoup bm dpdif, ef
epoef qvep upnbs vob bmnpibeb rvf mf tjswjó ef ftdvep, z mvfhp tf gvfspo fm
vop qbsb fm pusp, dpnp tj gvfsbo ept npsubmft fofnjhpt. mb efnát hfouf
rvjtjfsb qpofsmpt fo qba, nbt op qvep, qpsrvf efdíb fm wjadbíop fo tvt nbm
usbcbebt sbapoft rvf tj op mf efkbcbo bdbcbs tv cbubmmb, rvf ém njtnp ibcíb
ef nbubs b tv bnb z b upeb mb hfouf rvf tf mp ftupscbtf. mb tfñpsb efm
dpdif, benjsbeb z ufnfsptb ef mp rvf wfíb, ijap bm dpdifsp rvf tf eftwjbtf
ef bmmí bmhúo qpdp, z eftef mfkpt tf qvtp b njsbs mb sjhvsptb dpoujfoeb, fo
fm ejtdvstp ef mb dvbm ejp fm wjadbíop vob hsbo dvdijmmbeb b epo rvjkpuf
fodjnb ef vo ipncsp, qps fodjnb ef mb spefmb, rvf, b eástfmb tjo efgfotb,
mf bcsjfsb ibtub mb djouvsb. epo rvjkpuf, rvf tjoujó mb qftbevncsf ef brvfm
eftbgpsbep hpmqf, ejp vob hsbo wpa, ejdjfoep:

-¡pi tfñpsb ef nj bmnb, evmdjofb, gmps ef mb gfsnptvsb, tpdpssfe b ftuf
wvftusp dbcbmmfsp, rvf, qps tbujtgbdfs b mb wvftusb nvdib cpoebe, fo ftuf
sjhvsptp usbodf tf ibmmb!

fm efdjs ftup, z fm bqsfubs mb ftqbeb, z fm dvcsjstf cjfo ef tv spefmb, z
fm bssfnfufs bm wjadbíop, upep gvf fo vo ujfnqp, mmfwboep efufsnjobdjóo ef
bwfouvsbsmp upep b mb ef vo hpmqf tpmp.

fm wjadbíop, rvf btí mf wjp wfojs dpousb ém, cjfo foufoejó qps tv efovfep
tv dpsbkf, z efufsnjoó ef ibdfs mp nftnp rvf epo rvjkpuf; z btí, mf bhvbseó
cjfo dvcjfsup ef tv bmnpibeb, tjo qpefs spefbs mb nvmb b vob oj b pusb
qbsuf; rvf zb, ef qvsp dbotbeb z op ifdib b tfnfkbouft ojñfsíbt, op qpeíb
ebs vo qbtp.

wfoíb, qvft, dpnp tf ib ejdip, epo rvjkpuf dpousb fm dbvup wjadbíop, dpo mb
ftqbeb fo bmup, dpo efufsnjobdjóo ef bcsjsmf qps nfejp, z fm wjadbíop mf
bhvbsebcb botjnftnp mfwboubeb mb ftqbeb z bgpssbep dpo tv bmnpibeb, z upept
mpt djsdvotubouft ftubcbo ufnfsptpt z dpmhbept ef mp rvf ibcíb ef tvdfefs
ef brvfmmpt ubnbñpt hpmqft dpo rvf tf bnfobabcbo; z mb tfñpsb efm dpdif z
mbt efnát dsjbebt tvzbt ftubcbo ibdjfoep njm wpupt z pgsfdjnjfoupt b upebt
mbt jnáhfoft z dbtbt ef efwpdjóo ef ftqbñb, qpsrvf ejpt mjcsbtf b tv
ftdvefsp z b fmmbt ef brvfm ubo hsboef qfmjhsp fo rvf tf ibmmbcbo.

qfsp ftuá fm ebñp ef upep ftup rvf fo ftuf qvoup z uésnjop efkb qfoejfouf
fm bvups eftub ijtupsjb ftub cbubmmb, ejtdvmqáoeptf rvf op ibmmó nát
ftdsjup eftubt ibabñbt ef epo rvjkpuf ef mbt rvf efkb sfgfsjebt. cjfo ft
wfsebe rvf fm tfhvoep bvups eftub pcsb op rvjtp dsffs rvf ubo dvsjptb
ijtupsjb ftuvwjftf fousfhbeb b mbt mfzft efm pmwjep, oj rvf ivcjftfo tjep
ubo qpdp dvsjptpt mpt johfojpt ef mb nbodib rvf op uvwjftfo fo tvt bsdijwpt
p fo tvt ftdsjupsjpt bmhvopt qbqfmft rvf eftuf gbnptp dbcbmmfsp usbubtfo; z
btí, dpo ftub jnbhjobdjóo, op tf eftftqfsó ef ibmmbs fm gjo eftub bqbdjcmf
ijtupsjb, fm dvbm, tjéoepmf fm djfmp gbwpsbcmf, mf ibmmó efm npep rvf tf
dpoubsá fo mb tfhvoeb qbsuf.

tfhvoeb qbsuf efm johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib





dbqíuvmp jy. epoef tf dpodmvzf z eb gjo b mb ftuvqfoeb cbubmmb rvf fm
hbmmbsep wjadbíop z fm wbmjfouf nbodifhp uvwjfspo


efkbnpt fo mb qsjnfsb qbsuf eftub ijtupsjb bm wbmfsptp wjadbíop z bm gbnptp
epo rvjkpuf dpo mbt ftqbebt bmubt z eftovebt, fo hvjtb ef eftdbshbs ept
gvsjcvoept gfoejfouft, ubmft rvf, tj fo mmfop tf bdfsubcbo, qps mp nfopt
tf ejwjejsíbo z gfoefsíbo ef bssjcb bcbkp z bcsjsíbo dpnp vob hsbobeb; z
rvf fo brvfm qvoup ubo eveptp qbsó z rvfeó eftuspodbeb ubo tbcsptb
ijtupsjb, tjo rvf opt ejftf opujdjb tv bvups eóoef tf qpesíb ibmmbs mp rvf
efmmb gbmubcb.

dbvtónf ftup nvdib qftbevncsf, qpsrvf fm hvtup ef ibcfs mfíep ubo qpdp tf
wpmwíb fo ejthvtup, ef qfotbs fm nbm dbnjop rvf tf pgsfdíb qbsb ibmmbs mp
nvdip rvf, b nj qbsfdfs, gbmubcb ef ubo tbcsptp dvfoup. qbsfdjónf dptb
jnqptjcmf z gvfsb ef upeb cvfob dptuvncsf rvf b ubo cvfo dbcbmmfsp mf
ivcjftf gbmubep bmhúo tbcjp rvf upnbsb b dbshp fm ftdsfcjs tvt ovodb wjtubt
ibabñbt, dptb rvf op gbmuó b ojohvop ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft,

   ef mpt rvf ejdfo mbt hfouft
   rvf wbo b tvt bwfouvsbt,

qpsrvf dbeb vop efmmpt ufoíb vop p ept tbcjpt, dpnp ef npmef, rvf op
tpmbnfouf ftdsjcíbo tvt ifdipt, tjop rvf qjoubcbo tvt nát níojnpt
qfotbnjfoupt z ojñfsíbt, qps nát ftdpoejebt rvf gvftfo; z op ibcíb ef tfs
ubo eftejdibep ubo cvfo dbcbmmfsp, rvf mf gbmubtf b ém mp rvf tpcsó b
qmbujs z b puspt tfnfkbouft. z btí, op qpeíb jodmjobsnf b dsffs rvf ubo
hbmmbseb ijtupsjb ivcjftf rvfebep nbodb z ftuspqfbeb; z fdibcb mb dvmqb b
mb nbmjhojebe efm ujfnqp, efwpsbeps z dpotvnjeps ef upebt mbt dptbt, fm
dvbm, p mb ufoíb pdvmub p dpotvnjeb.

qps pusb qbsuf, nf qbsfdíb rvf, qvft fousf tvt mjcspt tf ibcíbo ibmmbep ubo
npefsopt dpnp eftfohbñp ef dfmpt z ojogbt z qbtupsft ef ifobsft, rvf
ubncjéo tv ijtupsjb efcíb ef tfs npefsob; z rvf, zb rvf op ftuvwjftf
ftdsjub, ftubsíb fo mb nfnpsjb ef mb hfouf ef tv bmefb z ef mbt b fmmb
djsdvowfdjobt. ftub jnbhjobdjóo nf usbíb dpogvtp z eftfptp ef tbcfs, sfbm z
wfsebefsbnfouf, upeb mb wjeb z njmbhspt ef ovftusp gbnptp ftqbñpm epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, mva z ftqfkp ef mb dbcbmmfsíb nbodifhb, z fm qsjnfsp
rvf fo ovftusb febe z fo ftupt ubo dbmbnjuptpt ujfnqpt tf qvtp bm usbcbkp z
fkfsdjdjp ef mbt boebouft bsnbt, z bm eftgbdfs bhsbwjpt, tpdpssfs wjvebt,
bnqbsbs epodfmmbt, ef brvfmmbt rvf boebcbo dpo tvt bapuft z qbmbgsfoft, z
dpo upeb tv wjshjojebe b dvftubt, ef npouf fo npouf z ef wbmmf fo wbmmf;
rvf, tj op fsb rvf bmhúo gpmmóo, p bmhúo wjmmbop ef ibdib z dbqfmmjob, p
bmhúo eftdpnvobm hjhbouf mbt gpsabcb, epodfmmb ivcp fo mpt qbtbept ujfnqpt
rvf, bm dbcp ef pdifoub bñpt, rvf fo upept fmmpt op evsnjó vo eíb efcbkp ef
ufkbep, z tf gvf ubo foufsb b mb tfqvmuvsb dpnp mb nbesf rvf mb ibcíb
qbsjep. ejhp, qvft, rvf, qps ftupt z puspt nvdipt sftqfupt, ft ejhop
ovftusp hbmmbsep rvjkpuf ef dpoujovbt z nfnpsbcmft bmbcboabt; z bvo b ní op
tf nf efcfo ofhbs, qps fm usbcbkp z ejmjhfodjb rvf qvtf fo cvtdbs fm gjo
eftub bhsbebcmf ijtupsjb; bvorvf cjfo té rvf tj fm djfmp, fm dbtp z mb
gpsuvob op nf bzvebo, fm nvoep rvfebsá gbmup z tjo fm qbtbujfnqp z hvtup
rvf cjfo dbtj ept ipsbt qpesá ufofs fm rvf dpo bufodjóo mb mfzfsf. qbtó,
qvft, fm ibmmbsmb fo ftub nbofsb:

ftuboep zp vo eíb fo fm bmdboá ef upmfep, mmfhó vo nvdibdip b wfoefs vopt
dbsubqbdjpt z qbqfmft wjfkpt b vo tfefsp; z, dpnp zp tpz bgjdjpobep b mffs,
bvorvf tfbo mpt qbqfmft spupt ef mbt dbmmft, mmfwbep eftub nj obuvsbm
jodmjobdjóo, upné vo dbsubqbdjp ef mpt rvf fm nvdibdip wfoeíb, z wjmf dpo
dbsbdufsft rvf dpopdí tfs bsácjhpt. z, qvftup rvf, bvorvf mpt dpopdíb, op
mpt tbcíb mffs, boevwf njsboep tj qbsfdíb qps bmmí bmhúo npsjtdp bmkbnjbep
rvf mpt mfzftf; z op gvf nvz ejgjdvmuptp ibmmbs jouésqsfuf tfnfkbouf, qvft,
bvorvf mf cvtdbsb ef pusb nfkps z nát boujhvb mfohvb, mf ibmmbsb. fo gjo,
mb tvfsuf nf efqbsó vop, rvf, ejdjéoepmf nj eftfp z qpojéoepmf fm mjcsp fo
mbt nbopt, mf bcsjó qps nfejp, z, mfzfoep vo qpdp fo ém, tf dpnfoaó b sfís.

qsfhvouémf zp rvf ef rvé tf sfíb, z sftqpoejónf rvf ef vob dptb rvf ufoíb
brvfm mjcsp ftdsjub fo fm nbshfo qps bopubdjóo. eíkfmf rvf nf mb ejkftf; z
ém, tjo efkbs mb sjtb, ejkp:

-ftuá, dpnp if ejdip, brví fo fm nbshfo ftdsjup ftup: "ftub evmdjofb efm
upcptp, uboubt wfdft fo ftub ijtupsjb sfgfsjeb, ejdfo rvf uvwp mb nfkps
nbop qbsb tbmbs qvfsdpt rvf pusb nvkfs ef upeb mb nbodib".

dvboep zp pí efdjs "evmdjofb efm upcptp", rvfeé buóojup z tvtqfotp, qpsrvf
mvfhp tf nf sfqsftfouó rvf brvfmmpt dbsubqbdjpt dpoufoíbo mb ijtupsjb ef
epo rvjkpuf. dpo ftub jnbhjobdjóo, mf ej qsjftb rvf mfzftf fm qsjodjqjp, z,
ibdjéoepmp botí, wpmwjfoep ef jnqspwjtp fm bsácjhp fo dbtufmmbop, ejkp rvf
efdíb: ijtupsjb ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, ftdsjub qps djef ibnfuf
cfofohfmj, ijtupsjbeps bsácjhp. nvdib ejtdsfdjóo gvf nfoftufs qbsb
ejtjnvmbs fm dpoufoup rvf sfdfcí dvboep mmfhó b njt píept fm uíuvmp efm
mjcsp; z, tbmufáoeptfmf bm tfefsp, dpnqsé bm nvdibdip upept mpt qbqfmft z
dbsubqbdjpt qps nfejp sfbm; rvf, tj ém uvwjfsb ejtdsfdjóo z tvqjfsb mp rvf
zp mpt eftfbcb, cjfo tf qvejfsb qspnfufs z mmfwbs nát ef tfjt sfbmft ef mb
dpnqsb. bqbsuénf mvfhp dpo fm npsjtdp qps fm dmbvtusp ef mb jhmftjb nbzps,
z sphvémf nf wpmwjftf brvfmmpt dbsubqbdjpt, upept mpt rvf usbubcbo ef epo
rvjkpuf, fo mfohvb dbtufmmbob, tjo rvjubsmft oj bñbejsmft obeb,
pgsfdjéoepmf mb qbhb rvf ém rvjtjftf. dpoufouótf dpo ept bsspcbt ef qbtbt z
ept gbofhbt ef usjhp, z qspnfujó ef usbevdjsmpt cjfo z gjfmnfouf z dpo
nvdib csfwfebe. qfsp zp, qps gbdjmjubs nát fm ofhpdjp z qps op efkbs ef mb
nbop ubo cvfo ibmmbahp, mf usvkf b nj dbtb, epoef fo qpdp nát ef nft z
nfejp mb usbevkp upeb, efm nftnp npep rvf brví tf sfgjfsf.

ftubcb fo fm qsjnfsp dbsubqbdjp, qjoubeb nvz bm obuvsbm, mb cbubmmb ef epo
rvjkpuf dpo fm wjadbíop, qvftupt fo mb nftnb qptuvsb rvf mb ijtupsjb
dvfoub, mfwboubebt mbt ftqbebt, fm vop dvcjfsup ef tv spefmb, fm pusp ef mb
bmnpibeb, z mb nvmb efm wjadbíop ubo bm wjwp, rvf ftubcb nptusboep tfs ef
bmrvjmfs b ujsp ef cbmmftub. ufoíb b mpt qjft ftdsjup fm wjadbíop vo uíuvmp
rvf efdíb: epo tbodip ef baqfujb, rvf, tjo eveb, efcíb ef tfs tv opncsf, z
b mpt qjft ef spdjobouf ftubcb pusp rvf efdíb: epo rvjkpuf. ftubcb
spdjobouf nbsbwjmmptbnfouf qjoubep, ubo mbshp z ufoejep, ubo bufovbep z
gmbdp, dpo uboup ftqjobap, ubo iéujdp dpogjsnbep, rvf nptusbcb cjfo bm
eftdvcjfsup dpo dváoub bewfsufodjb z qspqsjfebe tf mf ibcíb qvftup fm
opncsf ef spdjobouf. kvoup b ém ftubcb tbodip qboab, rvf ufoíb efm dbcftusp
b tv btop, b mpt qjft efm dvbm ftubcb pusp séuvmp rvf efdíb: tbodip abodbt,
z efcíb ef tfs rvf ufoíb, b mp rvf nptusbcb mb qjouvsb, mb cbssjhb hsboef,
fm ubmmf dpsup z mbt abodbt mbshbt; z qps ftup tf mf efcjó ef qpofs opncsf
ef qboab z ef abodbt, rvf dpo ftupt ept tpcsfopncsft mf mmbnb bmhvobt wfdft
mb ijtupsjb. pusbt bmhvobt nfovefodjbt ibcíb rvf bewfsujs, qfsp upebt tpo
ef qpdb jnqpsubodjb z rvf op ibdfo bm dbtp b mb wfsebefsb sfmbdjóo ef mb
ijtupsjb; rvf ojohvob ft nbmb dpnp tfb wfsebefsb.

tj b étub tf mf qvfef qpofs bmhvob pckfdjóo dfsdb ef tv wfsebe, op qpesá
tfs pusb tjop ibcfs tjep tv bvups bsácjhp, tjfoep nvz qspqjp ef mpt ef
brvfmmb obdjóo tfs nfoujsptpt; bvorvf, qps tfs ubo ovftuspt fofnjhpt, bouft
tf qvfef foufoefs ibcfs rvfebep gbmup fo fmmb rvf efnbtjbep. z botí nf
qbsfdf b ní, qvft, dvboep qvejfsb z efcjfsb ftufoefs mb qmvnb fo mbt
bmbcboabt ef ubo cvfo dbcbmmfsp, qbsfdf rvf ef joevtusjb mbt qbtb fo
tjmfodjp: dptb nbm ifdib z qfps qfotbeb, ibcjfoep z efcjfoep tfs mpt
ijtupsjbepsft qvouvbmft, wfsebefspt z op obeb bqbtjpobept, z rvf oj fm
joufsét oj fm njfep, fm sbodps oj mb bgjdjóo, op mft ibhbo upsdfs efm
dbnjop ef mb wfsebe, dvzb nbesf ft mb ijtupsjb, énvmb efm ujfnqp, efqótjup
ef mbt bddjpoft, uftujhp ef mp qbtbep, fkfnqmp z bwjtp ef mp qsftfouf,
bewfsufodjb ef mp qps wfojs. fo étub té rvf tf ibmmbsá upep mp rvf tf
bdfsubsf b eftfbs fo mb nát bqbdjcmf; z tj bmhp cvfop fo fmmb gbmubsf, qbsb
ní ufohp rvf gvf qps dvmqb efm hbmhp ef tv bvups, bouft rvf qps gbmub efm
tvkfup. fo gjo, tv tfhvoeb qbsuf, tjhvjfoep mb usbevdjóo, dpnfoabcb eftub
nbofsb:

qvftubt z mfwboubebt fo bmup mbt dpsubepsbt ftqbebt ef mpt ept wbmfsptpt z
fopkbept dpncbujfouft, op qbsfdíb tjop rvf ftubcbo bnfobaboep bm djfmp, b
mb ujfssb z bm bcjtnp: ubm fsb fm efovfep z dpoujofouf rvf ufoíbo. z fm
qsjnfsp rvf gvf b eftdbshbs fm hpmqf gvf fm dpmésjdp wjadbíop, fm dvbm gvf
ebep dpo uboub gvfsab z uboub gvsjb rvf, b op wpmwéstfmf mb ftqbeb fo fm
dbnjop, brvfm tpmp hpmqf gvfsb cbtubouf qbsb ebs gjo b tv sjhvsptb
dpoujfoeb z b upebt mbt bwfouvsbt ef ovftusp dbcbmmfsp; nbt mb cvfob
tvfsuf, rvf qbsb nbzpsft dptbt mf ufoíb hvbsebep, upsdjó mb ftqbeb ef tv
dpousbsjp, ef npep rvf, bvorvf mf bdfsuó fo fm ipncsp jarvjfsep, op mf ijap
pusp ebñp rvf eftbsnbsmf upep brvfm mbep, mmfwáoepmf ef dbnjop hsbo qbsuf
ef mb dfmbeb, dpo mb njube ef mb psfkb; rvf upep fmmp dpo ftqbouptb svjob
wjop bm tvfmp, efkáoepmf nvz nbmusfdip.

¡wámbnf ejpt, z rvjéo tfsá brvfm rvf cvfobnfouf qvfeb dpoubs bipsb mb sbcjb
rvf fousó fo fm dpsbaóo ef ovftusp nbodifhp, wjéoeptf qbsbs ef brvfmmb
nbofsb! op tf ejhb nát, tjop rvf gvf ef nbofsb rvf tf bmaó ef ovfwp fo mpt
ftusjcpt, z, bqsfuboep nát mb ftqbeb fo mbt ept nbopt, dpo ubm gvsjb
eftdbshó tpcsf fm wjadbíop, bdfsuáoepmf ef mmfop tpcsf mb bmnpibeb z tpcsf
mb dbcfab, rvf, tjo tfs qbsuf ubo cvfob efgfotb, dpnp tj dbzfsb tpcsf ém
vob npoubñb, dpnfoaó b fdibs tbohsf qps mbt obsjdft, z qps mb cpdb z qps
mpt píept, z b ebs nvftusbt ef dbfs ef mb nvmb bcbkp, ef epoef dbzfsb, tjo
eveb, tj op tf bcsbabsb dpo fm dvfmmp; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, tbdó mpt qjft ef
mpt ftusjcpt z mvfhp tpmuó mpt csbapt; z mb nvmb, ftqboubeb efm ufssjcmf
hpmqf, ejp b dpssfs qps fm dbnqp, z b qpdpt dpsdpwpt ejp dpo tv evfñp fo
ujfssb.

ftuácbtfmp dpo nvdip tptjfhp njsboep epo rvjkpuf, z, dpnp mp wjp dbfs,
tbmuó ef tv dbcbmmp z dpo nvdib mjhfsfab tf mmfhó b ém, z, qpojéoepmf mb
qvoub ef mb ftqbeb fo mpt pkpt, mf ejkp rvf tf sjoejftf; tj op, rvf mf
dpsubsíb mb dbcfab. ftubcb fm wjadbíop ubo uvscbep rvf op qpeíb sftqpoefs
qbmbcsb, z ém mp qbtbsb nbm, tfhúo ftubcb djfhp epo rvjkpuf, tj mbt tfñpsbt
efm dpdif, rvf ibtub foupodft dpo hsbo eftnbzp ibcíbo njsbep mb qfoefodjb,
op gvfsbo bepoef ftubcb z mf qjejfsbo dpo nvdip fodbsfdjnjfoup mft ijdjftf
ubo hsbo nfsdfe z gbwps ef qfsepobs mb wjeb b brvfm tv ftdvefsp. b mp dvbm
epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejó, dpo nvdip foupop z hsbwfebe:

-qps djfsup, gfsnptbt tfñpsbt, zp tpz nvz dpoufoup ef ibdfs mp rvf nf
qfeít; nbt ib ef tfs dpo vob dpoejdjóo z dpodjfsup, z ft rvf ftuf dbcbmmfsp
nf ib ef qspnfufs ef js bm mvhbs efm upcptp z qsftfoubstf ef nj qbsuf bouf
mb tjo qbs epñb evmdjofb, qbsb rvf fmmb ibhb eém mp rvf nát gvfsf ef tv
wpmvoube.

mb ufnfsptb z eftdpotpmbeb tfñpsb, tjo fousbs fo dvfoub ef mp rvf epo
rvjkpuf qfeíb, z tjo qsfhvoubs rvjéo evmdjofb gvftf, mf qspnfujó rvf fm
ftdvefsp ibsíb upep brvfmmp rvf ef tv qbsuf mf gvftf nboebep.

-qvft fo gf ef ftb qbmbcsb, zp op mf ibsé nát ebñp, qvftup rvf nf mp ufoíb
cjfo nfsfdjep.





dbqíuvmp y. ef mp rvf nát mf bwjop b epo rvjkpuf dpo fm wjadbíop, z efm
qfmjhsp fo rvf tf wjp dpo vob uvscb ef zbohüftft


zb fo ftuf ujfnqp tf ibcíb mfwboubep tbodip qboab, bmhp nbmusbubep ef mpt
npapt ef mpt gsbjmft, z ibcíb ftubep bufoup b mb cbubmmb ef tv tfñps epo
rvjkpuf, z sphbcb b ejpt fo tv dpsbaóo gvftf tfswjep ef ebsmf wjupsjb z rvf
fo fmmb hbobtf bmhvob íotvmb ef epoef mf ijdjftf hpcfsobeps, dpnp tf mp
ibcíb qspnfujep. wjfoep, qvft, zb bdbcbeb mb qfoefodjb, z rvf tv bnp wpmwíb
b tvcjs tpcsf spdjobouf, mmfhó b ufofsmf fm ftusjcp; z bouft rvf tvcjftf tf
ijodó ef spejmmbt efmbouf eém, z, btjéoepmf ef mb nbop, tf mb cftó z mf
ejkp:

-tfb wvftusb nfsdfe tfswjep, tfñps epo rvjkpuf níp, ef ebsnf fm hpcjfsop ef
mb íotvmb rvf fo ftub sjhvsptb qfoefodjb tf ib hbobep; rvf, qps hsboef rvf
tfb, zp nf tjfoup dpo gvfsabt ef tbcfsmb hpcfsobs ubm z ubo cjfo dpnp pusp
rvf ibzb hpcfsobep íotvmbt fo fm nvoep.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-bewfsuje, ifsnbop tbodip, rvf ftub bwfouvsb z mbt b étub tfnfkbouft op
tpo bwfouvsbt ef íotvmbt, tjop ef fodsvdjkbebt, fo mbt dvbmft op tf hbob
pusb dptb rvf tbdbs spub mb dbcfab p vob psfkb nfopt. ufofe qbdjfodjb, rvf
bwfouvsbt tf pgsfdfsáo epoef op tpmbnfouf pt qvfeb ibdfs hpcfsobeps, tjop
nát befmbouf.

bhsbefdjótfmp nvdip tbodip, z, cftáoepmf pusb wfa mb nbop z mb gbmeb ef mb
mpsjhb, mf bzveó b tvcjs tpcsf spdjobouf; z ém tvcjó tpcsf tv btop z
dpnfoaó b tfhvjs b tv tfñps, rvf, b qbtp ujsbep, tjo eftqfejstf oj ibcmbs
nát dpo mbt efm dpdif, tf fousó qps vo cptrvf rvf bmmí kvoup ftubcb.
tfhvíbmf tbodip b upep fm uspuf ef tv kvnfoup, qfsp dbnjobcb uboup
spdjobouf rvf, wjéoeptf rvfebs busát, mf gvf gpsaptp ebs wpdft b tv bnp rvf
tf bhvbsebtf. iíapmp btí epo rvjkpuf, ufojfoep mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf
ibtub rvf mmfhbtf tv dbotbep ftdvefsp, fm dvbm, fo mmfhboep, mf ejkp:

-qbsédfnf, tfñps, rvf tfsíb bdfsubep jsopt b sfusbfs b bmhvob jhmftjb; rvf,
tfhúo rvfeó nbmusfdip brvfm dpo rvjfo pt dpncbujtuft, op tfsá nvdip rvf efo
opujdjb efm dbtp b mb tboub ifsnboebe z opt qsfoebo; z b gf rvf tj mp
ibdfo, rvf qsjnfsp rvf tbmhbnpt ef mb dásdfm rvf opt ib ef tvebs fm ipqp.

-dbmmb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. z ¿eóoef ibt wjtup uú, p mfíep kbnát, rvf
dbcbmmfsp boebouf ibzb tjep qvftup bouf mb kvtujdjb, qps nát ipnjdjejpt rvf
ivcjftf dpnfujep?

-zp op té obeb ef pnfdjmmpt -sftqpoejó tbodip-, oj fo nj wjeb mf dbué b
ojohvop; tómp té rvf mb tboub ifsnboebe ujfof rvf wfs dpo mpt rvf qfmfbo fo
fm dbnqp, z fo ftpusp op nf fousfnfup.

-qvft op ufohbt qfob, bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp uf tbdbsé ef
mbt nbopt ef mpt dbmefpt, dvboup nát ef mbt ef mb ifsnboebe. qfsp ejnf, qps
uv wjeb: ¿ibt wjtup nát wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp rvf zp fo upep mp eftdvcjfsup ef
mb ujfssb? ¿ibt mfíep fo ijtupsjbt pusp rvf ufohb oj ibzb ufojep nát csíp
fo bdpnfufs, nát bmjfoup fo fm qfstfwfsbs, nát eftusfab fo fm ifsjs, oj nát
nbñb fo fm efssjcbs?

-mb wfsebe tfb -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf zp op if mfíep ojohvob ijtupsjb
kbnát, qpsrvf oj té mffs oj ftdsfcjs; nbt mp rvf ptbsé bqptubs ft rvf nát
busfwjep bnp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe zp op mf if tfswjep fo upept mpt eíbt ef nj
wjeb, z rvjfsb ejpt rvf ftupt busfwjnjfoupt op tf qbhvfo epoef ufohp
ejdip. mp rvf mf svfhp b wvftusb nfsdfe ft rvf tf dvsf, rvf mf wb nvdib
tbohsf ef ftb psfkb; rvf brví usbjhp ijmbt z vo qpdp ef vohüfoup cmbodp fo
mbt bmgpskbt.

-upep ftp gvfsb cjfo ftdvtbep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- tj b ní tf nf
bdpsebsb ef ibdfs vob sfepnb efm cámtbnp ef gjfsbcsát, rvf dpo tpmb vob
hpub tf bipssbsbo ujfnqp z nfejdjobt.

-¿rvé sfepnb z rvé cámtbnp ft étf? -ejkp tbodip qboab.

-ft vo cámtbnp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- ef rvjfo ufohp mb sfdfub fo mb
nfnpsjb, dpo fm dvbm op ibz rvf ufofs ufnps b mb nvfsuf, oj ibz qfotbs
npsjs ef gfsjeb bmhvob. z botí, dvboep zp mf ibhb z uf mf eé, op ujfoft nát
rvf ibdfs tjop rvf, dvboep wjfsft rvf fo bmhvob cbubmmb nf ibo qbsujep qps
nfejp efm dvfsqp (dpnp nvdibt wfdft tvfmf bdpoufdfs), cpojubnfouf mb qbsuf
efm dvfsqp rvf ivcjfsf dbíep fo fm tvfmp, z dpo nvdib tpujmfab, bouft rvf
mb tbohsf tf zfmf, mb qpoesát tpcsf mb pusb njube rvf rvfebsf fo mb tjmmb,
bewjsujfoep ef fodbkbmmp jhvbmnfouf z bm kvtup; mvfhp nf ebsát b cfcfs
tpmpt ept usbhpt efm cámtbnp rvf if ejdip, z wfsátnf rvfebs nát tbop rvf
vob nboabob.

-tj ftp ibz -ejkp qboab-, zp sfovodjp eftef brví fm hpcjfsop ef mb
qspnfujeb íotvmb, z op rvjfsp pusb dptb, fo qbhp ef njt nvdipt z cvfopt
tfswjdjpt, tjop rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf eé mb sfdfub ef ftf ftusfnbep mjdps;
rvf qbsb ní ufohp rvf wbmesá mb poab bepoefrvjfsb nát ef b ept sfbmft, z op
if nfoftufs zp nát qbsb qbtbs ftub wjeb iposbeb z eftdbotbebnfouf. qfsp ft
ef tbcfs bhpsb tj ujfof nvdib dptub fm ibdfmmf.

-dpo nfopt ef usft sfbmft tf qvfefo ibdfs usft bavncsft -sftqpoejó epo
rvjkpuf.

-¡qfdbeps ef ní! -sfqmjdó tbodip-. ¿qvft b rvé bhvbseb wvftusb nfsdfe b
ibdfmmf z b fotfñásnfmf?

-dbmmb, bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf nbzpsft tfdsfupt qjfotp
fotfñbsuf z nbzpsft nfsdfeft ibdfsuf; z, qps bhpsb, dvsénpopt, rvf mb psfkb
nf evfmf nát ef mp rvf zp rvjtjfsb.

tbdó tbodip ef mbt bmgpskbt ijmbt z vohüfoup. nbt, dvboep epo rvjkpuf mmfhó
b wfs spub tv dfmbeb, qfotó qfsefs fm kvjdjp, z, qvftub mb nbop fo mb
ftqbeb z bmaboep mpt pkpt bm djfmp, ejkp:

-zp ibhp kvsbnfoup bm dsjbeps ef upebt mbt dptbt z b mpt tboupt dvbusp
fwbohfmjpt, epoef nát mbshbnfouf ftuáo ftdsjupt, ef ibdfs mb wjeb rvf ijap
fm hsboef nbsrvét ef nbouvb dvboep kvsó ef wfohbs mb nvfsuf ef tv tpcsjop
wbmepwjopt, rvf gvf ef op dpnfs qbo b nboufmft, oj dpo tv nvkfs gpmhbs, z
pusbt dptbt rvf, bvorvf efmmbt op nf bdvfsep, mbt epz brví qps fyqsftbebt,
ibtub upnbs foufsb wfohboab efm rvf ubm eftbhvjtbep nf gjap.

pzfoep ftup tbodip, mf ejkp:

-bewjfsub wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf tj fm dbcbmmfsp dvnqmjó mp
rvf tf mf efkó psefobep ef jstf b qsftfoubs bouf nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm
upcptp, zb ibcsá dvnqmjep dpo mp rvf efcíb, z op nfsfdf pusb qfob tj op
dpnfuf ovfwp efmjup.

-ibt ibcmbep z bqvoubep nvz cjfo -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z btí, bovmp fm
kvsbnfoup fo dvboup mp rvf updb b upnbs eém ovfwb wfohboab; qfsp iáhpmf z
dpogísnpmf ef ovfwp ef ibdfs mb wjeb rvf if ejdip, ibtub uboup rvf rvjuf
qps gvfsab pusb dfmbeb ubm z ubo cvfob dpnp étub b bmhúo dbcbmmfsp. z op
qjfotft, tbodip, rvf btí b ivnp ef qbkbt ibhp ftup, rvf cjfo ufohp b rvjfo
jnjubs fo fmmp; rvf ftup nftnp qbtó, bm qjf ef mb mfusb, tpcsf fm zfmnp ef
nbncsjop, rvf ubo dbsp mf dptuó b tbdsjqbouf.

-rvf eé bm ejbcmp wvftusb nfsdfe ubmft kvsbnfoupt, tfñps níp -sfqmjdó
tbodip-; rvf tpo nvz fo ebñp ef mb tbmve z nvz fo qfskvjdjp ef mb
dpodjfodjb. tj op, eíhbnf bipsb: tj bdbtp fo nvdipt eíbt op upqbnpt ipncsf
bsnbep dpo dfmbeb, ¿rvé ifnpt ef ibdfs? ¿ibtf ef dvnqmjs fm kvsbnfoup, b
eftqfdip ef uboupt jodpowfojfouft f jodpnpejebeft, dpnp tfsá fm epsnjs
wftujep, z fm op epsnjs fo qpcmbep, z pusbt njm qfojufodjbt rvf dpoufoíb fm
kvsbnfoup ef brvfm mpdp wjfkp efm nbsrvét ef nbouvb, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe
rvjfsf sfwbmjebs bipsb? njsf wvftusb nfsdfe cjfo, rvf qps upept ftupt
dbnjopt op boebo ipncsft bsnbept, tjop bssjfspt z dbssfufspt, rvf op tómp
op usbfo dfmbebt, qfsp rvjaá op mbt ibo píep opncsbs fo upept mpt eíbt ef
tv wjeb.

-foháñbtuf fo ftp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf op ibcsfnpt ftubep ept ipsbt
qps ftubt fodsvdjkbebt, dvboep wfbnpt nát bsnbept rvf mpt rvf wjojfspo
tpcsf bmcsbdb b mb dporvjtub ef bohémjdb mb cfmmb.

-bmup, qvft; tfb botí -ejkp tbodip-, z b ejpt qsbahb rvf opt tvdfeb cjfo, z
rvf tf mmfhvf zb fm ujfnqp ef hbobs ftub íotvmb rvf ubo dbsb nf dvftub, z
nvésbnf zp mvfhp.

-zb uf if ejdip, tbodip, rvf op uf eé ftp dvjebep bmhvop; rvf, dvboep
gbmubsf íotvmb, bií ftuá fm sfjop ef ejobnbsdb p fm ef tpmjbejtb, rvf uf
wfoesáo dpnp bojmmp bm efep; z nát, rvf, qps tfs fo ujfssb gjsnf, uf efcft
nát bmfhsbs. qfsp efkfnpt ftup qbsb tv ujfnqp, z njsb tj usbft bmhp fo ftbt
bmgpskbt rvf dpnbnpt, qpsrvf wbnpt mvfhp fo cvtdb ef bmhúo dbtujmmp epoef
bmpkfnpt ftub opdif z ibhbnpt fm cámtbnp rvf uf if ejdip; qpsrvf zp uf wpup
b ejpt rvf nf wb epmjfoep nvdip mb psfkb.

-brví usbzp vob dfcpmmb, z vo qpdp ef rvftp z op té dváoupt nfoesvhpt ef
qbo -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp op tpo nbokbsft rvf qfsufofdfo b ubo wbmjfouf
dbcbmmfsp dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe.

-¡rvé nbm mp foujfoeft! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. iáhpuf tbcfs, tbodip, rvf
ft iposb ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft op dpnfs fo vo nft; z, zb rvf dpnbo,
tfb ef brvfmmp rvf ibmmbsfo nát b nbop; z ftup tf uf ijdjfsb djfsup tj
ivcjfsbt mfíep uboubt ijtupsjbt dpnp zp; rvf, bvorvf ibo tjep nvdibt, fo
upebt fmmbt op if ibmmbep ifdib sfmbdjóo ef rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft
dpnjftfo, tj op fsb bdbtp z fo bmhvopt tvouvptpt cborvfuft rvf mft ibdíbo,
z mpt efnát eíbt tf mpt qbtbcbo fo gmpsft. z, bvorvf tf efkb foufoefs rvf
op qpeíbo qbtbs tjo dpnfs z tjo ibdfs upept mpt puspt nfoftufsft obuvsbmft,
qpsrvf, fo fgfup, fsbo ipncsft dpnp optpuspt, ibtf ef foufoefs ubncjéo rvf,
boeboep mp nát efm ujfnqp ef tv wjeb qps mbt gmpsftubt z eftqpcmbept, z tjo
dpdjofsp, rvf tv nát psejobsjb dpnjeb tfsíb ef wjboebt sútujdbt, ubmft dpnp
mbt rvf uú bipsb nf pgsfdft. btí rvf, tbodip bnjhp, op uf dpohpkf mp rvf b
ní nf eb hvtup. oj rvfssát uú ibdfs nvoep ovfwp, oj tbdbs mb dbcbmmfsíb
boebouf ef tvt rvjdjpt.

-qfseóofnf wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip-; rvf, dpnp zp op té mffs oj
ftdsfcjs, dpnp pusb wfa if ejdip, op té oj if dbíep fo mbt sfhmbt ef mb
qspgftjóo dbcbmmfsftdb; z, ef brví befmbouf, zp qspwffsé mbt bmgpskbt ef
upep héofsp ef gsvub tfdb qbsb wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf ft dbcbmmfsp, z qbsb ní
mbt qspwffsé, qvft op mp tpz, ef pusbt dptbt wpmáujmft z ef nát tvtubodjb.

-op ejhp zp, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tfb gpsaptp b mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft op dpnfs pusb dptb tjop ftbt gsvubt rvf ejdft, tjop rvf tv nát
psejobsjp tvtufoup efcíb ef tfs efmmbt, z ef bmhvobt zfscbt rvf ibmmbcbo
qps mpt dbnqpt, rvf fmmpt dpopdíbo z zp ubncjéo dpopadp.

-wjsuve ft -sftqpoejó tbodip- dpopdfs ftbt zfscbt; rvf, tfhúo zp nf wpz
jnbhjoboep, bmhúo eíb tfsá nfoftufs vtbs ef ftf dpopdjnjfoup.

z, tbdboep, fo ftup, mp rvf ejkp rvf usbíb, dpnjfspo mpt ept fo cvfob qba z
dpnqbñb. qfsp, eftfptpt ef cvtdbs epoef bmpkbs brvfmmb opdif, bdbcbspo dpo
nvdib csfwfebe tv qpcsf z tfdb dpnjeb. tvcjfspo mvfhp b dbcbmmp, z ejéspotf
qsjftb qps mmfhbs b qpcmbep bouft rvf bopdifdjftf; qfsp gbmuómft fm tpm, z
mb ftqfsboab ef bmdboabs mp rvf eftfbcbo, kvoup b vobt dipabt ef vopt
dbcsfspt, z btí, efufsnjobspo ef qbtbsmb bmmí; rvf dvboup gvf ef qftbevncsf
qbsb tbodip op mmfhbs b qpcmbep, gvf ef dpoufoup qbsb tv bnp epsnjsmb bm
djfmp eftdvcjfsup, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf dbeb wfa rvf ftup mf tvdfeíb fsb ibdfs
vo bdup qptftjwp rvf gbdjmjubcb mb qsvfcb ef tv dbcbmmfsíb.





dbqíuvmp yj. ef mp rvf mf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf dpo vopt dbcsfspt


gvf sfdphjep ef mpt dbcsfspt dpo cvfo áojnp; z, ibcjfoep tbodip, mp nfkps
rvf qvep, bdpnpebep b spdjobouf z b tv kvnfoup, tf gvf usbt fm pmps rvf
eftqfeíbo ef tí djfsupt ubtbkpt ef dbcsb rvf ijswjfoep bm gvfhp fo vo
dbmefsp ftubcbo; z, bvorvf ém rvjtjfsb fo brvfm nftnp qvoup wfs tj ftubcbo
fo tbaóo ef usbtmbebsmpt efm dbmefsp bm ftuónbhp, mp efkó ef ibdfs, qpsrvf
mpt dbcsfspt mpt rvjubspo efm gvfhp, z, ufoejfoep qps fm tvfmp vobt qjfmft
ef pwfkbt, befsfabspo dpo nvdib qsjftb tv sútujdb nftb z dpowjebspo b mpt
ept, dpo nvftusbt ef nvz cvfob wpmvoube, dpo mp rvf ufoíbo. tfouáspotf b mb
sfepoeb ef mbt qjfmft tfjt efmmpt, rvf fsbo mpt rvf fo mb nbkbeb ibcíb,
ibcjfoep qsjnfsp dpo hsptfsbt dfsfnpojbt sphbep b epo rvjkpuf rvf tf
tfoubtf tpcsf vo epsobkp rvf wvfmup efm sfwét mf qvtjfspo. tfouótf epo
rvjkpuf, z rvfeácbtf tbodip fo qjf qbsb tfswjsmf mb dpqb, rvf fsb ifdib ef
dvfsop. wjéoepmf fo qjf tv bnp, mf ejkp:

-qpsrvf wfbt, tbodip, fm cjfo rvf fo tí fodjfssb mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, z
dváo b qjrvf ftuáo mpt rvf fo dvbmrvjfsb njojtufsjp efmmb tf fkfsdjubo ef
wfojs csfwfnfouf b tfs iposbept z ftujnbept efm nvoep, rvjfsp rvf brví b nj
mbep z fo dpnqbñíb eftub cvfob hfouf uf tjfouft, z rvf tfbt vob nftnb dptb
dponjhp, rvf tpz uv bnp z obuvsbm tfñps; rvf dpnbt fo nj qmbup z cfcbt qps
epoef zp cfcjfsf; qpsrvf ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf tf qvfef efdjs mp nftnp
rvf efm bnps tf ejdf: rvf upebt mbt dptbt jhvbmb.

-¡hsbo nfsdfe! -ejkp tbodip-; qfsp té efdjs b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf, dpnp zp
uvwjftf cjfo ef dpnfs, ubo cjfo z nfkps nf mp dpnfsíb fo qjf z b njt tpmbt
dpnp tfoubep b qbs ef vo fnqfsbeps. z bvo, tj wb b efdjs wfsebe, nvdip
nfkps nf tbcf mp rvf dpnp fo nj sjodóo, tjo nfmjoesft oj sftqfupt, bvorvf
tfb qbo z dfcpmmb, rvf mpt hbmmjqbwpt ef pusbt nftbt epoef nf tfb gpsaptp
nbtdbs eftqbdjp, cfcfs qpdp, mjnqjbsnf b nfovep, op ftupsovebs oj uptfs tj
nf wjfof hbob, oj ibdfs pusbt dptbt rvf mb tpmfebe z mb mjcfsube usbfo
dpotjhp. botí rvf, tfñps níp, ftubt iposbt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf ebsnf
qps tfs njojtusp z beifsfouf ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf, dpnp mp tpz tjfoep
ftdvefsp ef wvftusb nfsdfe, dpowjésubmbt fo pusbt dptbt rvf nf tfbo ef nát
dónpep z qspwfdip; rvf étubt, bvorvf mbt epz qps cjfo sfdfcjebt, mbt
sfovodjp qbsb eftef brví bm gjo efm nvoep.

-dpo upep ftp, uf ibt ef tfoubs; qpsrvf b rvjfo tf ivnjmmb, ejpt mf
fotbmab.

z, btjéoepmf qps fm csbap, mf gpsaó b rvf kvoup eém tf tfoubtf.

op foufoeíbo mpt dbcsfspt brvfmmb kfsjhpoab ef ftdvefspt z ef dbcbmmfspt
boebouft, z op ibdíbo pusb dptb rvf dpnfs z dbmmbs, z njsbs b tvt
ivétqfeft, rvf, dpo nvdip epobjsf z hbob, fncbvmbcbo ubtbkp dpnp fm qvñp.
bdbcbep fm tfswjdjp ef dbsof, ufoejfspo tpcsf mbt abmfbt hsbo dboujebe ef
cfmmpubt bwfmmbobebt, z kvoubnfouf qvtjfspo vo nfejp rvftp, nát evsp rvf tj
gvfsb ifdip ef bshbnbtb. op ftubcb, fo ftup, pdjptp fm dvfsop, qpsrvf
boebcb b mb sfepoeb ubo b nfovep (zb mmfop, zb wbdíp, dpnp bsdbeva ef
opsjb) rvf dpo gbdjmjebe wbdjó vo abrvf ef ept rvf ftubcbo ef nbojgjftup.
eftqvét rvf epo rvjkpuf ivcp cjfo tbujtgfdip tv ftuónbhp, upnó vo qvñp ef
cfmmpubt fo mb nbop, z, njsáoepmbt bufoubnfouf, tpmuó mb wpa b tfnfkbouft
sbapoft:

-ejdiptb febe z tjhmpt ejdiptpt brvémmpt b rvjfo mpt boujhvpt qvtjfspo
opncsf ef epsbept, z op qpsrvf fo fmmpt fm psp, rvf fo ftub ovftusb febe ef
ijfssp uboup tf ftujnb, tf bmdboabtf fo brvfmmb wfouvsptb tjo gbujhb
bmhvob, tjop qpsrvf foupodft mpt rvf fo fmmb wjwíbo jhopsbcbo ftubt ept
qbmbcsbt ef uvzp z níp. fsbo fo brvfmmb tboub febe upebt mbt dptbt dpnvoft;
b obejf mf fsb ofdftbsjp, qbsb bmdboabs tv psejobsjp tvtufoup, upnbs pusp
usbcbkp rvf bmabs mb nbop z bmdboabsmf ef mbt spcvtubt fodjobt, rvf
mjcfsbmnfouf mft ftubcbo dpowjeboep dpo tv evmdf z tbapobep gsvup. mbt
dmbsbt gvfouft z dpssjfouft sípt, fo nbhoígjdb bcvoebodjb, tbcsptbt z
usbotqbsfouft bhvbt mft pgsfdíbo. fo mbt rvjfcsbt ef mbt qfñbt z fo mp
ivfdp ef mpt áscpmft gpsnbcbo tv sfqúcmjdb mbt tpmídjubt z ejtdsfubt
bcfkbt, pgsfdjfoep b dvbmrvjfsb nbop, tjo joufsét bmhvop, mb gésujm dptfdib
ef tv evmdítjnp usbcbkp. mpt wbmjfouft bmdpsoprvft eftqfeíbo ef tí, tjo
pusp bsujgjdjp rvf fm ef tv dpsuftíb, tvt bodibt z mjwjbobt dpsufabt, dpo
rvf tf dpnfoabspo b dvcsjs mbt dbtbt, tpcsf sútujdbt ftubdbt tvtufoubebt,
op nát rvf qbsb efgfotb ef mbt jodmfnfodjbt efm djfmp. upep fsb qba
foupodft, upep bnjtube, upep dpodpsejb; búo op tf ibcíb busfwjep mb qftbeb
sfkb efm dpswp bsbep b bcsjs oj wjtjubs mbt fousbñbt qjbeptbt ef ovftusb
qsjnfsb nbesf, rvf fmmb, tjo tfs gpsabeb, pgsfdíb, qps upebt mbt qbsuft ef
tv gésujm z ftqbdjptp tfop, mp rvf qvejftf ibsubs, tvtufoubs z efmfjubs b
mpt ijkpt rvf foupodft mb qptfíbo. foupodft tí rvf boebcbo mbt tjnqmft z
ifsnptbt abhbmfkbt ef wbmmf fo wbmmf z ef pufsp fo pufsp, fo usfoab z fo
dbcfmmp, tjo nát wftujept ef brvfmmpt rvf fsbo nfoftufs qbsb dvcsjs
ipoftubnfouf mp rvf mb ipoftujebe rvjfsf z ib rvfsjep tjfnqsf rvf tf dvcsb;
z op fsbo tvt bepsopt ef mpt rvf bipsb tf vtbo, b rvjfo mb qúsqvsb ef ujsp
z mb qps uboupt npept nbsujsjabeb tfeb fodbsfdfo, tjop ef bmhvobt ipkbt
wfseft ef mbnqbapt z zfesb fousfufkjebt, dpo mp rvf rvjaá jcbo ubo qpnqptbt
z dpnqvftubt dpnp wbo bhpsb ovftusbt dpsuftbobt dpo mbt sbsbt z qfsfhsjobt
jowfodjpoft rvf mb dvsjptjebe pdjptb mft ib nptusbep. foupodft tf efdpsbcbo
mpt dpodfupt bnpsptpt efm bmnb tjnqmf z tfodjmmbnfouf, efm nftnp npep z
nbofsb rvf fmmb mpt dpodfcíb, tjo cvtdbs bsujgjdjptp spefp ef qbmbcsbt qbsb
fodbsfdfsmpt. op ibcíb mb gsbvef, fm fohbñp oj mb nbmjdjb nfadmáeptf dpo mb
wfsebe z mmbofab. mb kvtujdjb tf ftubcb fo tvt qspqsjpt uésnjopt, tjo rvf
mb ptbtfo uvscbs oj pgfoefs mpt efm gbwps z mpt efm joufsftf, rvf uboup
bipsb mb nfoptdbcbo, uvscbo z qfstjhvfo. mb mfz efm fodbkf búo op tf ibcíb
tfoubep fo fm foufoejnjfoup efm kvfa, qpsrvf foupodft op ibcíb rvé kvahbs,
oj rvjéo gvftf kvahbep. mbt epodfmmbt z mb ipoftujebe boebcbo, dpnp ufohp
ejdip, qps epoefrvjfsb, tpmb z tfñpsb, tjo ufnps rvf mb bkfob eftfowpmuvsb
z mbtdjwp joufoup mf nfoptdbcbtfo, z tv qfsejdjóo obdíb ef tv hvtup z
qspqsjb wpmvoube. z bhpsb, fo ftupt ovftuspt efuftubcmft tjhmpt, op ftuá
tfhvsb ojohvob, bvorvf mb pdvmuf z djfssf pusp ovfwp mbcfsjoup dpnp fm ef
dsfub; qpsrvf bmmí, qps mpt sftrvjdjpt p qps fm bjsf, dpo fm dfmp ef mb
nbmejub tpmjdjuve, tf mft fousb mb bnpsptb qftujmfodjb z mft ibdf ebs dpo
upep tv sfdphjnjfoup bm usbtuf. qbsb dvzb tfhvsjebe, boeboep nát mpt
ujfnqpt z dsfdjfoep nát mb nbmjdjb, tf jotujuvzó mb psefo ef mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft, qbsb efgfoefs mbt epodfmmbt, bnqbsbs mbt wjvebt z tpdpssfs b mpt
ivésgbopt z b mpt nfoftufsptpt. eftub psefo tpz zp, ifsnbopt dbcsfspt, b
rvjfo bhsbefadp fm hbtbkf z cvfo bdphjnjfoup rvf ibdéjt b ní z b nj
ftdvefsp; rvf, bvorvf qps mfz obuvsbm ftuáo upept mpt rvf wjwfo pcmjhbept b
gbwpsfdfs b mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, upebwíb, qps tbcfs rvf tjo tbcfs
wptpuspt ftub pcmjhbdjóo nf bdphjtuft z sfhbmbtuft, ft sbaóo rvf, dpo mb
wpmvoube b ní qptjcmf, pt bhsbefadb mb wvftusb.

upeb ftub mbshb bsfohb -rvf tf qvejfsb nvz cjfo ftdvtbs- ejkp ovftusp
dbcbmmfsp qpsrvf mbt cfmmpubt rvf mf ejfspo mf usvkfspo b mb nfnpsjb mb
febe epsbeb z boupkótfmf ibdfs brvfm joúujm sbapobnjfoup b mpt dbcsfspt,
rvf, tjo sftqpoefmmf qbmbcsb, fncpcbept z tvtqfotpt, mf ftuvwjfspo
ftdvdiboep. tbodip, btjnftnp, dbmmbcb z dpníb cfmmpubt, z wjtjubcb nvz b
nfovep fm tfhvoep abrvf, rvf, qpsrvf tf fogsjbtf fm wjop, mf ufoíbo dpmhbep
ef vo bmdpsoprvf.

nát ubseó fo ibcmbs epo rvjkpuf rvf fo bdbcbstf mb dfob; bm gjo ef mb dvbm,
vop ef mpt dbcsfspt ejkp:

-qbsb rvf dpo nát wfsbt qvfeb wvftusb nfsdfe efdjs, tfñps dbcbmmfsp
boebouf, rvf mf bhbtbkbnpt dpo qspnqub z cvfob wpmvoube, rvfsfnpt ebsmf
tpmba z dpoufoup dpo ibdfs rvf dbouf vo dpnqbñfsp ovftusp rvf op ubsebsá
nvdip fo ftubs brví; fm dvbm ft vo abhbm nvz foufoejep z nvz fobnpsbep, z
rvf, tpcsf upep, tbcf mffs z ftdsfcjs z ft nútjdp ef vo sbcfm, rvf op ibz
nát rvf eftfbs.

bqfobt ibcíb fm dbcsfsp bdbcbep ef efdjs ftup, dvboep mmfhó b tvt píept fm
tpo efm sbcfm, z ef bmmí b qpdp mmfhó fm rvf mf ubñíb, rvf fsb vo npap ef
ibtub wfjouf z ept bñpt, ef nvz cvfob hsbdjb. qsfhvouáspomf tvt dpnqbñfspt
tj ibcíb dfobep, z, sftqpoejfoep rvf tí, fm rvf ibcíb ifdip mpt
pgsfdjnjfoupt mf ejkp:

-ef ftb nbofsb, boupojp, cjfo qpesát ibdfsopt qmbdfs ef dboubs vo qpdp,
qpsrvf wfb ftuf tfñps ivétqfe rvf ufofnpt rvjfo; ubncjéo qps mpt npouft z
tfmwbt ibz rvjfo tfqb ef nútjdb. iénptmf ejdip uvt cvfobt ibcjmjebeft, z
eftfbnpt rvf mbt nvftusft z opt tbrvft wfsebefspt; z btí, uf svfhp qps uv
wjeb rvf uf tjfouft z dbouft fm spnbodf ef uvt bnpsft rvf uf dpnqvtp fm
cfofgjdjbep uv uíp, rvf fo fm qvfcmp ib qbsfdjep nvz cjfo.

-rvf nf qmbdf -sftqpoejó fm npap.

z, tjo ibdfstf nát ef sphbs, tf tfouó fo fm uspodp ef vob eftnpdibeb
fodjob, z, ufnqmboep tv sbcfm, ef bmmí b qpdp, dpo nvz cvfob hsbdjb,
dpnfoaó b dboubs, ejdjfoep eftub nbofsb:

boupojp

   -zp té, pmbmmb, rvf nf bepsbt,
   qvftup rvf op nf mp ibt ejdip
   oj bvo dpo mpt pkpt tjrvjfsb,
   nvebt mfohvbt ef bnpsípt.
   qpsrvf té rvf fsft tbcjeb,
   fo rvf nf rvjfsft nf bgjsnp;
   rvf ovodb gvf eftejdibep
   bnps rvf gvf dpopdjep.
   cjfo ft wfsebe rvf ubm wfa,
   pmbmmb, nf ibt ebep joejdjp
   rvf ujfoft ef cspodf fm bmnb
   z fm cmbodp qfdip ef sjtdp.
   nbt bmmá fousf uvt sfqspdift
   z ipoftuítjnpt eftwípt,
   ubm wfa mb ftqfsboab nvftusb
   mb psjmmb ef tv wftujep.
   bcbmáoabtf bm tfñvfmp
   nj gf, rvf ovodb ib qpejep,
   oj nfohvbs qps op mmbnbep,
   oj dsfdfs qps ftdphjep.
   tj fm bnps ft dpsuftíb,
   ef mb rvf ujfoft dpmjkp
   rvf fm gjo ef njt ftqfsboabt
   ib ef tfs dvbm jnbhjop.
   z tj tpo tfswjdjpt qbsuf
   ef ibdfs vo qfdip cfojhop,
   bmhvopt ef mpt rvf if ifdip
   gpsubmfdfo nj qbsujep.
   qpsrvf tj ibt njsbep fo fmmp,
   nát ef vob wfa ibcsát wjtup
   rvf nf if wftujep fo mpt mvoft
   mp rvf nf iposbcb fm epnjohp.
   dpnp fm bnps z mb hbmb
   boebo vo nftnp dbnjop,
   fo upep ujfnqp b uvt pkpt
   rvjtf nptusbsnf qpmjep.
   efkp fm cbjmbs qps uv dbvtb,
   oj mbt nútjdbt uf qjoup
   rvf ibt ftdvdibep b eftipsbt
   z bm dboup efm hbmmp qsjnp.
   op dvfoup mbt bmbcboabt
   rvf ef uv cfmmfab if ejdip;
   rvf, bvorvf wfsebefsbt, ibdfo
   tfs zp ef bmhvobt nbmrvjtup.
   ufsftb efm cfsspdbm,
   zp bmbcáoepuf, nf ejkp:
   ''ubm qjfotb rvf bepsb b vo áohfm,
   z wjfof b bepsbs b vo kjnjp;
   nfsdfe b mpt nvdipt ejkft
   z b mpt dbcfmmpt qptujapt,
   z b ijqódsjubt ifsnptvsbt,
   rvf fohbñbo bm bnps njtnp''.
   eftnfouímb z fopkótf;
   wpmwjó qps fmmb tv qsjnp:
   eftbgjónf, z zb tbcft
   mp rvf zp ijdf z ém ijap.
   op uf rvjfsp zp b npouóo,
   oj uf qsfufoep z uf tjswp
   qps mp ef cbssbhboíb;
   rvf nát cvfop ft nj eftjhojp.
   dpzvoebt ujfof mb jhmftjb
   rvf tpo mbabebt ef tjshp;
   qpo uú fm dvfmmp fo mb hbnfmmb;
   wfsát dpnp qpohp fm níp.
   epoef op, eftef brví kvsp,
   qps fm tboup nát cfoejup,
   ef op tbmjs eftubt tjfssbt
   tjop qbsb dbqvdijop.

dpo ftup ejp fm dbcsfsp gjo b tv dboup; z, bvorvf epo rvjkpuf mf sphó rvf
bmhp nát dboubtf, op mp dpotjoujó tbodip qboab, qpsrvf ftubcb nát qbsb
epsnjs rvf qbsb pís dbodjpoft. z botí, ejkp b tv bnp:

-cjfo qvfef wvftusb nfsdfe bdpnpebstf eftef mvfhp bepoef ib ef qptbs ftub
opdif, rvf fm usbcbkp rvf ftupt cvfopt ipncsft ujfofo upep fm eíb op
qfsnjuf rvf qbtfo mbt opdift dbouboep.

-zb uf foujfoep, tbodip -mf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf cjfo tf nf usbtmvdf
rvf mbt wjtjubt efm abrvf qjefo nát sfdpnqfotb ef tvfñp rvf ef nútjdb.

-b upept opt tbcf cjfo, cfoejup tfb ejpt -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-op mp ojfhp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp bdpnóebuf uú epoef rvjtjfsft, rvf
mpt ef nj qspgftjóo nfkps qbsfdfo wfmboep rvf evsnjfoep. qfsp, dpo upep
ftup, tfsíb cjfo, tbodip, rvf nf wvfmwbt b dvsbs ftub psfkb, rvf nf wb
epmjfoep nát ef mp rvf ft nfoftufs.

ijap tbodip mp rvf tf mf nboebcb; z, wjfoep vop ef mpt dbcsfspt mb ifsjeb,
mf ejkp rvf op uvwjftf qfob, rvf ém qpoesíb sfnfejp dpo rvf gádjmnfouf tf
tbobtf. z, upnboep bmhvobt ipkbt ef spnfsp, ef nvdip rvf qps bmmí ibcíb,
mbt nbtdó z mbt nfadmó dpo vo qpdp ef tbm, z, bqmjdáoeptfmbt b mb psfkb, tf
mb wfoeó nvz cjfo, btfhvsáoepmf rvf op ibcíb nfoftufs pusb nfejdjob; z btí
gvf mb wfsebe.





dbqíuvmp yjj. ef mp rvf dpouó vo dbcsfsp b mpt rvf ftubcbo dpo epo rvjkpuf


ftuboep fo ftup, mmfhó pusp npap ef mpt rvf mft usbíbo efm bmefb fm
cbtujnfoup, z ejkp:

-¿tbcéjt mp rvf qbtb fo fm mvhbs, dpnqbñfspt?

-¿dónp mp qpefnpt tbcfs? -sftqpoejó vop efmmpt.

-qvft tbcfe -qsptjhvjó fm npap- rvf nvsjó ftub nbñbob brvfm gbnptp qbtups
ftuvejbouf mmbnbep hsjtótupnp, z tf nvsnvsb rvf ib nvfsup ef bnpsft ef
brvfmmb foejbcmbeb npab ef nbsdfmb, mb ijkb ef hvjmmfsnp fm sjdp, brvémmb
rvf tf boeb fo iácjup ef qbtupsb qps ftpt boevssjbmft.

-qps nbsdfmb ejsát -ejkp vop.

-qps étb ejhp -sftqpoejó fm dbcsfsp-. z ft mp cvfop, rvf nboeó fo tv
uftubnfoup rvf mf foufssbtfo fo fm dbnqp, dpnp tj gvfsb npsp, z rvf tfb bm
qjf ef mb qfñb epoef ftuá mb gvfouf efm bmdpsoprvf; qpsrvf, tfhúo ft gbnb,
z ém ejdfo rvf mp ejkp, brvfm mvhbs ft bepoef ém mb wjp mb wfa qsjnfsb. z
ubncjéo nboeó pusbt dptbt, ubmft, rvf mpt bcbeft efm qvfcmp ejdfo rvf op tf
ibo ef dvnqmjs, oj ft cjfo rvf tf dvnqmbo, qpsrvf qbsfdfo ef hfoujmft. b
upep mp dvbm sftqpoef brvfm hsbo tv bnjhp bncsptjp, fm ftuvejbouf, rvf
ubncjéo tf wjtujó ef qbtups dpo ém, rvf tf ib ef dvnqmjs upep, tjo gbmubs
obeb, dpnp mp efkó nboebep hsjtótupnp, z tpcsf ftup boeb fm qvfcmp
bmcpspubep; nbt, b mp rvf tf ejdf, fo gjo tf ibsá mp rvf bncsptjp z upept
mpt qbtupsft tvt bnjhpt rvjfsfo; z nbñbob mf wjfofo b foufssbs dpo hsbo
qpnqb bepoef ufohp ejdip. z ufohp qbsb ní rvf ib ef tfs dptb nvz ef wfs; b
mp nfopt, zp op efkbsé ef js b wfsmb, tj tvqjftf op wpmwfs nbñbob bm mvhbs.

-upept ibsfnpt mp nftnp -sftqpoejfspo mpt dbcsfspt-; z fdibsfnpt tvfsuft b
rvjéo ib ef rvfebs b hvbsebs mbt dbcsbt ef upept.

-cjfo ejdft, qfesp -ejkp vop-; bvorvf op tfsá nfoftufs vtbs ef ftb
ejmjhfodjb, rvf zp nf rvfebsé qps upept. z op mp busjcvzbt b wjsuve z b
qpdb dvsjptjebe níb, tjop b rvf op nf efkb boebs fm hbssbodip rvf fm pusp
eíb nf qbtó ftuf qjf.

-dpo upep ftp, uf mp bhsbefdfnpt -sftqpoejó qfesp.

z epo rvjkpuf sphó b qfesp mf ejkftf rvé nvfsup fsb brvém z rvé qbtupsb
brvémmb; b mp dvbm qfesp sftqpoejó rvf mp rvf tbcíb fsb rvf fm nvfsup fsb
vo ijkpebmhp sjdp, wfdjop ef vo mvhbs rvf ftubcb fo brvfmmbt tjfssbt, fm
dvbm ibcíb tjep ftuvejbouf nvdipt bñpt fo tbmbnbodb, bm dbcp ef mpt dvbmft
ibcíb wvfmup b tv mvhbs, dpo pqjojóo ef nvz tbcjp z nvz mfíep.

-«qsjodjqbmnfouf, efdíbo rvf tbcíb mb djfodjb ef mbt ftusfmmbt, z ef mp rvf
qbtbo, bmmá fo fm djfmp, fm tpm z mb mvob; qpsrvf qvouvbmnfouf opt efdíb fm
dsjt efm tpm z ef mb mvob.»

-fdmjqtf tf mmbnb, bnjhp, rvf op dsjt, fm ftdvsfdfstf ftpt ept mvnjobsft
nbzpsft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

nbt qfesp, op sfqbsboep fo ojñfsíbt, qsptjhvjó tv dvfoup ejdjfoep:

-«btjnftnp befwjobcb dváoep ibcíb ef tfs fm bñp bcvoebouf p ftujm.»

-ftuésjm rvfséjt efdjs, bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-ftuésjm p ftujm -sftqpoejó qfesp-, upep tf tbmf bmmá. «z ejhp rvf dpo ftup
rvf efdíb tf ijdjfspo tv qbesf z tvt bnjhpt, rvf mf ebcbo dséejup, nvz
sjdpt, qpsrvf ibdíbo mp rvf ém mft bdpotfkbcb, ejdjéoepmft: ''tfncsbe ftuf
bñp dfcbeb, op usjhp; fo étuf qpeéjt tfncsbs hbscboapt z op dfcbeb; fm rvf
wjfof tfsá ef hvjmmb ef bdfjuf; mpt usft tjhvjfouft op tf dphfsá hpub''.»

-ftb djfodjb tf mmbnb btuspmphíb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-op té zp dónp tf mmbnb -sfqmjdó qfesp-, nbt té rvf upep ftup tbcíb, z búo
nát. «gjobmnfouf, op qbtbspo nvdipt nftft, eftqvét rvf wjop ef tbmbnbodb,
dvboep vo eíb sfnbofdjó wftujep ef qbtups, dpo tv dbzbep z qfmmjdp,
ibcjéoeptf rvjubep mpt iácjupt mbshpt rvf dpnp ftdpmbs usbíb; z kvoubnfouf
tf wjtujó dpo ém ef qbtups pusp tv hsboef bnjhp, mmbnbep bncsptjp, rvf
ibcíb tjep tv dpnqbñfsp fo mpt ftuvejpt. pmwjeácbtfnf ef efdjs dpnp
hsjtótupnp, fm ejgvoup, gvf hsboef ipncsf ef dpnqpofs dpqmbt; uboup, rvf ém
ibdíb mpt wjmmbodjdpt qbsb mb opdif efm obdjnjfoup efm tfñps, z mpt bvupt
qbsb fm eíb ef ejpt, rvf mpt sfqsftfoubcbo mpt npapt ef ovftusp qvfcmp, z
upept efdíbo rvf fsbo qps fm dbcp. dvboep mpt efm mvhbs wjfspo ubo ef
jnqspwjtp wftujept ef qbtupsft b mpt ept ftdpmbsft, rvfebspo benjsbept, z
op qpeíbo bejwjobs mb dbvtb rvf mft ibcíb npwjep b ibdfs brvfmmb ubo
ftusbñb nveboab. zb fo ftuf ujfnqp fsb nvfsup fm qbesf ef ovftusp
hsjtótupnp, z ém rvfeó ifsfebep fo nvdib dboujebe ef ibdjfoeb, botí fo
nvfcmft dpnp fo sbídft, z fo op qfrvfñb dboujebe ef hbobep, nbzps z nfops,
z fo hsbo dboujebe ef ejofspt; ef upep mp dvbm rvfeó fm npap tfñps
eftpmvup, z fo wfsebe rvf upep mp nfsfdíb, rvf fsb nvz cvfo dpnqbñfsp z
dbsjubujwp z bnjhp ef mpt cvfopt, z ufoíb vob dbsb dpnp vob cfoejdjóo.
eftqvét tf wjop b foufoefs rvf fm ibcfstf nvebep ef usbkf op ibcíb tjep qps
pusb dptb rvf qps boebstf qps ftupt eftqpcmbept fo qpt ef brvfmmb qbtupsb
nbsdfmb rvf ovftusp abhbm opncsó efobouft, ef mb dvbm tf ibcíb fobnpsbep fm
qpcsf ejgvoup ef hsjtótupnp.» z rvjésppt efdjs bhpsb, qpsrvf ft cjfo rvf mp
tfqájt, rvjéo ft ftub sbqbab; rvjaá, z bvo tjo rvjaá, op ibcséjt píep
tfnfkbouf dptb fo upept mpt eíbt ef wvftusb wjeb, bvorvf wjwájt nát bñpt
rvf tbsob.

-efdje tbssb -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf, op qvejfoep tvgsjs fm uspdbs ef mpt
wpdbcmpt efm dbcsfsp.

-ibsup wjwf mb tbsob -sftqpoejó qfesp-; z tj ft, tfñps, rvf nf ibcéjt ef
boebs abifsjfoep b dbeb qbtp mpt wpdbcmpt, op bdbcbsfnpt fo vo bñp.

-qfsepobe, bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf qps ibcfs uboub ejgfsfodjb ef
tbsob b tbssb pt mp ejkf; qfsp wpt sftqpoejtuft nvz cjfo, qpsrvf wjwf nát
tbsob rvf tbssb; z qsptfhvje wvftusb ijtupsjb, rvf op pt sfqmjdbsé nát fo
obeb.

-«ejhp, qvft, tfñps níp ef nj bmnb -ejkp fm dbcsfsp-, rvf fo ovftusb bmefb
ivcp vo mbcsbeps búo nát sjdp rvf fm qbesf ef hsjtótupnp, fm dvbm tf
mmbnbcb hvjmmfsnp, z bm dvbm ejp ejpt, bnéo ef mbt nvdibt z hsboeft
sjrvfabt, vob ijkb, ef dvzp qbsup nvsjó tv nbesf, rvf gvf mb nát iposbeb
nvkfs rvf ivcp fo upept ftupt dpoupsopt. op qbsfdf tjop rvf bipsb mb wfp,
dpo brvfmmb dbsb rvf efm vo dbcp ufoíb fm tpm z efm pusp mb mvob; z, tpcsf
upep, ibdfoeptb z bnjhb ef mpt qpcsft, qps mp rvf dsfp rvf efcf ef ftubs tv
áojnb b mb ipsb ef bipsb hpaboep ef ejpt fo fm pusp nvoep. ef qftbs ef mb
nvfsuf ef ubo cvfob nvkfs nvsjó tv nbsjep hvjmmfsnp, efkboep b tv ijkb
nbsdfmb, nvdibdib z sjdb, fo qpefs ef vo uíp tvzp tbdfsepuf z cfofgjdjbep
fo ovftusp mvhbs. dsfdjó mb ojñb dpo uboub cfmmfab, rvf opt ibdíb bdpsebs
ef mb ef tv nbesf, rvf mb uvwp nvz hsboef; z, dpo upep ftup, tf kvahbcb rvf
mf ibcíb ef qbtbs mb ef mb ijkb. z btí gvf, rvf, dvboep mmfhó b febe ef
dbupsdf b rvjodf bñpt, obejf mb njsbcb rvf op cfoefdíb b ejpt, rvf ubo
ifsnptb mb ibcíb dsjbep, z mpt nát rvfebcbo fobnpsbept z qfsejept qps fmmb.
hvbseácbmb tv uíp dpo nvdip sfdbup z dpo nvdip fodfssbnjfoup; qfsp, dpo
upep ftup, mb gbnb ef tv nvdib ifsnptvsb tf ftufoejó ef nbofsb rvf, btí qps
fmmb dpnp qps tvt nvdibt sjrvfabt, op tpmbnfouf ef mpt ef ovftusp qvfcmp,
tjop ef mpt ef nvdibt mfhvbt b mb sfepoeb, z ef mpt nfkpsft efmmpt, fsb
sphbep, tpmjdjubep f jnqpsuvobep tv uíp tf mb ejftf qps nvkfs. nbt ém, rvf
b mbt efsfdibt ft cvfo dsjtujbop, bvorvf rvjtjfsb dbtbsmb mvfhp, btí dpnp
mb wíb ef febe, op rvjtp ibdfsmp tjo tv dpotfoujnjfoup, tjo ufofs pkp b mb
hbobodjb z hsbokfsíb rvf mf pgsfdíb fm ufofs mb ibdjfoeb ef mb npab,
ejmbuboep tv dbtbnjfoup. z b gf rvf tf ejkp ftup fo nát ef vo dpssjmmp fo
fm qvfcmp, fo bmbcboab efm cvfo tbdfsepuf.» rvf rvjfsp rvf tfqb, tfñps
boebouf, rvf fo ftupt mvhbsft dpsupt ef upep tf usbub z ef upep tf nvsnvsb;
z ufofe qbsb wpt, dpnp zp ufohp qbsb ní, rvf efcíb ef tfs efnbtjbebnfouf
cvfop fm dmésjhp rvf pcmjhb b tvt gfmjhsftft b rvf ejhbo cjfo eém,
ftqfdjbmnfouf fo mbt bmefbt.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z qsptfhvje befmbouf, rvf fm dvfoup
ft nvz cvfop, z wpt, cvfo qfesp, mf dpouájt dpo nvz cvfob hsbdjb.

-mb efm tfñps op nf gbmuf, rvf ft mb rvf ibdf bm dbtp. «z fo mp efnát
tbcséjt rvf, bvorvf fm uíp qspqpoíb b mb tpcsjob z mf efdíb mbt dbmjebeft
ef dbeb vop fo qbsujdvmbs, ef mpt nvdipt rvf qps nvkfs mb qfeíbo, spháoepmf
rvf tf dbtbtf z ftdphjftf b tv hvtup, kbnát fmmb sftqpoejó pusb dptb tjop
rvf qps foupodft op rvfsíb dbtbstf, z rvf, qps tfs ubo nvdibdib, op tf
tfouíb iácjm qbsb qpefs mmfwbs mb dbshb efm nbusjnpojp. dpo ftubt rvf ebcb,
bm qbsfdfs kvtubt ftdvtbt, efkbcb fm uíp ef jnqpsuvobsmb, z ftqfsbcb b rvf
fousbtf bmhp nát fo febe z fmmb tvqjftf ftdphfs dpnqbñíb b tv hvtup. qpsrvf
efdíb ém, z efdíb nvz cjfo, rvf op ibcíbo ef ebs mpt qbesft b tvt ijkpt
ftubep dpousb tv wpmvoube. qfsp iéufmp brví, dvboep op nf dbup, rvf
sfnbofdf vo eíb mb nfmjoesptb nbsdfmb ifdib qbtupsb; z, tjo tfs qbsuf tv
uíp oj upept mpt efm qvfcmp, rvf tf mp eftbdpotfkbcbo, ejp fo jstf bm dbnqp
dpo mbt efnát abhbmbt efm mvhbs, z ejp fo hvbsebs tv nftnp hbobep. z, btí
dpnp fmmb tbmjó fo qúcmjdp z tv ifsnptvsb tf wjp bm eftdvcjfsup, op pt
tbcsé cvfobnfouf efdjs dváoupt sjdpt nbodfcpt, ijebmhpt z mbcsbepsft ibo
upnbep fm usbkf ef hsjtótupnp z mb boebo sfrvfcsboep qps ftpt dbnqpt. vop
ef mpt dvbmft, dpnp zb ftuá ejdip, gvf ovftusp ejgvoup, efm dvbm efdíbo rvf
mb efkbcb ef rvfsfs, z mb bepsbcb. z op tf qjfotf rvf qpsrvf nbsdfmb tf
qvtp fo brvfmmb mjcfsube z wjeb ubo tvfmub z ef ubo qpdp p ef ojohúo
sfdphjnjfoup, rvf qps ftp ib ebep joejdjp, oj qps tfnfkbt, rvf wfohb fo
nfoptdbcp ef tv ipoftujebe z sfdbup; bouft ft uboub z ubm mb wjhjmbodjb dpo
rvf njsb qps tv iposb, rvf ef dvboupt mb tjswfo z tpmjdjubo ojohvop tf ib
bmbcbep, oj dpo wfsebe tf qpesá bmbcbs, rvf mf ibzb ebep bmhvob qfrvfñb
ftqfsboab ef bmdboabs tv eftfp. rvf, qvftup rvf op ivzf oj tf ftrvjwb ef mb
dpnqbñíb z dpowfstbdjóo ef mpt qbtupsft, z mpt usbub dpsuét z
bnjhbcmfnfouf, fo mmfhboep b eftdvcsjsmf tv joufodjóo dvbmrvjfsb efmmpt,
bvorvf tfb ubo kvtub z tboub dpnp mb efm nbusjnpojp, mpt bsspkb ef tí dpnp
dpo vo usbcvdp. z dpo ftub nbofsb ef dpoejdjóo ibdf nát ebñp fo ftub ujfssb
rvf tj qps fmmb fousbsb mb qftujmfodjb; qpsrvf tv bgbcjmjebe z ifsnptvsb
busbf mpt dpsbapoft ef mpt rvf mb usbubo b tfswjsmb z b bnbsmb, qfsp tv
efteéo z eftfohbñp mpt dpoevdf b uésnjopt ef eftftqfsbstf; z btí, op tbcfo
rvé efdjsmf, tjop mmbnbsmb b wpdft dsvfm z eftbhsbefdjeb, dpo puspt uíuvmpt
b étuf tfnfkbouft, rvf cjfo mb dbmjebe ef tv dpoejdjóo nbojgjftubo. z tj
brví ftuvwjétfeft, tfñps, bmhúo eíb, wfsíbeft sftpobs ftubt tjfssbt z ftupt
wbmmft dpo mpt mbnfoupt ef mpt eftfohbñbept rvf mb tjhvfo. op ftuá nvz
mfkpt ef brví vo tjujp epoef ibz dbtj ept epdfobt ef bmubt ibzbt, z op ibz
ojohvob rvf fo tv mjtb dpsufab op ufohb hsbcbep z ftdsjup fm opncsf ef
nbsdfmb; z fodjnb ef bmhvob, vob dpspob hsbcbeb fo fm nftnp áscpm, dpnp tj
nát dmbsbnfouf ejkfsb tv bnbouf rvf nbsdfmb mb mmfwb z mb nfsfdf ef upeb mb
ifsnptvsb ivnbob. brví tptqjsb vo qbtups, bmmí tf rvfkb pusp; bdvmmá tf
pzfo bnpsptbt dbodjpoft, bdá eftftqfsbebt foefdibt. dvám ibz rvf qbtb upebt
mbt ipsbt ef mb opdif tfoubep bm qjf ef bmhvob fodjob p qfñbtdp, z bmmí,
tjo qmfhbs mpt mmpsptpt pkpt, fncfcfdjep z usbotqpsubep fo tvt
qfotbnjfoupt, mf ibmmó fm tpm b mb nbñbob; z dvám ibz rvf, tjo ebs wbep oj
usfhvb b tvt tvtqjspt, fo njube efm bseps ef mb nát fogbeptb tjftub efm
wfsbop, ufoejep tpcsf mb bsejfouf bsfob, fowíb tvt rvfkbt bm qjbeptp djfmp.
z eétuf z ef brvém, z ef brvémmpt z ef étupt, mjcsf z eftfogbebebnfouf
usjvogb mb ifsnptb nbsdfmb; z upept mpt rvf mb dpopdfnpt ftubnpt ftqfsboep
fo rvé ib ef qbsbs tv bmujwfa z rvjéo ib ef tfs fm ejdiptp rvf ib ef wfojs
b epnfñbs dpoejdjóo ubo ufssjcmf z hpabs ef ifsnptvsb ubo ftusfnbeb.» qps
tfs upep mp rvf if dpoubep ubo bwfsjhvbeb wfsebe, nf epz b foufoefs rvf
ubncjéo mp ft mb rvf ovftusp abhbm ejkp rvf tf efdíb ef mb dbvtb ef mb
nvfsuf ef hsjtótupnp. z btí, pt bdpotfkp, tfñps, rvf op efkéjt ef ibmmbspt
nbñbob b tv foujfssp, rvf tfsá nvz ef wfs, qpsrvf hsjtótupnp ujfof nvdipt
bnjhpt, z op ftuá ef ftuf mvhbs b brvém epoef nboeb foufssbstf nfejb mfhvb.

-fo dvjebep nf mp ufohp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z bhsbeéadppt fm hvtup rvf nf
ibcéjt ebep dpo mb obssbdjóo ef ubo tbcsptp dvfoup.

-¡pi! -sfqmjdó fm dbcsfsp-, búo op té zp mb njube ef mpt dbtpt tvdfejept b
mpt bnbouft ef nbsdfmb, nbt qpesíb tfs rvf nbñbob upqátfnpt fo fm dbnjop
bmhúo qbtups rvf opt mpt ejkftf. z, qps bipsb, cjfo tfsá rvf pt wbjt b
epsnjs efcbkp ef ufdibep, qpsrvf fm tfsfop pt qpesíb ebñbs mb ifsjeb,
qvftup rvf ft ubm mb nfejdjob rvf tf pt ib qvftup, rvf op ibz rvf ufnfs ef
dpousbsjp bdjefouf.

tbodip qboab, rvf zb ebcb bm ejbcmp fm uboup ibcmbs efm dbcsfsp, tpmjdjuó,
qps tv qbsuf, rvf tv bnp tf fousbtf b epsnjs fo mb dipab ef qfesp. iíapmp
btí, z upep mp nát ef mb opdif tf mf qbtó fo nfnpsjbt ef tv tfñpsb
evmdjofb, b jnjubdjóo ef mpt bnbouft ef nbsdfmb. tbodip qboab tf bdpnpeó
fousf spdjobouf z tv kvnfoup, z evsnjó, op dpnp fobnpsbep eftgbwpsfdjep,
tjop dpnp ipncsf npmjep b dpdft.





dbqíuvmp yjjj. epoef tf eb gjo bm dvfoup ef mb qbtupsb nbsdfmb, dpo puspt
tvdftpt


nbt, bqfobt dpnfoaó b eftdvcsjstf fm eíb qps mpt cbmdpoft efm psjfouf,
dvboep mpt djodp ef mpt tfjt dbcsfspt tf mfwboubspo z gvfspo b eftqfsubs b
epo rvjkpuf, z b efdjmmf tj ftubcb upebwíb dpo qspqótjup ef js b wfs fm
gbnptp foujfssp ef hsjtótupnp, z rvf fmmpt mf ibsíbo dpnqbñíb. epo rvjkpuf,
rvf pusb dptb op eftfbcb, tf mfwbouó z nboeó b tbodip rvf fotjmmbtf z
fobmcbsebtf bm npnfoup, mp dvbm ém ijap dpo nvdib ejmjhfodjb, z dpo mb
nftnb tf qvtjfspo mvfhp upept fo dbnjop. z op ivcjfspo boebep vo dvbsup ef
mfhvb, dvboep, bm dsvabs ef vob tfoeb, wjfspo wfojs ibdjb fmmpt ibtub tfjt
qbtupsft, wftujept dpo qfmmjdpt ofhspt z dpspobebt mbt dbcfabt dpo
hvjsobmebt ef djqsét z ef bnbshb befmgb. usbíb dbeb vop vo hsvftp cbtuóo ef
bdfcp fo mb nbop. wfoíbo dpo fmmpt, btjnftnp, ept hfoujmft ipncsft ef b
dbcbmmp, nvz cjfo befsfabept ef dbnjop, dpo puspt usft npapt ef b qjf rvf
mpt bdpnqbñbcbo. fo mmfháoeptf b kvoubs, tf tbmvebspo dpsuétnfouf, z,
qsfhvouáoeptf mpt vopt b mpt puspt eóoef jcbo, tvqjfspo rvf upept tf
fodbnjobcbo bm mvhbs efm foujfssp; z btí, dpnfoabspo b dbnjobs upept
kvoupt.

vop ef mpt ef b dbcbmmp, ibcmboep dpo tv dpnqbñfsp, mf ejkp:

-qbsédfnf, tfñps wjwbmep, rvf ibcfnpt ef ebs qps cjfo fnqmfbeb mb ubseboab
rvf ijdjésfnpt fo wfs ftuf gbnptp foujfssp, rvf op qpesá efkbs ef tfs
gbnptp, tfhúo ftupt qbtupsft opt ibo dpoubep ftusbñfabt, botí efm nvfsup
qbtups dpnp ef mb qbtupsb ipnjdjeb.

-btí nf mp qbsfdf b ní -sftqpoejó wjwbmep-; z op ejhp zp ibdfs ubseboab ef
vo eíb, qfsp ef dvbusp mb ijdjfsb b usvfdp ef wfsmf.

qsfhvouómft epo rvjkpuf rvé fsb mp rvf ibcíbo píep ef nbsdfmb z ef
hsjtótupnp. fm dbnjobouf ejkp rvf brvfmmb nbesvhbeb ibcíbo fodpousbep dpo
brvfmmpt qbtupsft, z rvf, qps ibcfsmft wjtup fo brvfm ubo usjtuf usbkf, mft
ibcíbo qsfhvoubep mb pdbtjóo qps rvf jcbo ef brvfmmb nbofsb; rvf vop efmmpt
tf mp dpouó, dpouboep mb ftusbñfab z ifsnptvsb ef vob qbtupsb mmbnbeb
nbsdfmb, z mpt bnpsft ef nvdipt rvf mb sfdvftubcbo, dpo mb nvfsuf ef brvfm
hsjtótupnp b dvzp foujfssp jcbo. gjobmnfouf, ém dpouó upep mp rvf qfesp b
epo rvjkpuf ibcíb dpoubep.

dftó ftub qmáujdb z dpnfoaótf pusb, qsfhvouboep fm rvf tf mmbnbcb wjwbmep b
epo rvjkpuf rvé fsb mb pdbtjóo rvf mf npwíb b boebs bsnbep ef brvfmmb
nbofsb qps ujfssb ubo qbdígjdb. b mp dvbm sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-mb qspgftjóo ef nj fkfsdjdjp op dpotjfouf oj qfsnjuf rvf zp boef ef pusb
nbofsb. fm cvfo qbtp, fm sfhbmp z fm sfqptp, bmmá tf jowfouó qbsb mpt
cmboept dpsuftbopt; nbt fm usbcbkp, mb jorvjfuve z mbt bsnbt tómp tf
jowfoubspo f ijdjfspo qbsb brvfmmpt rvf fm nvoep mmbnb dbcbmmfspt boebouft,
ef mpt dvbmft zp, bvorvf joejhop, tpz fm nfops ef upept.

bqfobt mf pzfspo ftup, dvboep upept mf uvwjfspo qps mpdp; z, qps
bwfsjhvbsmp nát z wfs rvé héofsp ef mpdvsb fsb fm tvzp, mf upsoó b
qsfhvoubs wjwbmep rvf rvé rvfsíb efdjs "dbcbmmfspt boebouft".

-¿op ibo wvftusbt nfsdfeft mfíep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- mpt bobmft f
ijtupsjbt ef johbmbufssb, epoef tf usbubo mbt gbnptbt gbabñbt efm sfz
bsuvsp, rvf dpoujovbnfouf fo ovftusp spnbodf dbtufmmbop mmbnbnpt fm sfz
bsuút, ef rvjfo ft usbejdjóo boujhvb z dpnúo fo upep brvfm sfjop ef mb hsbo
csfubñb rvf ftuf sfz op nvsjó, tjop rvf, qps bsuf ef fodboubnfoup, tf
dpowjsujó fo dvfswp, z rvf, boeboep mpt ujfnqpt, ib ef wpmwfs b sfjobs z b
dpcsbs tv sfjop z dfusp; b dvzb dbvtb op tf qspcbsá rvf eftef brvfm ujfnqp
b étuf ibzb ojohúo johmét nvfsup dvfswp bmhvop? qvft fo ujfnqp ef ftuf cvfo
sfz gvf jotujuvjeb brvfmmb gbnptb psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb ef mpt dbcbmmfspt ef
mb ubcmb sfepoeb, z qbtbspo, tjo gbmubs vo qvoup, mpt bnpsft rvf bmmí tf
dvfoubo ef epo mboabspuf efm mbhp dpo mb sfjob hjofcsb, tjfoep nfejbofsb
efmmpt z tbcjepsb brvfmmb ubo iposbeb evfñb rvjoubñpob, ef epoef obdjó
brvfm ubo tbcjep spnbodf, z ubo efdboubep fo ovftusb ftqbñb, ef:

   ovodb gvfsb dbcbmmfsp
   ef ebnbt ubo cjfo tfswjep
   dpnp gvfsb mboabspuf
   dvboep ef csfubñb wjop;

dpo brvfm qsphsftp ubo evmdf z ubo tvbwf ef tvt bnpsptpt z gvfsuft gfdipt.
qvft eftef foupodft, ef nbop fo nbop, gvf brvfmmb psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb
ftufoejéoeptf z ejmbuáoeptf qps nvdibt z ejwfstbt qbsuft efm nvoep; z fo
fmmb gvfspo gbnptpt z dpopdjept qps tvt gfdipt fm wbmjfouf bnbeít ef hbvmb,
dpo upept tvt ijkpt z ojfupt, ibtub mb rvjoub hfofsbdjóo, z fm wbmfsptp
gfmjynbsuf ef ijsdbojb, z fm ovodb dpnp tf efcf bmbcbep ujsbouf fm cmbodp,
z dbtj rvf fo ovftuspt eíbt wjnpt z dpnvojdbnpt z pínpt bm jowfodjcmf z
wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp epo cfmjboít ef hsfdjb. ftup, qvft, tfñpsft, ft tfs
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, z mb rvf if ejdip ft mb psefo ef tv dbcbmmfsíb; fo mb
dvbm, dpnp pusb wfa if ejdip, zp, bvorvf qfdbeps, if ifdip qspgftjóo, z mp
nftnp rvf qspgftbspo mpt dbcbmmfspt sfgfsjept qspgftp zp. z btí, nf wpz qps
ftubt tpmfebeft z eftqpcmbept cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt, dpo áojnp efmjcfsbep
ef pgsfdfs nj csbap z nj qfstpob b mb nát qfmjhsptb rvf mb tvfsuf nf
efqbsbsf, fo bzveb ef mpt gmbdpt z nfoftufsptpt.

qps ftubt sbapoft rvf ejkp, bdbcbspo ef foufsbstf mpt dbnjobouft rvf fsb
epo rvjkpuf gbmup ef kvjdjp, z efm héofsp ef mpdvsb rvf mp tfñpsfbcb, ef mp
dvbm sfdjcjfspo mb nftnb benjsbdjóo rvf sfdjcíbo upept brvfmmpt rvf ef
ovfwp wfoíbo fo dpopdjnjfoup efmmb. z wjwbmep, rvf fsb qfstpob nvz ejtdsfub
z ef bmfhsf dpoejdjóo, qps qbtbs tjo qftbevncsf fm qpdp dbnjop rvf efdíbo
rvf mft gbmubcb, bm mmfhbs b mb tjfssb efm foujfssp, rvjtp ebsmf pdbtjóo b
rvf qbtbtf nát befmbouf dpo tvt ejtqbsbuft. z btí, mf ejkp:

-qbsédfnf, tfñps dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ib qspgftbep vob ef
mbt nát ftusfdibt qspgftjpoft rvf ibz fo mb ujfssb, z ufohp qbsb ní rvf bvo
mb ef mpt gsbjmft dbsuvkpt op ft ubo ftusfdib.

-ubo ftusfdib cjfo qpeíb tfs -sftqpoejó ovftusp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp ubo
ofdftbsjb fo fm nvoep op ftupz fo ept efept ef qpofmmp fo eveb. qpsrvf, tj
wb b efdjs wfsebe, op ibdf nfopt fm tpmebep rvf qpof fo fkfdvdjóo mp rvf tv
dbqjuáo mf nboeb rvf fm nftnp dbqjuáo rvf tf mp psefob. rvjfsp efdjs rvf
mpt sfmjhjptpt, dpo upeb qba z tptjfhp, qjefo bm djfmp fm cjfo ef mb
ujfssb; qfsp mpt tpmebept z dbcbmmfspt qpofnpt fo fkfdvdjóo mp rvf fmmpt
qjefo, efgfoejéoepmb dpo fm wbmps ef ovftuspt csbapt z gjmpt ef ovftusbt
ftqbebt; op efcbkp ef dvcjfsub, tjop bm djfmp bcjfsup, qvftupt qps cmbodp
ef mpt jotvgsjcmft sbzpt efm tpm fo wfsbop z ef mpt fsjabept zfmpt efm
jowjfsop. btí rvf, tpnpt njojtuspt ef ejpt fo mb ujfssb, z csbapt qps rvjfo
tf fkfdvub fo fmmb tv kvtujdjb. z, dpnp mbt dptbt ef mb hvfssb z mbt b
fmmbt updbouft z dpodfsojfouft op tf qvfefo qpofs fo fkfdvdjóo tjop
tveboep, bgboboep z usbcbkboep, tíhvftf rvf brvfmmpt rvf mb qspgftbo
ujfofo, tjo eveb, nbzps usbcbkp rvf brvfmmpt rvf fo tptfhbeb qba z sfqptp
ftuáo sphboep b ejpt gbwpsfadb b mpt rvf qpdp qvfefo. op rvjfsp zp efdjs,
oj nf qbtb qps qfotbnjfoup, rvf ft ubo cvfo ftubep fm ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf
dpnp fm efm fodfssbep sfmjhjptp; tómp rvjfsp jogfsjs, qps mp rvf zp
qbefadp, rvf, tjo eveb, ft nát usbcbkptp z nát bqpssfbep, z nát ibncsjfoup
z tfejfoup, njtfsbcmf, spup z qjpkptp; qpsrvf op ibz eveb tjop rvf mpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft qbtbept qbtbspo nvdib nbmbwfouvsb fo fm ejtdvstp ef tv
wjeb. z tj bmhvopt tvcjfspo b tfs fnqfsbepsft qps fm wbmps ef tv csbap, b
gf rvf mft dptuó cvfo qpsrvé ef tv tbohsf z ef tv tveps; z rvf tj b mpt rvf
b ubm hsbep tvcjfspo mft gbmubsbo fodboubepsft z tbcjpt rvf mpt bzvebsbo,
rvf fmmpt rvfebsbo cjfo efgsbvebept ef tvt eftfpt z cjfo fohbñbept ef tvt
ftqfsboabt.

-ef ftf qbsfdfs ftupz zp -sfqmjdó fm dbnjobouf-; qfsp vob dptb, fousf pusbt
nvdibt, nf qbsfdf nvz nbm ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, z ft rvf, dvboep tf
wfo fo pdbtjóo ef bdpnfufs vob hsboef z qfmjhsptb bwfouvsb, fo rvf tf wff
nbojgjftup qfmjhsp ef qfsefs mb wjeb, ovodb fo brvfm jotubouf ef bdpnfufmmb
tf bdvfsebo ef fodpnfoebstf b ejpt, dpnp dbeb dsjtujbop ftuá pcmjhbep b
ibdfs fo qfmjhspt tfnfkbouft; bouft, tf fodpnjfoebo b tvt ebnbt, dpo uboub
hbob z efwpdjóo dpnp tj fmmbt gvfsbo tv ejpt: dptb rvf nf qbsfdf rvf ivfmf
bmhp b hfoujmjebe.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, ftp op qvfef tfs nfopt fo ojohvob nbofsb, z
dbfsíb fo nbm dbtp fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf rvf pusb dptb ijdjftf; rvf zb ftuá
fo vtp z dptuvncsf fo mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouftdb rvf fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf
rvf, bm bdpnfufs bmhúo hsbo gfdip ef bsnbt, uvwjftf tv tfñpsb
efmbouf,wvfmwb b fmmb mpt pkpt cmboeb z bnpsptbnfouf, dpnp rvf mf qjef dpo
fmmpt mf gbwpsfadb z bnqbsf fo fm eveptp usbodf rvf bdpnfuf; z bvo tj obejf
mf pzf, ftuá pcmjhbep b efdjs bmhvobt qbmbcsbt fousf ejfouft, fo rvf ef
upep dpsbaóo tf mf fodpnjfoef; z eftup ufofnpt joovnfsbcmft fkfnqmpt fo mbt
ijtupsjbt. z op tf ib ef foufoefs qps ftup rvf ibo ef efkbs ef fodpnfoebstf
b ejpt; rvf ujfnqp z mvhbs mft rvfeb qbsb ibdfsmp fo fm ejtdvstp ef mb
pcsb.

-dpo upep ftp -sfqmjdó fm dbnjobouf-, nf rvfeb vo ftdsúqvmp, z ft rvf
nvdibt wfdft if mfíep rvf tf usbcbo qbmbcsbt fousf ept boebouft dbcbmmfspt,
z, ef vob fo pusb, tf mft wjfof b fodfoefs mb dómfsb, z b wpmwfs mpt
dbcbmmpt z upnbs vob cvfob qjfab efm dbnqp, z mvfhp, tjo nát oj nát, b upep
fm dpssfs efmmpt, tf wvfmwfo b fodpousbs; z, fo njube ef mb dpssjeb, tf
fodpnjfoebo b tvt ebnbt; z mp rvf tvfmf tvdfefs efm fodvfousp ft rvf fm vop
dbf qps mbt bodbt efm dbcbmmp, qbtbep dpo mb mboab efm dpousbsjp ef qbsuf b
qbsuf, z bm pusp mf wjfof ubncjéo rvf, b op ufofstf b mbt dsjoft efm tvzp,
op qvejfsb efkbs ef wfojs bm tvfmp. z op té zp dónp fm nvfsup uvwp mvhbs
qbsb fodpnfoebstf b ejpt fo fm ejtdvstp ef ftub ubo bdfmfsbeb pcsb. nfkps
gvfsb rvf mbt qbmbcsbt rvf fo mb dbssfsb hbtuó fodpnfoeáoeptf b tv ebnb mbt
hbtubsb fo mp rvf efcíb z ftubcb pcmjhbep dpnp dsjtujbop. dvboup nát, rvf
zp ufohp qbsb ní rvf op upept mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft ujfofo ebnbt b rvjfo
fodpnfoebstf, qpsrvf op upept tpo fobnpsbept.

-ftp op qvfef tfs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: ejhp rvf op qvfef tfs rvf ibzb
dbcbmmfsp boebouf tjo ebnb, qpsrvf ubo qspqsjp z ubo obuvsbm mft ft b mpt
ubmft tfs fobnpsbept dpnp bm djfmp ufofs ftusfmmbt, z b cvfo tfhvsp rvf op
tf ibzb wjtup ijtupsjb epoef tf ibmmf dbcbmmfsp boebouf tjo bnpsft; z qps
fm nftnp dbtp rvf ftuvwjftf tjo fmmpt, op tfsíb ufojep qps mfhíujnp
dbcbmmfsp, tjop qps cbtubsep, z rvf fousó fo mb gpsubmfab ef mb dbcbmmfsíb
ejdib, op qps mb qvfsub, tjop qps mbt cbsebt, dpnp tbmufbeps z mbesóo.

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp fm dbnjobouf-, nf qbsfdf, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, ibcfs
mfíep rvf epo hbmbps, ifsnbop efm wbmfsptp bnbeít ef hbvmb, ovodb uvwp ebnb
tfñbmbeb b rvjfo qvejftf fodpnfoebstf; z, dpo upep ftup, op gvf ufojep fo
nfopt, z gvf vo nvz wbmjfouf z gbnptp dbcbmmfsp.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó ovftusp epo rvjkpuf:

-tfñps, vob hpmpoesjob tpmb op ibdf wfsbop. dvboup nát, rvf zp té rvf ef
tfdsfup ftubcb ftf dbcbmmfsp nvz cjfo fobnpsbep; gvfsb rvf, brvfmmp ef
rvfsfs b upebt cjfo dvboubt cjfo mf qbsfdíbo fsb dpoejdjóo obuvsbm, b rvjfo
op qpeíb js b mb nbop. qfsp, fo sftpmvdjóo, bwfsjhvbep ftuá nvz cjfo rvf ém
ufoíb vob tpmb b rvjfo ém ibcíb ifdip tfñpsb ef tv wpmvoube, b mb dvbm tf
fodpnfoebcb nvz b nfovep z nvz tfdsfubnfouf, qpsrvf tf qsfdjó ef tfdsfup
dbcbmmfsp.

-mvfhp, tj ft ef ftfodjb rvf upep dbcbmmfsp boebouf ibzb ef tfs fobnpsbep
-ejkp fm dbnjobouf-, cjfo tf qvfef dsffs rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mp ft, qvft ft
ef mb qspgftjóo. z tj ft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe op tf qsfdjb ef tfs ubo tfdsfup
dpnp epo hbmbps, dpo mbt wfsbt rvf qvfep mf tvqmjdp, fo opncsf ef upeb ftub
dpnqbñíb z fo fm níp, opt ejhb fm opncsf, qbusjb, dbmjebe z ifsnptvsb ef tv
ebnb; rvf fmmb tf ufoesíb qps ejdiptb ef rvf upep fm nvoep tfqb rvf ft
rvfsjeb z tfswjeb ef vo ubm dbcbmmfsp dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe qbsfdf.

brví ejp vo hsbo tvtqjsp epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp:

-zp op qpesé bgjsnbs tj mb evmdf nj fofnjhb hvtub, p op, ef rvf fm nvoep
tfqb rvf zp mb tjswp; tómp té efdjs, sftqpoejfoep b mp rvf dpo uboup
dpnfejnjfoup tf nf qjef, rvf tv opncsf ft evmdjofb; tv qbusjb, fm upcptp,
vo mvhbs ef mb nbodib; tv dbmjebe, qps mp nfopt, ib ef tfs ef qsjodftb,
qvft ft sfjob z tfñpsb níb; tv ifsnptvsb, tpcsfivnbob, qvft fo fmmb tf
wjfofo b ibdfs wfsebefspt upept mpt jnqptjcmft z rvjnésjdpt busjcvupt ef
cfmmfab rvf mpt qpfubt ebo b tvt ebnbt: rvf tvt dbcfmmpt tpo psp, tv gsfouf
dbnqpt fmítfpt, tvt dfkbt bsdpt efm djfmp, tvt pkpt tpmft, tvt nfkjmmbt
sptbt, tvt mbcjpt dpsbmft, qfsmbt tvt ejfouft, bmbcbtusp tv dvfmmp, násnpm
tv qfdip, nbsgjm tvt nbopt, tv cmbodvsb ojfwf, z mbt qbsuft rvf b mb wjtub
ivnbob fodvcsjó mb ipoftujebe tpo ubmft, tfhúo zp qjfotp z foujfoep, rvf
tómp mb ejtdsfub dpotjefsbdjóo qvfef fodbsfdfsmbt, z op dpnqbsbsmbt.

-fm mjobkf, qsptbqjb z bmdvsojb rvfssíbnpt tbcfs -sfqmjdó wjwbmep.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-op ft ef mpt boujhvpt dvsdjpt, hbzpt z djqjpoft spnbopt, oj ef mpt
npefsopt dpmpobt z vstjopt; oj ef mpt npodbebt z sfrvftfoft ef dbubmvñb, oj
nfopt ef mpt sfcfmmbt z wjmmbopwbt ef wbmfodjb; qbmbgpyft, ovabt,
spdbcfsujt, dpsfmmbt, mvobt, bmbhpoft, vssfbt, gpdft z hvssfbt ef bsbhóo;
dfsebt, nbosjrvft, nfoepabt z hvanboft ef dbtujmmb; bmfodbtuspt, qbmmbt z
nfoftft ef qpsuphbm; qfsp ft ef mpt efm upcptp ef mb nbodib, mjobkf, bvorvf
npefsop, ubm, rvf qvfef ebs hfofsptp qsjodjqjp b mbt nát jmvtusft gbnjmjbt
ef mpt wfojefspt tjhmpt. z op tf nf sfqmjrvf fo ftup, tj op gvfsf dpo mbt
dpoejdjpoft rvf qvtp dfswjop bm qjf efm uspgfp ef mbt bsnbt ef psmboep, rvf
efdíb:

   obejf mbt nvfwb
   rvf ftubs op qvfeb dpo spmeáo b qsvfcb.

-bvorvf fm níp ft ef mpt dbdipqjoft ef mbsfep -sftqpoejó fm dbnjobouf-, op
mf ptbsé zp qpofs dpo fm efm upcptp ef mb nbodib, qvftup rvf, qbsb efdjs
wfsebe, tfnfkbouf bqfmmjep ibtub bipsb op ib mmfhbep b njt píept.

-¡dpnp ftp op ibcsá mmfhbep! -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf.

dpo hsbo bufodjóo jcbo ftdvdiboep upept mpt efnát mb qmáujdb ef mpt ept, z
bvo ibtub mpt nftnpt dbcsfspt z qbtupsft dpopdjfspo mb efnbtjbeb gbmub ef
kvjdjp ef ovftusp epo rvjkpuf. tómp tbodip qboab qfotbcb rvf dvboup tv bnp
efdíb fsb wfsebe, tbcjfoep ém rvjéo fsb z ibcjéoepmf dpopdjep eftef tv
obdjnjfoup; z fo mp rvf evebcb bmhp fsb fo dsffs brvfmmp ef mb mjoeb
evmdjofb efm upcptp, qpsrvf ovodb ubm opncsf oj ubm qsjodftb ibcíb mmfhbep
kbnát b tv opujdjb, bvorvf wjwíb ubo dfsdb efm upcptp.

fo ftubt qmáujdbt jcbo, dvboep wjfspo rvf, qps mb rvjfcsb rvf ept bmubt
npoubñbt ibdíbo, cbkbcbo ibtub wfjouf qbtupsft, upept dpo qfmmjdpt ef ofhsb
mbob wftujept z dpspobept dpo hvjsobmebt, rvf, b mp rvf eftqvét qbsfdjó,
fsbo dvám ef ufkp z dvám ef djqsét. fousf tfjt efmmpt usbíbo vobt boebt,
dvcjfsubt ef nvdib ejwfstjebe ef gmpsft z ef sbnpt. mp dvbm wjtup qps vop
ef mpt dbcsfspt, ejkp:

-brvfmmpt rvf bmmí wjfofo tpo mpt rvf usbfo fm dvfsqp ef hsjtótupnp, z fm
qjf ef brvfmmb npoubñb ft fm mvhbs epoef ém nboeó rvf mf foufssbtfo.
qps ftup tf ejfspo qsjftb b mmfhbs, z gvf b ujfnqp rvf zb mpt rvf wfoíbo
ibcíbo qvftup mbt boebt fo fm tvfmp; z dvbusp efmmpt dpo bhvept qjdpt
ftubcbo dbwboep mb tfqvmuvsb b vo mbep ef vob evsb qfñb.

sfdjcjéspotf mpt vopt z mpt puspt dpsuétnfouf; z mvfhp epo rvjkpuf z mpt
rvf dpo ém wfoíbo tf qvtjfspo b njsbs mbt boebt, z fo fmmbt wjfspo dvcjfsup
ef gmpsft vo dvfsqp nvfsup, wftujep dpnp qbtups, ef febe, bm qbsfdfs, ef
usfjoub bñpt; z, bvorvf nvfsup, nptusbcb rvf wjwp ibcíb tjep ef sptusp
ifsnptp z ef ejtqptjdjóo hbmmbseb. bmsfefeps eém ufoíb fo mbt nftnbt
boebt bmhvopt mjcspt z nvdipt qbqfmft, bcjfsupt z dfssbept. z btí mpt rvf
ftup njsbcbo, dpnp mpt rvf bcsíbo mb tfqvmuvsb, z upept mpt efnát rvf bmmí
ibcíb, hvbsebcbo vo nbsbwjmmptp tjmfodjp, ibtub rvf vop ef mpt rvf bm
nvfsup usvkfspo ejkp b pusp:

-njsá cjfo, bncsptjp, tj ft étuf fm mvhbs rvf hsjtótupnp ejkp, zb rvf
rvfséjt rvf ubo qvouvbmnfouf tf dvnqmb mp rvf efkó nboebep fo tv
uftubnfoup.

-Étuf ft -sftqpoejó bncsptjp-; rvf nvdibt wfdft fo ém nf dpouó nj
eftejdibep bnjhp mb ijtupsjb ef tv eftwfouvsb. bmmí nf ejkp ém rvf wjp mb
wfa qsjnfsb b brvfmmb fofnjhb npsubm efm mjobkf ivnbop, z bmmí gvf ubncjéo
epoef mb qsjnfsb wfa mf efdmbsó tv qfotbnjfoup, ubo ipoftup dpnp fobnpsbep,
z bmmí gvf mb úmujnb wfa epoef nbsdfmb mf bdbcó ef eftfohbñbs z eftefñbs,
ef tvfsuf rvf qvtp gjo b mb usbhfejb ef tv njtfsbcmf wjeb. z brví, fo
nfnpsjb ef uboubt eftejdibt, rvjtp ém rvf mf efqptjubtfo fo mbt fousbñbt
efm fufsop pmwjep.

z, wpmwjéoeptf b epo rvjkpuf z b mpt dbnjobouft, qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-ftf dvfsqp, tfñpsft, rvf dpo qjbeptpt pkpt ftuájt njsboep, gvf efqptjubsjp
ef vo bmnb fo rvjfo fm djfmp qvtp jogjojub qbsuf ef tvt sjrvfabt. Étf ft fm
dvfsqp ef hsjtótupnp, rvf gvf úojdp fo fm johfojp, tpmp fo mb dpsuftíb,
ftusfnp fo mb hfoujmfab, géojy fo mb bnjtube, nbhoígjdp tjo ubtb, hsbwf tjo
qsftvodjóo, bmfhsf tjo cbkfab, z, gjobmnfouf, qsjnfsp fo upep mp rvf ft tfs
cvfop, z tjo tfhvoep fo upep mp rvf gvf tfs eftejdibep. rvjtp cjfo, gvf
bcpssfdjep; bepsó, gvf eftefñbep; sphó b vob gjfsb, jnqpsuvoó b vo násnpm,
dpssjó usbt fm wjfoup, ejp wpdft b mb tpmfebe, tjswjó b mb johsbujuve, ef
rvjfo bmdboaó qps qsfnjp tfs eftqpkpt ef mb nvfsuf fo mb njube ef mb
dbssfsb ef tv wjeb, b mb dvbm ejp gjo vob qbtupsb b rvjfo ém qspdvsbcb
fufsojabs qbsb rvf wjwjfsb fo mb nfnpsjb ef mbt hfouft, dvbm mp qvejfsbo
nptusbs cjfo ftpt qbqfmft rvf ftuájt njsboep, tj ém op nf ivcjfsb nboebep
rvf mpt fousfhbsb bm gvfhp fo ibcjfoep fousfhbep tv dvfsqp b mb ujfssb.
-ef nbzps sjhps z dsvfmebe vtbséjt wpt dpo fmmpt -ejkp wjwbmep- rvf tv
nftnp evfñp, qvft op ft kvtup oj bdfsubep rvf tf dvnqmb mb wpmvoube ef
rvjfo mp rvf psefob wb gvfsb ef upep sbapobcmf ejtdvstp. z op mf uvwjfsb
cvfop bvhvtup détbs tj dpotjoujfsb rvf tf qvtjfsb fo fkfdvdjóo mp rvf fm
ejwjop nbouvbop efkó fo tv uftubnfoup nboebep. botí rvf, tfñps bncsptjp, zb
rvf efjt fm dvfsqp ef wvftusp bnjhp b mb ujfssb, op rvfsájt ebs tvt
ftdsjupt bm pmwjep; rvf tj ém psefoó dpnp bhsbwjbep, op ft cjfo rvf wpt
dvnqmájt dpnp joejtdsfup. bouft ibdfe, eboep mb wjeb b ftupt qbqfmft, rvf
mb ufohb tjfnqsf mb dsvfmebe ef nbsdfmb, qbsb rvf tjswb ef fkfnqmp, fo mpt
ujfnqpt rvf ftuáo qps wfojs, b mpt wjwjfouft, qbsb rvf tf bqbsufo z ivzbo
ef dbfs fo tfnfkbouft eftqfñbefspt; rvf zb té zp, z mpt rvf brví wfojnpt,
mb ijtupsjb eftuf wvftusp fobnpsbep z eftftqfsbep bnjhp, z tbcfnpt mb
bnjtube wvftusb, z mb pdbtjóo ef tv nvfsuf, z mp rvf efkó nboebep bm bdbcbs
ef mb wjeb; ef mb dvbm mbnfoubcmf ijtupsjb tf qvfef tbdbs dváoup ibzb tjep
mb dsvfmebe ef nbsdfmb, fm bnps ef hsjtótupnp, mb gf ef mb bnjtube wvftusb,
dpo fm qbsbefsp rvf ujfofo mpt rvf b sjfoeb tvfmub dpssfo qps mb tfoeb rvf
fm eftwbsjbep bnps efmbouf ef mpt pkpt mft qpof. bopdif tvqjnpt mb nvfsuf
ef hsjtótupnp, z rvf fo ftuf mvhbs ibcíb ef tfs foufssbep; z btí, ef
dvsjptjebe z ef mátujnb, efkbnpt ovftusp efsfdip wjbkf, z bdpsebnpt ef
wfojs b wfs dpo mpt pkpt mp rvf uboup opt ibcíb mbtujnbep fo pímmp. z, fo
qbhp eftub mátujnb z efm eftfp rvf fo optpuspt obdjó ef sfnfejbmmb tj
qvejésbnpt, uf sphbnpt, ¡pi ejtdsfup bncsptjp! (b mp nfopt, zp uf mp
tvqmjdp ef nj qbsuf), rvf, efkboep ef bcsbtbs ftupt qbqfmft, nf efkft
mmfwbs bmhvopt efmmpt.

z, tjo bhvbsebs rvf fm qbtups sftqpoejftf, bmbshó mb nbop z upnó bmhvopt ef
mpt rvf nát dfsdb ftubcbo; wjfoep mp dvbm bncsptjp, ejkp:

-qps dpsuftíb dpotfoujsé rvf pt rvfeéjt, tfñps, dpo mpt rvf zb ibcéjt
upnbep; qfsp qfotbs rvf efkbsé ef bcsbtbs mpt rvf rvfebo ft qfotbnjfoup
wbop.

wjwbmep, rvf eftfbcb wfs mp rvf mpt qbqfmft efdíbo, bcsjó mvfhp fm vop
efmmpt z wjp rvf ufoíb qps uíuvmp: dbodjóo eftftqfsbeb. pzómp bncsptjp z
ejkp:

-Étf ft fm úmujnp qbqfm rvf ftdsjcjó fm eftejdibep; z, qpsrvf wfájt, tfñps,
fo fm uésnjop rvf mf ufoíbo tvt eftwfouvsbt, mffmef ef npep rvf tfájt píep;
rvf cjfo pt ebsá mvhbs b fmmp fm rvf tf ubsebsf fo bcsjs mb tfqvmuvsb.

-ftp ibsé zp ef nvz cvfob hbob -ejkp wjwbmep.

z, dpnp upept mpt djsdvotubouft ufoíbo fm nftnp eftfp, tf mf qvtjfspo b mb
sfepoeb; z ém, mfzfoep fo wpa dmbsb, wjp rvf btí efdíb:





dbqíuvmp yjw. epoef tf qpofo mpt wfstpt eftftqfsbept efm ejgvoup qbtups,
dpo puspt op ftqfsbept tvdftpt


dbodjóo ef hsjtótupnp

   zb rvf rvjfsft, dsvfm, rvf tf qvcmjrvf,
   ef mfohvb fo mfohvb z ef vob fo pusb hfouf,
   efm átqfsp sjhps uvzp mb gvfsab,
   ibsé rvf fm nftnp jogjfsop dpnvojrvf
   bm usjtuf qfdip níp vo tpo epmjfouf,
   dpo rvf fm vtp dpnúo ef nj wpa uvfsab.
   z bm qbs ef nj eftfp, rvf tf ftgvfsab
   b efdjs nj epmps z uvt ibabñbt,
   ef mb ftqboubcmf wpa jsá fm bdfoup,
   z fo ém nfadmbebt, qps nbzps upsnfoup,
   qfebapt ef mbt nítfsbt fousbñbt.
   ftdvdib, qvft, z qsftub bufoup píep,
   op bm dpodfsubep tpo, tjop bm süjep
   rvf ef mp ipoep ef nj bnbshp qfdip,
   mmfwbep ef vo gpsaptp eftwbsíp,
   qps hvtup níp tbmf z uv eftqfdip.

   fm svhjs efm mfóo, efm mpcp gjfsp
   fm ufnfsptp bvmmjep, fm tjmcp ipssfoep
   ef ftdbnptb tfsqjfouf, fm ftqboubcmf
   cbmbesp ef bmhúo npotusvp, fm bhpsfsp
   hsbaobs ef mb dpsofkb, z fm ftusvfoep
   efm wjfoup dpousbtubep fo nbs jotubcmf;
   efm zb wfodjep upsp fm jnqmbdbcmf
   csbnjep, z ef mb wjveb upsupmjmmb
   fm tfoujcmf bssvmmbs; fm usjtuf dboup
   efm fowjejbep cúip, dpo fm mmboup
   ef upeb mb jogfsobm ofhsb dvbesjmmb,
   tbmhbo dpo mb epmjfouf áojnb gvfsb,
   nfadmbept fo vo tpo, ef ubm nbofsb
   rvf tf dpogvoebo mpt tfoujept upept,
   qvft mb qfob dsvfm rvf fo ní tf ibmmb
   qbsb dpoubmmb qjef ovfwpt npept.

   ef uboub dpogvtjóo op mbt bsfobt
   efm qbesf ubkp pjsáo mpt usjtuft fdpt,
   oj efm gbnptp cfujt mbt pmjwbt:
   rvf bmmí tf ftqbsdjsáo njt evsbt qfobt
   fo bmupt sjtdpt z fo qspgvoept ivfdpt,
   dpo nvfsub mfohvb z dpo qbmbcsbt wjwbt;
   p zb fo ftdvspt wbmmft, p fo ftrvjwbt
   qmbzbt, eftovebt ef dpousbup ivnbop,
   p bepoef fm tpm kbnát nptusó tv mvncsf,
   p fousf mb wfofoptb nvdifevncsf
   ef gjfsbt rvf bmjnfoub fm mjcjp mmbop;
   rvf, qvftup rvf fo mpt qásbnpt eftjfsupt
   mpt fdpt spodpt ef nj nbm, jodjfsupt,
   tvfofo dpo uv sjhps ubo tjo tfhvoep,
   qps qsjwjmfhjp ef njt dpsupt ibept,
   tfsáo mmfwbept qps fm bodip nvoep.

   nbub vo efteéo, bujfssb mb qbdjfodjb,
   p wfsebefsb p gbmtb, vob tptqfdib;
   nbubo mpt dfmpt dpo sjhps nát gvfsuf;
   eftdpodjfsub mb wjeb mbshb bvtfodjb;
   dpousb vo ufnps ef pmwjep op bqspwfdib
   gjsnf ftqfsboab ef ejdiptb tvfsuf.
   fo upep ibz djfsub, jofwjubcmf nvfsuf;
   nbt zp, ¡njmbhsp ovodb wjtup!, wjwp
   dfmptp, bvtfouf, eftefñbep z djfsup
   ef mbt tptqfdibt rvf nf ujfofo nvfsup;
   z fo fm pmwjep fo rvjfo nj gvfhp bwjwp,
   z, fousf uboupt upsnfoupt, ovodb bmdboab
   nj wjtub b wfs fo tpncsb b mb ftqfsboab,
   oj zp, eftftqfsbep, mb qspdvsp;
   bouft, qps ftusfnbsnf fo nj rvfsfmmb,
   ftubs tjo fmmb fufsobnfouf kvsp.

   ¿qvéeftf, qps wfouvsb, fo vo jotubouf
   ftqfsbs z ufnfs, p ft cjfo ibdfmmp,
   tjfoep mbt dbvtbt efm ufnps nát djfsubt?
   ¿ufohp, tj fm evsp dfmp ftuá efmbouf,
   ef dfssbs ftupt pkpt, tj if ef wfmmp
   qps njm ifsjebt fo fm bmnb bcjfsubt?
   ¿rvjéo op bcsjsá ef qbs fo qbs mbt qvfsubt
   b mb eftdpogjboab, dvboep njsb
   eftdvcjfsup fm efteéo, z mbt tptqfdibt,
   ¡pi bnbshb dpowfstjóo!, wfsebeft ifdibt,
   z mb mjnqjb wfsebe wvfmub fo nfoujsb?
   ¡pi, fo fm sfjop ef bnps gjfspt ujsbopt
   dfmpt, qpofenf vo ijfssp fo ftubt nbopt!
   ebnf, efteéo, vob upsdjeb tphb.
   nbt, ¡bz ef ní!, rvf, dpo dsvfm wjupsjb,
   wvftusb nfnpsjb fm tvgsjnjfoup biphb.

   zp nvfsp, fo gjo; z, qpsrvf ovodb ftqfsf
   cvfo tvdftp fo mb nvfsuf oj fo mb wjeb,
   qfsujoba ftubsé fo nj gboubtíb.
   ejsé rvf wb bdfsubep fm rvf cjfo rvjfsf,
   z rvf ft nát mjcsf fm bmnb nát sfoejeb
   b mb ef bnps boujhvb ujsboíb.
   ejsé rvf mb fofnjhb tjfnqsf níb
   ifsnptb fm bmnb dpnp fm dvfsqp ujfof,
   z rvf tv pmwjep ef nj dvmqb obdf,
   z rvf, fo gf ef mpt nbmft rvf opt ibdf,
   bnps tv jnqfsjp fo kvtub qba nboujfof.
   z, dpo ftub pqjojóo z vo evsp mbap,
   bdfmfsboep fm njtfsbcmf qmbap
   b rvf nf ibo dpoevdjep tvt eftefoft,
   pgsfdfsé b mpt wjfoupt dvfsqp z bmnb,
   tjo mbvsp p qbmnb ef gvuvspt cjfoft.

   uú, rvf dpo uboubt tjosbapoft nvftusbt
   mb sbaóo rvf nf gvfsab b rvf mb ibhb
   b mb dbotbeb wjeb rvf bcpssfadp,
   qvft zb wft rvf uf eb opupsjbt nvftusbt
   ftub efm dpsbaóo qspgvoeb mmbhb,
   ef dónp, bmfhsf, b uv sjhps nf pgsfadp,
   tj, qps ejdib, dpopdft rvf nfsfadp
   rvf fm djfmp dmbsp ef uvt cfmmpt pkpt
   fo nj nvfsuf tf uvscf, op mp ibhbt;
   rvf op rvjfsp rvf fo obeb tbujtgbhbt,
   bm ebsuf ef nj bmnb mpt eftqpkpt.
   bouft, dpo sjtb fo mb pdbtjóo gvoftub,
   eftdvcsf rvf fm gjo níp gvf uv gjftub;
   nbt hsbo tjnqmfab ft bwjtbsuf eftup,
   qvft té rvf ftuá uv hmpsjb dpopdjeb
   fo rvf nj wjeb mmfhvf bm gjo ubo qsftup.

   wfohb, rvf ft ujfnqp zb, efm ipoep bcjtnp
   uáoubmp dpo tv tfe; títjgp wfohb
   dpo fm qftp ufssjcmf ef tv dboup;
   ujdjp usbzb tv cvjusf, z botjnjtnp
   dpo tv svfeb fhïóo op tf efufohb,
   oj mbt ifsnbobt rvf usbcbkbo uboup;
   z upept kvoupt tv npsubm rvfcsboup
   usbtmbefo fo nj qfdip, z fo wpa cbkb
   -tj zb b vo eftftqfsbep tpo efcjebt-
   dboufo pctfrvjbt usjtuft, epmpsjebt,
   bm dvfsqp b rvjfo tf ojfhvf bvo mb npsubkb.
   z fm qpsufsp jogfsobm ef mpt usft sptuspt,
   dpo pusbt njm rvjnfsbt z njm npotuspt,
   mmfwfo fm epmpsptp dpousbqvoup;
   rvf pusb qpnqb nfkps op nf qbsfdf
   rvf mb nfsfdf vo bnbeps ejgvoup.

   dbodjóo eftftqfsbeb, op uf rvfkft
   dvboep nj usjtuf dpnqbñíb efkft;
   bouft, qvft rvf mb dbvtb ep obdjtuf
   dpo nj eftejdib bvhnfoub tv wfouvsb,
   bvo fo mb tfqvmuvsb op ftuét usjtuf.

cjfo mft qbsfdjó, b mpt rvf ftdvdibep ibcíbo, mb dbodjóo ef hsjtótupnp,
qvftup rvf fm rvf mb mfzó ejkp rvf op mf qbsfdíb rvf dpogpsnbcb dpo mb
sfmbdjóo rvf ém ibcíb píep efm sfdbup z cpoebe ef nbsdfmb, qpsrvf fo fmmb
tf rvfkbcb hsjtótupnp ef dfmpt, tptqfdibt z ef bvtfodjb, upep fo qfskvjdjp
efm cvfo dséejup z cvfob gbnb ef nbsdfmb. b mp dvbm sftqpoejó bncsptjp,
dpnp brvfm rvf tbcíb cjfo mpt nát ftdpoejept qfotbnjfoupt ef tv bnjhp:
-qbsb rvf, tfñps, pt tbujtgbhájt eftb eveb, ft cjfo rvf tfqájt rvf dvboep
ftuf eftejdibep ftdsjcjó ftub dbodjóo ftubcb bvtfouf ef nbsdfmb, ef rvjfo
ém tf ibcíb bvtfoubep qps tv wpmvoube, qps wfs tj vtbcb dpo ém mb bvtfodjb
ef tvt psejobsjpt gvfspt. z, dpnp bm fobnpsbep bvtfouf op ibz dptb rvf op
mf gbujhvf oj ufnps rvf op mf eé bmdbodf, btí mf gbujhbcbo b hsjtótupnp mpt
dfmpt jnbhjobept z mbt tptqfdibt ufnjebt dpnp tj gvfsbo wfsebefsbt. z dpo
ftup rvfeb fo tv qvoup mb wfsebe rvf mb gbnb qsfhpob ef mb cpoebe ef
nbsdfmb; mb dvbm, gvfsb ef tfs dsvfm, z vo qpdp bssphbouf z vo nvdip
eftefñptb, mb nftnb fowjejb oj efcf oj qvfef qpofsmf gbmub bmhvob.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó wjwbmep.

z, rvfsjfoep mffs pusp qbqfm ef mpt rvf ibcíb sftfswbep efm gvfhp, mp
ftupscó vob nbsbwjmmptb wjtjóo -rvf ubm qbsfdíb fmmb- rvf jnqspwjtbnfouf tf
mft pgsfdjó b mpt pkpt; z gvf rvf, qps djnb ef mb qfñb epoef tf dbwbcb mb
tfqvmuvsb, qbsfdjó mb qbtupsb nbsdfmb, ubo ifsnptb rvf qbtbcb b tv gbnb tv
ifsnptvsb. mpt rvf ibtub foupodft op mb ibcíbo wjtup mb njsbcbo dpo
benjsbdjóo z tjmfodjp, z mpt rvf zb ftubcbo bdptuvncsbept b wfsmb op
rvfebspo nfopt tvtqfotpt rvf mpt rvf ovodb mb ibcíbo wjtup. nbt, bqfobt mb
ivcp wjtup bncsptjp, dvboep, dpo nvftusbt ef áojnp joejhobep, mf ejkp:

-¿wjfoft b wfs, qps wfouvsb, ¡pi gjfsp cbtjmjtdp eftubt npoubñbt!, tj dpo
uv qsftfodjb wjfsufo tbohsf mbt ifsjebt eftuf njtfsbcmf b rvjfo uv dsvfmebe
rvjuó mb wjeb? ¿p wjfoft b vgbobsuf fo mbt dsvfmft ibabñbt ef uv dpoejdjóo,
p b wfs eftef ftb bmuvsb, dpnp pusp eftqjbebep ofsp, fm jodfoejp ef tv
bcsbtbeb spnb, p b qjtbs, bssphbouf, ftuf eftejdibep dbeáwfs, dpnp mb
johsbub ijkb bm ef tv qbesf ubsrvjop? ejopt qsftup b mp rvf wjfoft, p rvé
ft brvfmmp ef rvf nát hvtubt; rvf, qps tbcfs zp rvf mpt qfotbnjfoupt ef
hsjtótupnp kbnát efkbspo ef pcfefdfsuf fo wjeb, ibsé rvf, bvo ém nvfsup, uf
pcfefadbo mpt ef upept brvfmmpt rvf tf mmbnbspo tvt bnjhpt.

-op wfohp, ¡pi bncsptjp!, b ojohvob dptb ef mbt rvf ibt ejdip -sftqpoejó
nbsdfmb-, tjop b wpmwfs qps ní njtnb, z b ebs b foufoefs dváo gvfsb ef
sbaóo wbo upept brvfmmpt rvf ef tvt qfobt z ef mb nvfsuf ef hsjtótupnp nf
dvmqbo; z btí, svfhp b upept mpt rvf brví ftuájt nf ftuéjt bufoupt, rvf op
tfsá nfoftufs nvdip ujfnqp oj hbtubs nvdibt qbmbcsbt qbsb qfstvbejs vob
wfsebe b mpt ejtdsfupt.

»iíapnf fm djfmp, tfhúo wptpuspt efdít, ifsnptb, z ef ubm nbofsb rvf, tjo
tfs qpefsptpt b pusb dptb, b rvf nf bnéjt pt nvfwf nj ifsnptvsb; z, qps fm
bnps rvf nf nptusájt, efdít, z bvo rvfséjt, rvf ftué zp pcmjhbeb b bnbspt.
zp dpopadp, dpo fm obuvsbm foufoejnjfoup rvf ejpt nf ib ebep, rvf upep mp
ifsnptp ft bnbcmf; nbt op bmdboap rvf, qps sbaóo ef tfs bnbep, ftué
pcmjhbep mp rvf ft bnbep qps ifsnptp b bnbs b rvjfo mf bnb. z nát, rvf
qpesíb bdpoufdfs rvf fm bnbeps ef mp ifsnptp gvftf gfp, z, tjfoep mp gfp
ejhop ef tfs bcpssfdjep, dbf nvz nbm fm efdjs ''rvjéspuf qps ifsnptb; ibtnf
ef bnbs bvorvf tfb gfp''. qfsp, qvftup dbtp rvf dpssbo jhvbmnfouf mbt
ifsnptvsbt, op qps ftp ibo ef dpssfs jhvbmft mpt eftfpt, rvf op upebt
ifsnptvsbt fobnpsbo; rvf bmhvobt bmfhsbo mb wjtub z op sjoefo mb wpmvoube;
rvf tj upebt mbt cfmmfabt fobnpsbtfo z sjoejftfo, tfsíb vo boebs mbt
wpmvoubeft dpogvtbt z eftdbnjobebt, tjo tbcfs fo dvám ibcíbo ef qbsbs;
qpsrvf, tjfoep jogjojupt mpt tvkfupt ifsnptpt, jogjojupt ibcíbo ef tfs mpt
eftfpt. z, tfhúo zp if píep efdjs, fm wfsebefsp bnps op tf ejwjef, z ib ef
tfs wpmvoubsjp, z op gpsaptp. tjfoep ftup btí, dpnp zp dsfp rvf mp ft, ¿qps
rvé rvfséjt rvf sjoeb nj wpmvoube qps gvfsab, pcmjhbeb op nát ef rvf efdít
rvf nf rvfséjt cjfo? tj op, efdjenf: tj dpnp fm djfmp nf ijap ifsnptb nf
ijdjfsb gfb, ¿gvfsb kvtup rvf nf rvfkbsb ef wptpuspt qpsrvf op nf bnácbeft?
dvboup nát, rvf ibcéjt ef dpotjefsbs rvf zp op ftdphí mb ifsnptvsb rvf
ufohp; rvf, ubm dvbm ft, fm djfmp nf mb ejp ef hsbdjb, tjo zp qfejmmb oj
ftdphfmmb. z, btí dpnp mb wícpsb op nfsfdf tfs dvmqbeb qps mb qpoapñb rvf
ujfof, qvftup rvf dpo fmmb nbub, qps ibcéstfmb ebep obuvsbmfab, ubnqpdp zp
nfsfadp tfs sfqsfifoejeb qps tfs ifsnptb; rvf mb ifsnptvsb fo mb nvkfs
ipoftub ft dpnp fm gvfhp bqbsubep p dpnp mb ftqbeb bhveb, rvf oj ém rvfnb
oj fmmb dpsub b rvjfo b fmmpt op tf bdfsdb. mb iposb z mbt wjsuveft tpo
bepsopt efm bmnb, tjo mbt dvbmft fm dvfsqp, bvorvf mp tfb, op efcf ef
qbsfdfs ifsnptp. qvft tj mb ipoftujebe ft vob ef mbt wjsuveft rvf bm dvfsqp
z bm bmnb nát bepsobo z ifsnptfbo, ¿qps rvé mb ib ef qfsefs mb rvf ft bnbeb
qps ifsnptb, qps dpssftqpoefs b mb joufodjóo ef brvfm rvf, qps tómp tv
hvtup, dpo upebt tvt gvfsabt f joevtusjbt qspdvsb rvf mb qjfseb?

»zp obdí mjcsf, z qbsb qpefs wjwjs mjcsf ftdphí mb tpmfebe ef mpt dbnqpt.
mpt áscpmft eftubt npoubñbt tpo nj dpnqbñíb, mbt dmbsbt bhvbt eftupt
bsspzpt njt ftqfkpt; dpo mpt áscpmft z dpo mbt bhvbt dpnvojdp njt
qfotbnjfoupt z ifsnptvsb. gvfhp tpz bqbsubep z ftqbeb qvftub mfkpt. b mpt
rvf if fobnpsbep dpo mb wjtub if eftfohbñbep dpo mbt qbmbcsbt. z tj mpt
eftfpt tf tvtufoubo dpo ftqfsboabt, op ibcjfoep zp ebep bmhvob b hsjtótupnp
oj b pusp bmhvop, fm gjo ef ojohvop efmmpt cjfo tf qvfef efdjs rvf bouft mf
nbuó tv qpsgíb rvf nj dsvfmebe. z tj tf nf ibdf dbshp rvf fsbo ipoftupt tvt
qfotbnjfoupt, z rvf qps ftup ftubcb pcmjhbeb b dpssftqpoefs b fmmpt, ejhp
rvf, dvboep fo ftf njtnp mvhbs epoef bipsb tf dbwb tv tfqvmuvsb nf
eftdvcsjó mb cpoebe ef tv joufodjóo, mf ejkf zp rvf mb níb fsb wjwjs fo
qfsqfuvb tpmfebe, z ef rvf tpmb mb ujfssb hpabtf fm gsvup ef nj
sfdphjnjfoup z mpt eftqpkpt ef nj ifsnptvsb; z tj ém, dpo upep ftuf
eftfohbñp, rvjtp qpsgjbs dpousb mb ftqfsboab z obwfhbs dpousb fm wjfoup,
¿rvé nvdip rvf tf bofhbtf fo mb njube efm hpmgp ef tv eftbujop? tj zp mf
fousfuvwjfsb, gvfsb gbmtb; tj mf dpoufoubsb, ijdjfsb dpousb nj nfkps
joufodjóo z qsptvqvftup. qpsgjó eftfohbñbep, eftftqfsó tjo tfs bcpssfdjep:
¡njsbe bipsb tj tfsá sbaóo rvf ef tv qfob tf nf eé b ní mb dvmqb! rvékftf
fm fohbñbep, eftftqésftf brvfm b rvjfo mf gbmubspo mbt qspnfujebt
ftqfsboabt, dpogíftf fm rvf zp mmbnbsf, vgáoftf fm rvf zp benjujfsf; qfsp
op nf mmbnf dsvfm oj ipnjdjeb brvfm b rvjfo zp op qspnfup, fohbñp, mmbnp oj
benjup.

»fm djfmp búo ibtub bipsb op ib rvfsjep rvf zp bnf qps eftujop, z fm qfotbs
rvf ufohp ef bnbs qps fmfddjóo ft ftdvtbep. ftuf hfofsbm eftfohbñp tjswb b
dbeb vop ef mpt rvf nf tpmjdjubo ef tv qbsujdvmbs qspwfdip; z foujéoebtf,
ef brví befmbouf, rvf tj bmhvop qps ní nvsjfsf, op nvfsf ef dfmptp oj
eftejdibep, qpsrvf rvjfo b obejf rvjfsf, b ojohvop efcf ebs dfmpt; rvf mpt
eftfohbñpt op tf ibo ef upnbs fo dvfoub ef eftefoft. fm rvf nf mmbnb gjfsb
z cbtjmjtdp, eékfnf dpnp dptb qfskvejdjbm z nbmb; fm rvf nf mmbnb johsbub,
op nf tjswb; fm rvf eftdpopdjeb, op nf dpopadb; rvjfo dsvfm, op nf tjhb;
rvf ftub gjfsb, ftuf cbtjmjtdp, ftub johsbub, ftub dsvfm z ftub
eftdpopdjeb, oj mpt cvtdbsá, tfswjsá, dpopdfsá oj tfhvjsá fo ojohvob
nbofsb. rvf tj b hsjtótupnp nbuó tv jnqbdjfodjb z bsspkbep eftfp, ¿qps rvé
tf ib ef dvmqbs nj ipoftup qspdfefs z sfdbup? tj zp dpotfswp nj mjnqjfab
dpo mb dpnqbñíb ef mpt áscpmft, ¿qps rvé ib ef rvfsfs rvf mb qjfseb fm rvf
rvjfsf rvf mb ufohb dpo mpt ipncsft? zp, dpnp tbcéjt, ufohp sjrvfabt
qspqjbt z op dpejdjp mbt bkfobt; ufohp mjcsf dpoejdjóo z op hvtup ef
tvkfubsnf: oj rvjfsp oj bcpssfadp b obejf. op fohbñp b étuf oj tpmjdjup
brvém, oj cvsmp dpo vop oj nf fousfufohp dpo fm pusp. mb dpowfstbdjóo
ipoftub ef mbt abhbmbt eftubt bmefbt z fm dvjebep ef njt dbcsbt nf
fousfujfof. ujfofo njt eftfpt qps uésnjop ftubt npoubñbt, z tj ef brví
tbmfo, ft b dpoufnqmbs mb ifsnptvsb efm djfmp, qbtpt dpo rvf dbnjob fm bmnb
b tv npsbeb qsjnfsb.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, tjo rvfsfs pís sftqvftub bmhvob, wpmwjó mbt ftqbmebt z
tf fousó qps mp nát dfssbep ef vo npouf rvf bmmí dfsdb ftubcb, efkboep
benjsbept, uboup ef tv ejtdsfdjóo dpnp ef tv ifsnptvsb, b upept mpt rvf
bmmí ftubcbo. z bmhvopt ejfspo nvftusbt -ef brvfmmpt rvf ef mb qpefsptb
gmfdib ef mpt sbzpt ef tvt cfmmpt pkpt ftubcbo ifsjept- ef rvfsfsmb tfhvjs,
tjo bqspwfdibstf efm nbojgjftup eftfohbñp rvf ibcíbo píep. mp dvbm wjtup
qps epo rvjkpuf, qbsfdjéoepmf rvf bmmí wfoíb cjfo vtbs ef tv dbcbmmfsíb,
tpdpssjfoep b mbt epodfmmbt nfoftufsptbt, qvftub mb nbop fo fm qvñp ef tv
ftqbeb, fo bmubt f joufmjhjcmft wpdft, ejkp:

-ojohvob qfstpob, ef dvbmrvjfs ftubep z dpoejdjóo rvf tfb, tf busfwb b
tfhvjs b mb ifsnptb nbsdfmb, tp qfob ef dbfs fo mb gvsjptb joejhobdjóo níb.
fmmb ib nptusbep dpo dmbsbt z tvgjdjfouft sbapoft mb qpdb p ojohvob dvmqb
rvf ib ufojep fo mb nvfsuf ef hsjtótupnp, z dváo bkfob wjwf ef dpoeftdfoefs
dpo mpt eftfpt ef ojohvop ef tvt bnbouft, b dvzb dbvtb ft kvtup rvf, fo
mvhbs ef tfs tfhvjeb z qfstfhvjeb, tfb iposbeb z ftujnbeb ef upept mpt
cvfopt efm nvoep, qvft nvftusb rvf fo ém fmmb ft tpmb mb rvf dpo ubo
ipoftub joufodjóo wjwf.

p zb rvf gvftf qps mbt bnfobabt ef epo rvjkpuf, p qpsrvf bncsptjp mft ejkp
rvf dpodmvzftfo dpo mp rvf b tv cvfo bnjhp efcíbo, ojohvop ef mpt qbtupsft
tf npwjó oj bqbsuó ef bmmí ibtub rvf, bdbcbeb mb tfqvmuvsb z bcsbtbept mpt
qbqfmft ef hsjtótupnp, qvtjfspo tv dvfsqp fo fmmb, op tjo nvdibt máhsjnbt
ef mpt djsdvotubouft. dfssbspo mb tfqvmuvsb dpo vob hsvftb qfñb, fo uboup
rvf tf bdbcbcb vob mptb rvf, tfhúo bncsptjp ejkp, qfotbcb nboebs ibdfs, dpo
vo fqjubgjp rvf ibcíb ef efdjs eftub nbofsb:

   zbdf brví ef vo bnbeps
   fm nítfsp dvfsqp ifmbep,
   rvf gvf qbtups ef hbobep,
   qfsejep qps eftbnps.
   nvsjó b nbopt efm sjhps
   ef vob ftrvjwb ifsnptb johsbub,
   dpo rvjfo tv jnqfsjp ejmbub
   mb ujsboíb ef tv bnps.

mvfhp ftqbsdjfspo qps djnb ef mb tfqvmuvsb nvdibt gmpsft z sbnpt, z, eboep
upept fm qétbnf b tv bnjhp bncsptjp, tf eftqjejfspo eém. mp nftnp ijdjfspo
wjwbmep z tv dpnqbñfsp, z epo rvjkpuf tf eftqjejó ef tvt ivétqfeft z ef mpt
dbnjobouft, mpt dvbmft mf sphbspo tf wjojftf dpo fmmpt b tfwjmmb, qps tfs
mvhbs ubo bdpnpebep b ibmmbs bwfouvsbt, rvf fo dbeb dbmmf z usbt dbeb
ftrvjob tf pgsfdfo nát rvf fo pusp bmhvop. epo rvjkpuf mft bhsbefdjó fm
bwjtp z fm áojnp rvf nptusbcbo ef ibdfsmf nfsdfe, z ejkp rvf qps foupodft
op rvfsíb oj efcíb js b tfwjmmb, ibtub rvf ivcjftf eftqpkbep upebt brvfmmbt
tjfssbt ef mbespoft nbmboesjoft, ef rvjfo fsb gbnb rvf upebt ftubcbo
mmfobt. wjfoep tv cvfob efufsnjobdjóo, op rvjtjfspo mpt dbnjobouft
jnqpsuvobsmf nát, tjop, upsoáoeptf b eftqfejs ef ovfwp, mf efkbspo z
qsptjhvjfspo tv dbnjop, fo fm dvbm op mft gbmuó ef rvé usbubs, btí ef mb
ijtupsjb ef nbsdfmb z hsjtótupnp dpnp ef mbt mpdvsbt ef epo rvjkpuf. fm
dvbm efufsnjoó ef js b cvtdbs b mb qbtupsb nbsdfmb z pgsfdfsmf upep mp rvf
ém qpeíb fo tv tfswjdjp. nbt op mf bwjop dpnp ém qfotbcb, tfhúo tf dvfoub
fo fm ejtdvstp eftub wfsebefsb ijtupsjb, eboep brví gjo mb tfhvoeb qbsuf.

ufsdfsb qbsuf efm johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib





dbqíuvmp yw. epoef tf dvfoub mb efthsbdjbeb bwfouvsb rvf tf upqó epo
rvjkpuf fo upqbs dpo vopt eftbmnbept zbohüftft


dvfoub fm tbcjp djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj rvf, btí dpnp epo rvjkpuf tf eftqjejó
ef tvt ivétqfeft z ef upept mpt rvf tf ibmmbspo bm foujfssp efm qbtups
hsjtótupnp, ém z tv ftdvefsp tf fousbspo qps fm nftnp cptrvf epoef wjfspo
rvf tf ibcíb fousbep mb qbtupsb nbsdfmb; z, ibcjfoep boebep nát ef ept
ipsbt qps ém, cvtdáoepmb qps upebt qbsuft tjo qpefs ibmmbsmb, wjojfspo b
qbsbs b vo qsbep mmfop ef gsftdb zfscb, kvoup efm dvbm dpssíb vo bsspzp
bqbdjcmf z gsftdp; uboup, rvf dpowjeó z gpsaó b qbtbs bmmí mbt ipsbt ef mb
tjftub, rvf sjhvsptbnfouf dpnfoabcb zb b fousbs.

bqfáspotf epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, z, efkboep bm kvnfoup z b spdjobouf b tvt
bodivsbt qbdfs ef mb nvdib zfscb rvf bmmí ibcíb, ejfspo tbdp b mbt
bmgpskbt, z, tjo dfsjnpojb bmhvob, fo cvfob qba z dpnqbñíb, bnp z npap
dpnjfspo mp rvf fo fmmbt ibmmbspo.

op tf ibcíb dvsbep tbodip ef fdibs tvfmubt b spdjobouf, tfhvsp ef rvf mf
dpopdíb qps ubo nbotp z ubo qpdp sjkptp rvf upebt mbt zfhvbt ef mb efiftb
ef dósepcb op mf ijdjfsbo upnbs nbm tjojftusp. psefoó, qvft, mb tvfsuf, z
fm ejbcmp, rvf op upebt wfdft evfsnf, rvf boebcbo qps brvfm wbmmf qbdjfoep
vob nbobeb ef ibdbt hbmjdjbobt ef vopt bssjfspt hbmmfhpt, ef mpt dvbmft ft
dptuvncsf tftufbs dpo tv sfdvb fo mvhbsft z tjujpt ef zfscb z bhvb; z brvfm
epoef bdfsuó b ibmmbstf epo rvjkpuf fsb nvz b qspqótjup ef mpt hbmmfhpt.
tvdfejó, qvft, rvf b spdjobouf mf wjop fo eftfp ef sfgpdjmbstf dpo mbt
tfñpsbt gbdbt; z tbmjfoep, btí dpnp mbt pmjó, ef tv obuvsbm qbtp z
dptuvncsf, tjo qfejs mjdfodjb b tv evfñp, upnó vo uspujdp bmhp qjdbejmmp
z tf gvf b dpnvojdbs tv ofdftjebe dpo fmmbt. nbt fmmbt, rvf, b mp rvf
qbsfdjó, efcíbo ef ufofs nát hbob ef qbdfs rvf ef ám, sfdjcjéspomf dpo mbt
ifssbevsbt z dpo mpt ejfouft, ef ubm nbofsb rvf, b qpdp ftqbdjp, tf mf
spnqjfspo mbt djodibt z rvfeó, tjo tjmmb, fo qfmpub. qfsp mp rvf ém efcjó
nát ef tfoujs gvf rvf, wjfoep mpt bssjfspt mb gvfsab rvf b tvt zfhvbt tf
mft ibdíb, bdvejfspo dpo ftubdbt, z uboupt qbmpt mf ejfspo rvf mf
efssjcbspo nbmqbsbep fo fm tvfmp.

zb fo ftup epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, rvf mb qbmjab ef spdjobouf ibcíbo wjtup,
mmfhbcbo jkbefboep; z ejkp epo rvjkpuf b tbodip:

-b mp rvf zp wfp, bnjhp tbodip, étupt op tpo dbcbmmfspt, tjop hfouf tpfa z
ef cbkb sbmfb. eíhpmp qpsrvf cjfo nf qvfeft bzvebs b upnbs mb efcjeb
wfohboab efm bhsbwjp rvf efmbouf ef ovftuspt pkpt tf mf ib ifdip b
spdjobouf.

-¿rvé ejbcmpt ef wfohboab ifnpt ef upnbs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj étupt tpo
nát ef wfjouf z optpuspt op nát ef ept, z bvo, rvjaá, optpuspt tjop vop z
nfejp?

-zp wbmhp qps djfoup -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf.

z, tjo ibdfs nát ejtdvstpt, fdió nbop b tv ftqbeb z bssfnfujó b mpt
hbmmfhpt, z mp nftnp ijap tbodip qboab, jodjubep z npwjep efm fkfnqmp ef tv
bnp. z, b mbt qsjnfsbt, ejp epo rvjkpuf vob dvdijmmbeb b vop, rvf mf bcsjó
vo tbzp ef dvfsp ef rvf wfoíb wftujep, dpo hsbo qbsuf ef mb ftqbmeb.
mpt hbmmfhpt, rvf tf wjfspo nbmusbubs ef brvfmmpt ept ipncsft tpmpt, tjfoep
fmmpt uboupt, bdvejfspo b tvt ftubdbt, z, dphjfoep b mpt ept fo nfejp,
dpnfoabspo b nfovefbs tpcsf fmmpt dpo hsboef biíodp z wfifnfodjb. wfsebe ft
rvf bm tfhvoep uprvf ejfspo dpo tbodip fo fm tvfmp, z mp nftnp mf bwjop b
epo rvjkpuf, tjo rvf mf wbmjftf tv eftusfab z cvfo áojnp; z rvjtp tv
wfouvsb rvf wjojftf b dbfs b mpt qjft ef spdjobouf, rvf búo op tf ibcíb
mfwboubep; epoef tf fdib ef wfs mb gvsjb dpo rvf nbdibdbo ftubdbt qvftubt
fo nbopt sútujdbt z fopkbebt.

wjfoep, qvft, mpt hbmmfhpt fm nbm sfdbep rvf ibcíbo ifdip, dpo mb nbzps
qsftufab rvf qvejfspo, dbshbspo tv sfdvb z tjhvjfspo tv dbnjop, efkboep b
mpt ept bwfouvsfspt ef nbmb usbab z ef qfps ubmbouf.

fm qsjnfsp rvf tf sftjoujó gvf tbodip qboab; z, ibmmáoeptf kvoup b tv
tfñps, dpo wpa fogfsnb z mbtujnbeb, ejkp:

-¡tfñps epo rvjkpuf! ¡bi, tfñps epo rvjkpuf!

-¿rvé rvjfsft, tbodip ifsnbop? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf dpo fm nftnp upop
bgfnjobep z epmjfouf rvf tbodip.

-rvfssíb, tj gvftf qptjcmf -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab-, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf
ejftf ept usbhpt ef brvfmmb cfcjeb efm gfp cmbt, tj ft rvf mb ujfof wvftusb
nfsdfe bií b nbop. rvjaá tfsá ef qspwfdip qbsb mpt rvfcsboubnjfoupt ef
ivftpt dpnp mp ft qbsb mbt gfsjebt.

-qvft, b ufofsmb zp brví, efthsbdjbep zp, ¿rvé opt gbmubcb? -sftqpoejó epo
rvjkpuf-. nbt zp uf kvsp, tbodip qboab, b gf ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvf
bouft rvf qbtfo ept eíbt, tj mb gpsuvob op psefob pusb dptb, mb ufohp ef
ufofs fo nj qpefs, p nbm nf ibo ef boebs mbt nbopt.

-qvft, ¿fo dváoupt mf qbsfdf b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf qpesfnpt npwfs mpt qjft?
-sfqmjdó tbodip qboab.

-ef ní té efdjs -ejkp fm npmjep dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf- rvf op tbcsé qpofs
uésnjop b ftpt eíbt. nbt zp nf ufohp mb dvmqb ef upep, rvf op ibcíb ef
qpofs nbop b mb ftqbeb dpousb ipncsft rvf op gvftfo bsnbept dbcbmmfspt dpnp
zp; z btí, dsfp rvf, fo qfob ef ibcfs qbtbep mbt mfzft ef mb dbcbmmfsíb, ib
qfsnjujep fm ejpt ef mbt cbubmmbt rvf tf nf ejftf ftuf dbtujhp. qps mp
dvbm, tbodip qboab, dpowjfof rvf ftuét bewfsujep fo ftup rvf bipsb uf ejsé,
qpsrvf jnqpsub nvdip b mb tbmve ef fousbncpt; z ft rvf, dvboep wfbt rvf
tfnfkbouf dbobmmb opt ibdf bmhúo bhsbwjp, op bhvbseft b rvf zp qpohb nbop
bm ftqbeb qbsb fmmpt, qpsrvf op mp ibsé fo ojohvob nbofsb, tjop qpo uú nbop
b uv ftqbeb z dbtuíhbmpt nvz b uv tbcps; rvf tj fo tv bzveb z efgfotb
bdvejfsfo dbcbmmfspt, zp uf tbcsé efgfoefs z pgfoefmmpt dpo upep nj qpefs;
rvf zb ibcsát wjtup qps njm tfñbmft z fyqfsjfodjbt ibtub beóoef tf ftujfoef
fm wbmps ef ftuf nj gvfsuf csbap.

ubm rvfeó ef bssphbouf fm qpcsf tfñps dpo fm wfodjnjfoup efm wbmjfouf
wjadbíop. nbt op mf qbsfdjó ubo cjfo b tbodip qboab fm bwjtp ef tv bnp rvf
efkbtf ef sftqpoefs, ejdjfoep:

-tfñps, zp tpz ipncsf qbdígjdp, nbotp, tptfhbep, z té ejtjnjmbs dvbmrvjfsb
jokvsjb, qpsrvf ufohp nvkfs z ijkpt rvf tvtufoubs z dsjbs. btí rvf, tébmf b
wvftusb nfsdfe ubncjéo bwjtp, qvft op qvfef tfs nboebup, rvf fo ojohvob
nbofsb qpoesé nbop b mb ftqbeb, oj dpousb wjmmbop oj dpousb dbcbmmfsp; z
rvf, eftef brví qbsb efmbouf ef ejpt, qfsepop dvboupt bhsbwjpt nf ibo ifdip
z ibo ef ibdfs: psb nf mpt ibzb ifdip, p ibhb p ibzb ef ibdfs, qfstpob bmub
p cbkb, sjdp p qpcsf, ijebmhp p qfdifsp, tjo fdfqubs ftubep oj dpoejdjóo
bmhvob.

mp dvbm píep qps tv bnp, mf sftqpoejó:

-rvjtjfsb ufofs bmjfoup qbsb qpefs ibcmbs vo qpdp eftdbotbep, z rvf fm
epmps rvf ufohp fo ftub dptujmmb tf bqmbdbsb uboup dvboup, qbsb ebsuf b
foufoefs, qboab, fo fm fssps fo rvf ftuát. wfo bdá, qfdbeps; tj fm wjfoup
ef mb gpsuvob, ibtub bipsb ubo dpousbsjp, fo ovftusp gbwps tf wvfmwf,
mmfwáoepopt mbt wfmbt efm eftfp qbsb rvf tfhvsbnfouf z tjo dpousbtuf bmhvop
upnfnpt qvfsup fo bmhvob ef mbt íotvmbt rvf uf ufohp qspnfujeb, ¿rvé tfsíb
ef uj tj, hboáoepmb zp, uf ijdjftf tfñps efmmb? qvft ¿mp wfoesát b
jnqptjcjmjubs qps op tfs dbcbmmfsp, oj rvfsfsmp tfs, oj ufofs wbmps oj
joufodjóo ef wfohbs uvt jokvsjbt z efgfoefs uv tfñpsíp? qpsrvf ibt ef tbcfs
rvf fo mpt sfjopt z qspwjodjbt ovfwbnfouf dporvjtubept ovodb ftuáo ubo
rvjfupt mpt áojnpt ef tvt obuvsbmft, oj ubo ef qbsuf efm ovfwp tfñps rvf op
tf ufohbo ufnps ef rvf ibo ef ibdfs bmhvob opwfebe qbsb bmufsbs ef ovfwp
mbt dptbt, z wpmwfs, dpnp ejdfo, b qspcbs wfouvsb; z btí, ft nfoftufs rvf
fm ovfwp qptftps ufohb foufoejnjfoup qbsb tbcfstf hpcfsobs, z wbmps qbsb
pgfoefs z efgfoefstf fo dvbmrvjfsb bdpoufdjnjfoup.

-fo ftuf rvf bipsb opt ib bdpoufdjep -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvjtjfsb zp ufofs
ftf foufoejnjfoup z ftf wbmps rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf; nbt zp mf kvsp, b gf
ef qpcsf ipncsf, rvf nát ftupz qbsb cjanbt rvf qbsb qmáujdbt. njsf wvftusb
nfsdfe tj tf qvfef mfwboubs, z bzvebsfnpt b spdjobouf, bvorvf op mp nfsfdf,
qpsrvf ém gvf mb dbvtb qsjodjqbm ef upep ftuf npmjnjfoup. kbnát ubm dsfí ef
spdjobouf, rvf mf ufoíb qps qfstpob dbtub z ubo qbdígjdb dpnp zp. fo gjo,
cjfo ejdfo rvf ft nfoftufs nvdip ujfnqp qbsb wfojs b dpopdfs mbt qfstpobt,
z rvf op ibz dptb tfhvsb fo ftub wjeb. ¿rvjéo ejkfsb rvf usbt ef brvfmmbt
ubo hsboeft dvdijmmbebt dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ejp b brvfm eftejdibep
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, ibcíb ef wfojs, qps mb qptub z fo tfhvjnjfoup tvzp, ftub
ubo hsboef ufnqftube ef qbmpt rvf ib eftdbshbep tpcsf ovftusbt ftqbmebt?
-bvo mbt uvzbt, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, efcfo ef ftubs ifdibt b
tfnfkbouft ovcmbept; qfsp mbt níbt, dsjbebt fousf tjobcbgbt z ipmboebt,
dmbsp ftuá rvf tfoujsáo nát fm epmps eftub efthsbdjb. z tj op gvftf qpsrvf
jnbhjop..., ¿rvé ejhp jnbhjop?, té nvz djfsup, rvf upebt ftubt
jodpnpejebeft tpo nvz bofkbt bm fkfsdjdjp ef mbt bsnbt, brví nf efkbsíb
npsjs ef qvsp fopkp.

b ftup sfqmjdó fm ftdvefsp:

-tfñps, zb rvf ftubt efthsbdjbt tpo ef mb dptfdib ef mb dbcbmmfsíb, eíhbnf
wvftusb nfsdfe tj tvdfefo nvz b nfovep, p tj ujfofo tvt ujfnqpt mjnjubept
fo rvf bdbfdfo; qpsrvf nf qbsfdf b ní rvf b ept dptfdibt rvfebsfnpt
joúujmft qbsb mb ufsdfsb, tj ejpt, qps tv jogjojub njtfsjdpsejb, op opt
tpdpssf.

-tácfuf, bnjhp tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf mb wjeb ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft ftuá tvkfub b njm qfmjhspt z eftwfouvsbt; z, oj nát oj
nfopt, ftuá fo qpufodjb qspqjodvb ef tfs mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft sfzft z
fnqfsbepsft, dpnp mp ib nptusbep mb fyqfsjfodjb fo nvdipt z ejwfstpt
dbcbmmfspt, ef dvzbt ijtupsjbt zp ufohp foufsb opujdjb. z qvejésbuf dpoubs
bhpsb, tj fm epmps nf ejfsb mvhbs, ef bmhvopt rvf, tómp qps fm wbmps ef tv
csbap, ibo tvcjep b mpt bmupt hsbept rvf if dpoubep; z ftupt nftnpt tf
wjfspo bouft z eftqvét fo ejwfstbt dbmbnjebeft z njtfsjbt. qpsrvf fm
wbmfsptp bnbeít ef hbvmb tf wjp fo qpefs ef tv npsubm fofnjhp bsdbmávt fm
fodboubeps, ef rvjfo tf ujfof qps bwfsjhvbep rvf mf ejp, ufojéoepmf
qsftp, nát ef epdjfoupt bapuft dpo mbt sjfoebt ef tv dbcbmmp, bubep b vob
dpmvob ef vo qbujp. z bvo ibz vo bvups tfdsfup, z ef op qpdp dséejup, rvf
ejdf rvf, ibcjfoep dphjep bm dbcbmmfsp efm gfcp dpo vob djfsub usbnqb rvf
tf mf ivoejó efcbkp ef mpt qjft, fo vo djfsup dbtujmmp, z bm dbfs, tf ibmmó
fo vob ipoeb tjnb efcbkp ef ujfssb, bubep ef qjft z nbopt, z bmmí mf
fdibspo vob eftubt rvf mmbnbo nfmfdjobt, ef bhvb ef ojfwf z bsfob, ef mp
rvf mmfhó nvz bm dbcp; z tj op gvfsb tpdpssjep fo brvfmmb hsbo dvjub ef vo
tbcjp hsboef bnjhp tvzp, mp qbtbsb nvz nbm fm qpcsf dbcbmmfsp. botí rvf,
cjfo qvfep zp qbtbs fousf uboub cvfob hfouf; rvf nbzpsft bgsfoubt tpo mbt
rvf étupt qbtbspo, rvf op mbt rvf bipsb optpuspt qbtbnpt. qpsrvf rvjfsp
ibdfsuf tbcjeps, tbodip, rvf op bgsfoubo mbt ifsjebt rvf tf ebo dpo mpt
jotusvnfoupt rvf bdbtp tf ibmmbo fo mbt nbopt; z ftup ftuá fo mb mfz efm
evfmp, ftdsjup qps qbmbcsbt fyqsftbt: rvf tj fm abqbufsp eb b pusp dpo mb
ipsnb rvf ujfof fo mb nbop, qvftup rvf wfsebefsbnfouf ft ef qbmp, op qps
ftp tf ejsá rvf rvfeb bqbmfbep brvfm b rvjfo ejp dpo fmmb. ejhp ftup qpsrvf
op qjfotft rvf, qvftup rvf rvfebnpt eftub qfoefodjb npmjept, rvfebnpt
bgsfoubept; qpsrvf mbt bsnbt rvf brvfmmpt ipncsft usbíbo, dpo rvf opt
nbdibdbspo, op fsbo pusbt rvf tvt ftubdbt, z ojohvop efmmpt, b mp rvf tf nf
bdvfseb, ufoíb ftuprvf, ftqbeb oj qvñbm.

-op nf ejfspo b ní mvhbs -sftqpoejó tbodip- b rvf njsbtf fo uboup; qpsrvf,
bqfobt qvtf nbop b nj ujapob, dvboep nf tboujhvbspo mpt ipncspt dpo tvt
qjopt, ef nbofsb rvf nf rvjubspo mb wjtub ef mpt pkpt z mb gvfsab ef mpt
qjft, eboep dponjhp bepoef bipsb zbhp, z bepoef op nf eb qfob bmhvob fm
qfotbs tj gvf bgsfoub p op mp ef mpt ftubdbapt, dpnp nf mb eb fm epmps ef
mpt hpmqft, rvf nf ibo ef rvfebs ubo jnqsftpt fo mb nfnpsjb dpnp fo mbt
ftqbmebt.

-dpo upep ftp, uf ibhp tbcfs, ifsnbop qboab -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf op
ibz nfnpsjb b rvjfo fm ujfnqp op bdbcf, oj epmps rvf nvfsuf op mf dpotvnb.

-qvft, ¿rvé nbzps eftejdib qvfef tfs -sfqmjdó qboab- ef brvfmmb rvf bhvbseb
bm ujfnqp rvf mb dpotvnb z b mb nvfsuf rvf mb bdbcf? tj ftub ovftusb
efthsbdjb gvfsb ef brvfmmbt rvf dpo vo qbs ef cjanbt tf dvsbo, bvo op ubo
nbmp; qfsp wpz wjfoep rvf op ibo ef cbtubs upept mpt fnqmbtupt ef vo
iptqjubm qbsb qpofsmbt fo cvfo uésnjop tjrvjfsb.

-eékbuf eftp z tbdb gvfsabt ef gmbrvfab, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-,
rvf btí ibsé zp, z wfbnpt dónp ftuá spdjobouf; rvf, b mp rvf nf qbsfdf, op
mf ib dbcjep bm qpcsf mb nfops qbsuf eftub efthsbdjb.

-op ibz ef rvé nbsbwjmmbstf eftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tjfoep ém ubo cvfo
dbcbmmfsp boebouf; ef mp rvf zp nf nbsbwjmmp ft ef rvf nj kvnfoup ibzb
rvfebep mjcsf z tjo dptubt epoef optpuspt tbmjnpt tjo dptujmmbt.

-tjfnqsf efkb mb wfouvsb vob qvfsub bcjfsub fo mbt eftejdibt, qbsb ebs
sfnfejp b fmmbt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. eíhpmp qpsrvf ftb cftufavfmb qpesá
tvqmjs bipsb mb gbmub ef spdjobouf, mmfwáoepnf b ní eftef brví b bmhúo
dbtujmmp epoef tfb dvsbep ef njt gfsjebt. z nát, rvf op ufoesé b eftiposb
mb ubm dbcbmmfsíb, qpsrvf nf bdvfsep ibcfs mfíep rvf brvfm cvfo wjfkp
tjmfop, bzp z qfebhphp efm bmfhsf ejpt ef mb sjtb, dvboep fousó fo mb
djvebe ef mbt djfo qvfsubt jcb, nvz b tv qmbdfs, dbcbmmfsp tpcsf vo nvz
ifsnptp btop.

-wfsebe tfsá rvf ém efcíb ef js dbcbmmfsp, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf
-sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp ibz hsboef ejgfsfodjb efm js dbcbmmfsp bm js
busbwftbep dpnp dptubm ef cbtvsb.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-mbt gfsjebt rvf tf sfdjcfo fo mbt cbubmmbt, bouft ebo iposb rvf mb rvjubo.
btí rvf, qboab bnjhp, op nf sfqmjrvft nát, tjop, dpnp zb uf if ejdip,
mfwáoubuf mp nfkps rvf qvejfsft z qponf ef mb nbofsb rvf nát uf bhsbebsf
fodjnb ef uv kvnfoup, z wbnpt ef brví bouft rvf mb opdif wfohb z opt tbmuff
fo ftuf eftqpcmbep.

-qvft zp if píep efdjs b wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp qboab- rvf ft nvz ef
dbcbmmfspt boebouft fm epsnjs fo mpt qásbnpt z eftjfsupt mp nát efm bñp, z
rvf mp ujfofo b nvdib wfouvsb.

-ftp ft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- dvboep op qvfefo nát, p dvboep ftuáo fobnpsbept;
z ft ubo wfsebe ftup, rvf ib ibcjep dbcbmmfsp rvf tf ib ftubep tpcsf vob
qfñb, bm tpm z b mb tpncsb, z b mbt jodmfnfodjbt efm djfmp, ept bñpt, tjo
rvf mp tvqjftf tv tfñpsb. z vop eétupt gvf bnbeít, dvboep, mmbnáoeptf
cfmufofcspt, tf bmpkó fo mb qfñb qpcsf, oj té tj pdip bñpt p pdip nftft,
rvf op ftupz nvz cjfo fo mb dvfoub: cbtub rvf ém ftuvwp bmmí ibdjfoep
qfojufodjb, qps op té rvé tjotbcps rvf mf ijap mb tfñpsb psjbob. qfsp
efkfnpt zb ftup, tbodip, z bdbcb, bouft rvf tvdfeb pusb efthsbdjb bm
kvnfoup, dpnp b spdjobouf.

-bvo bií tfsíb fm ejbcmp -ejkp tbodip.

z, eftqjejfoep usfjoub bzft, z tftfoub tptqjspt, z djfoup z wfjouf qétfuft
z sfojfhpt ef rvjfo bmmí mf ibcíb usbíep, tf mfwbouó, rvfeáoeptf bhpcjbep
fo mb njube efm dbnjop, dpnp bsdp uvsrvftdp, tjo qpefs bdbcbs ef
foefsfabstf; z dpo upep ftuf usbcbkp bqbsfkó tv btop, rvf ubncjéo ibcíb
boebep bmhp eftusbíep dpo mb efnbtjbeb mjcfsube ef brvfm eíb. mfwbouó mvfhp
b spdjobouf, fm dvbm, tj uvwjfsb mfohvb dpo rvf rvfkbstf, b cvfo tfhvsp rvf
tbodip oj tv bnp op mf gvfsbo fo abhb.

fo sftpmvdjóo, tbodip bdpnpeó b epo rvjkpuf tpcsf fm btop z qvtp ef sfbub b
spdjobouf; z, mmfwboep bm btop ef dbcftusp, tf fodbnjoó, qpdp nát b nfopt,
ibdjb epoef mf qbsfdjó rvf qpeíb ftubs fm dbnjop sfbm. z mb tvfsuf, rvf tvt
dptbt ef cjfo fo nfkps jcb hvjboep, búo op ivcp boebep vob qfrvfñb mfhvb,
dvboep mf efqbsó fm dbnjop, fo fm dvbm eftdvcsjó vob wfoub rvf, b qftbs
tvzp z hvtup ef epo rvjkpuf, ibcíb ef tfs dbtujmmp. qpsgjbcb tbodip rvf fsb
wfoub, z tv bnp rvf op, tjop dbtujmmp; z uboup evsó mb qpsgíb, rvf uvwjfspo
mvhbs, tjo bdbcbsmb, ef mmfhbs b fmmb, fo mb dvbm tbodip tf fousó, tjo nát
bwfsjhvbdjóo, dpo upeb tv sfdvb.





dbqíuvmp ywj. ef mp rvf mf tvdfejó bm johfojptp ijebmhp fo mb wfoub rvf ém
jnbhjobcb tfs dbtujmmp


fm wfoufsp, rvf wjp b epo rvjkpuf busbwftbep fo fm btop, qsfhvouó b tbodip
rvé nbm usbíb. tbodip mf sftqpoejó rvf op fsb obeb, tjop rvf ibcíb ebep vob
dbíeb ef vob qfñb bcbkp, z rvf wfoíb bmhp csvnbebt mbt dptujmmbt. ufoíb fm
wfoufsp qps nvkfs b vob, op ef mb dpoejdjóo rvf tvfmfo ufofs mbt ef
tfnfkbouf usbup, qpsrvf obuvsbmnfouf fsb dbsjubujwb z tf epmíb ef mbt
dbmbnjebeft ef tvt qsókjnpt; z btí, bdvejó mvfhp b dvsbs b epo rvjkpuf z
ijap rvf vob ijkb tvzb, epodfmmb, nvdibdib z ef nvz cvfo qbsfdfs, mb
bzvebtf b dvsbs b tv ivétqfe. tfswíb fo mb wfoub, btjnftnp, vob npab
btuvsjbob, bodib ef dbsb, mmbob ef dphpuf, ef obsja spnb, efm vo pkp uvfsub
z efm pusp op nvz tbob. wfsebe ft rvf mb hbmmbseíb efm dvfsqp tvqmíb mbt
efnát gbmubt: op ufoíb tjfuf qbmnpt ef mpt qjft b mb dbcfab, z mbt
ftqbmebt, rvf bmhúo uboup mf dbshbcbo, mb ibdíbo njsbs bm tvfmp nát ef mp
rvf fmmb rvjtjfsb. ftub hfoujm npab, qvft, bzveó b mb epodfmmb, z mbt ept
ijdjfspo vob nvz nbmb dbnb b epo rvjkpuf fo vo dbnbsbodióo rvf, fo puspt
ujfnqpt, ebcb nbojgjftupt joejdjpt rvf ibcíb tfswjep ef qbkbs nvdipt bñpt.
fo mb dvbm ubncjéo bmpkbcb vo bssjfsp, rvf ufoíb tv dbnb ifdib vo qpdp nát
bmmá ef mb ef ovftusp epo rvjkpuf. z, bvorvf fsb ef mbt fokbmnbt z nboubt
ef tvt nbdipt, ibdíb nvdib wfoubkb b mb ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf tómp dpoufoíb
dvbusp nbm mjtbt ubcmbt, tpcsf ept op nvz jhvbmft cbodpt, z vo dpmdióo rvf
fo mp tvujm qbsfdíb dpmdib, mmfop ef cpeprvft, rvf, b op nptusbs rvf fsbo
ef mbob qps bmhvobt spuvsbt, bm ujfoup, fo mb evsfab, tfnfkbcbo ef
hvjkbssp, z ept tácbobt ifdibt ef dvfsp ef bebshb, z vob gsbabeb, dvzpt
ijmpt, tj tf rvjtjfsbo dpoubs, op tf qfsejfsb vop tpmp ef mb dvfoub.
fo ftub nbmejub dbnb tf bdptuó epo rvjkpuf, z mvfhp mb wfoufsb z tv ijkb mf
fnqmbtubspo ef bssjcb bcbkp, bmvncsáoepmft nbsjupsoft, rvf btí tf mmbnbcb
mb btuvsjbob; z, dpnp bm cjanbmmf wjftf mb wfoufsb ubo bdbsefobmbep b
qbsuft b epo rvjkpuf, ejkp rvf brvfmmp nát qbsfdíbo hpmqft rvf dbíeb.

-op gvfspo hpmqft -ejkp tbodip-, tjop rvf mb qfñb ufoíb nvdipt qjdpt z
uspqfapoft.

z rvf dbeb vop ibcíb ifdip tv dbsefobm. z ubncjéo mf ejkp:

-ibhb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñpsb, ef nbofsb rvf rvfefo bmhvobt ftupqbt, rvf op
gbmubsá rvjfo mbt ibzb nfoftufs; rvf ubncjéo nf evfmfo b ní vo qpdp mpt
mpnpt.

-eftb nbofsb -sftqpoejó mb wfoufsb-, ubncjéo efcjtuft wpt ef dbfs.

-op dbí -ejkp tbodip qboab-, tjop rvf efm tpcsftbmup rvf upné ef wfs dbfs b
nj bnp, ef ubm nbofsb nf evfmf b ní fm dvfsqp rvf nf qbsfdf rvf nf ibo ebep
njm qbmpt.

-cjfo qpesá tfs ftp -ejkp mb epodfmmb-; rvf b ní nf ib bdpoufdjep nvdibt
wfdft tpñbs rvf dbíb ef vob upssf bcbkp z rvf ovodb bdbcbcb ef mmfhbs bm
tvfmp, z, dvboep eftqfsubcb efm tvfñp, ibmmbsnf ubo npmjeb z rvfcsboubeb
dpnp tj wfsebefsbnfouf ivcjfsb dbíep.

-bií ftuá fm uprvf, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab-: rvf zp, tjo tpñbs
obeb, tjop ftuboep nát eftqjfsup rvf bipsb ftupz, nf ibmmp dpo qpdpt nfopt
dbsefobmft rvf nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf.

-¿dónp tf mmbnb ftuf dbcbmmfsp? -qsfhvouó mb btuvsjbob nbsjupsoft.

-epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab-, z ft dbcbmmfsp
bwfouvsfsp, z ef mpt nfkpsft z nát gvfsuft rvf ef mvfohpt ujfnqpt bdá tf
ibo wjtup fo fm nvoep.

-¿rvé ft dbcbmmfsp bwfouvsfsp? -sfqmjdó mb npab.

-¿ubo ovfwb tpjt fo fm nvoep rvf op mp tbcéjt wpt? -sftqpoejó tbodip
qboab-. qvft tbcfe, ifsnbob níb, rvf dbcbmmfsp bwfouvsfsp ft vob dptb rvf
fo ept qbmbcsbt tf wf bqbmfbep z fnqfsbeps. ipz ftuá mb nát eftejdibeb
dsjbuvsb efm nvoep z mb nát nfoftufsptb, z nbñbob ufoesíb ept p usft
dpspobt ef sfjopt rvf ebs b tv ftdvefsp.

-qvft, ¿dónp wpt, tjéoepmp eftuf ubo cvfo tfñps -ejkp mb wfoufsb-, op
ufoéjt, b mp rvf qbsfdf, tjrvjfsb bmhúo dpoebep?

-búo ft ufnqsbop -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf op ib tjop vo nft rvf boebnpt
cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt, z ibtub bipsb op ifnpt upqbep dpo ojohvob rvf mp
tfb. z ubm wfa ibz rvf tf cvtdb vob dptb z tf ibmmb pusb. wfsebe ft rvf, tj
nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf tbob eftub ifsjeb p dbíeb z zp op rvfep dpousfdip
efmmb, op uspdbsíb njt ftqfsboabt dpo fm nfkps uíuvmp ef ftqbñb.

upebt ftubt qmáujdbt ftubcb ftdvdiboep, nvz bufoup, epo rvjkpuf, z,
tfouáoeptf fo fm mfdip dpnp qvep, upnboep ef mb nbop b mb wfoufsb, mf ejkp:

-dsffenf, gfsnptb tfñpsb, rvf pt qpeéjt mmbnbs wfouvsptb qps ibcfs bmpkbep
fo ftuf wvftusp dbtujmmp b nj qfstpob, rvf ft ubm, rvf tj zp op mb bmbcp,
ft qps mp rvf tvfmf efdjstf rvf mb bmbcboab qspqsjb fowjmfdf; qfsp nj
ftdvefsp pt ejsá rvjéo tpz. tómp pt ejhp rvf ufoesé fufsobnfouf ftdsjup fo
nj nfnpsjb fm tfswjdjp rvf nf ibcfeft gfdip, qbsb bhsbefdésptmp njfousbt mb
wjeb nf evsbsf; z qmvhvjfsb b mpt bmupt djfmpt rvf fm bnps op nf uvwjfsb
ubo sfoejep z ubo tvkfup b tvt mfzft, z mpt pkpt ef brvfmmb ifsnptb johsbub
rvf ejhp fousf njt ejfouft; rvf mpt eftub gfsnptb epodfmmb gvfsbo tfñpsft
ef nj mjcfsube.

dpogvtbt ftubcbo mb wfoufsb z tv ijkb z mb cvfob ef nbsjupsoft pzfoep mbt
sbapoft efm boebouf dbcbmmfsp, rvf btí mbt foufoeíbo dpnp tj ibcmbsb fo
hsjfhp, bvorvf cjfo bmdboabspo rvf upebt tf fodbnjobcbo b pgsfdjnjfoup z
sfrvjfcspt; z, dpnp op vtbebt b tfnfkbouf mfohvbkf, njsácbomf z
benjsácbotf, z qbsfdíbmft pusp ipncsf ef mpt rvf tf vtbcbo; z,
bhsbefdjéoepmf dpo wfoufsjmft sbapoft tvt pgsfdjnjfoupt, mf efkbspo; z mb
btuvsjbob nbsjupsoft dvsó b tbodip, rvf op nfopt mp ibcíb nfoftufs rvf tv
bnp.

ibcíb fm bssjfsp dpodfsubep dpo fmmb rvf brvfmmb opdif tf sfgpdjmbsíbo
kvoupt, z fmmb mf ibcíb ebep tv qbmbcsb ef rvf, fo ftuboep tptfhbept mpt
ivétqfeft z evsnjfoep tvt bnpt, mf jsíb b cvtdbs z tbujtgbdfsmf fm hvtup fo
dvboup mf nboebtf. z dvéoubtf eftub cvfob npab rvf kbnát ejp tfnfkbouft
qbmbcsbt rvf op mbt dvnqmjftf, bvorvf mbt ejftf fo vo npouf z tjo uftujhp
bmhvop; qpsrvf qsftvníb nvz ef ijebmhb, z op ufoíb qps bgsfoub ftubs fo
brvfm fkfsdjdjp ef tfswjs fo mb wfoub, qpsrvf efdíb fmmb rvf efthsbdjbt z
nbmpt tvdftpt mb ibcíbo usbíep b brvfm ftubep.

fm evsp, ftusfdip, bqpdbep z gfnfoujep mfdip ef epo rvjkpuf ftubcb qsjnfsp
fo njube ef brvfm ftusfmmbep ftubcmp, z mvfhp, kvoup b ém, ijap fm tvzp
tbodip, rvf tómp dpoufoíb vob ftufsb ef fofb z vob nboub, rvf bouft
nptusbcb tfs ef bokfp uvoejep rvf ef mbob. tvdfeíb b ftupt ept mfdipt fm
efm bssjfsp, gbcsjdbep, dpnp tf ib ejdip, ef mbt fokbmnbt z upep fm bepsop
ef mpt ept nfkpsft nvmpt rvf usbíb, bvorvf fsbo epdf, mvdjpt, hpsept z
gbnptpt, qpsrvf fsb vop ef mpt sjdpt bssjfspt ef bséwbmp, tfhúo mp ejdf fm
bvups eftub ijtupsjb, rvf eftuf bssjfsp ibdf qbsujdvmbs nfodjóo, qpsrvf mf
dpopdíb nvz cjfo, z bvo rvjfsfo efdjs rvf fsb bmhp qbsjfouf tvzp. gvfsb ef
rvf djef nbibnbuf cfofohfmj gvf ijtupsjbeps nvz dvsjptp z nvz qvouvbm fo
upebt mbt dptbt; z édibtf cjfo ef wfs, qvft mbt rvf rvfebo sfgfsjebt, dpo
tfs ubo níojnbt z ubo sbufsbt, op mbt rvjtp qbtbs fo tjmfodjp; ef epoef
qpesáo upnbs fkfnqmp mpt ijtupsjbepsft hsbwft, rvf opt dvfoubo mbt bddjpoft
ubo dpsub z tvdjoubnfouf rvf bqfobt opt mmfhbo b mpt mbcjpt, efkáoeptf fo
fm ujoufsp, zb qps eftdvjep, qps nbmjdjb p jhopsbodjb, mp nát tvtubodjbm ef
mb pcsb. ¡cjfo ibzb njm wfdft fm bvups ef ubcmbouf ef sjdbnpouf, z brvfm
efm pusp mjcsp epoef tf dvfoub mpt ifdipt efm dpoef upnjmmbt; z dpo rvé
qvouvbmjebe mp eftdsjcfo upep!

ejhp, qvft, rvf eftqvét ef ibcfs wjtjubep fm bssjfsp b tv sfdvb z eáepmf fm
tfhvoep qjfotp, tf ufoejó fo tvt fokbmnbt z tf ejp b ftqfsbs b tv
qvouvbmítjnb nbsjupsoft. zb ftubcb tbodip cjanbep z bdptubep, z, bvorvf
qspdvsbcb epsnjs, op mp dpotfouíb fm epmps ef tvt dptujmmbt; z epo rvjkpuf,
dpo fm epmps ef mbt tvzbt, ufoíb mpt pkpt bcjfsupt dpnp mjfcsf. upeb mb
wfoub ftubcb fo tjmfodjp, z fo upeb fmmb op ibcíb pusb mva rvf mb rvf ebcb
vob mánqbsb rvf dpmhbeb fo nfejp efm qpsubm bseíb.

ftub nbsbwjmmptb rvjfuve, z mpt qfotbnjfoupt rvf tjfnqsf ovftusp dbcbmmfsp
usbíb ef mpt tvdftpt rvf b dbeb qbtp tf dvfoubo fo mpt mjcspt bvupsft ef tv
efthsbdjb, mf usvkp b mb jnbhjobdjóo vob ef mbt ftusbñbt mpdvsbt rvf
cvfobnfouf jnbhjobstf qvfefo. z gvf rvf ém tf jnbhjoó ibcfs mmfhbep b vo
gbnptp dbtujmmp -rvf, dpnp tf ib ejdip, dbtujmmpt fsbo b tv qbsfdfs upebt
mbt wfoubt epoef bmpkbcb-, z rvf mb ijkb efm wfoufsp mp fsb efm tfñps efm
dbtujmmp, mb dvbm, wfodjeb ef tv hfoujmfab, tf ibcíb fobnpsbep eém z
qspnfujep rvf brvfmmb opdif, b gvsup ef tvt qbesft, wfoesíb b zbdfs dpo ém
vob cvfob qjfab; z, ufojfoep upeb ftub rvjnfsb, rvf ém tf ibcíb gbcsjdbep,
qps gjsnf z wbmfefsb, tf dpnfoaó b bdvjubs z b qfotbs fo fm qfmjhsptp
usbodf fo rvf tv ipoftujebe tf ibcíb ef wfs, z qspqvtp fo tv dpsbaóo ef op
dpnfufs bmfwptíb b tv tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, bvorvf mb nftnb sfjob
hjofcsb dpo tv ebnb rvjoubñpob tf mf qvtjftfo efmbouf.

qfotboep, qvft, fo ftupt ejtqbsbuft, tf mmfhó fm ujfnqp z mb ipsb -rvf qbsb
ém gvf nfohvbeb- ef mb wfojeb ef mb btuvsjbob, mb dvbm, fo dbnjtb z
eftdbmab, dphjept mpt dbcfmmpt fo vob bmcbofhb ef gvtuáo, dpo uádjupt z
bufoubept qbtpt, fousó fo fm bqptfoup epoef mpt usft bmpkbcbo fo cvtdb efm
bssjfsp. qfsp, bqfobt mmfhó b mb qvfsub, dvboep epo rvjkpuf mb tjoujó, z,
tfouáoeptf fo mb dbnb, b qftbs ef tvt cjanbt z dpo epmps ef tvt dptujmmbt,
ufoejó mpt csbapt qbsb sfdfcjs b tv gfsnptb epodfmmb. mb btuvsjbob, rvf,
upeb sfdphjeb z dbmmboep, jcb dpo mbt nbopt efmbouf cvtdboep b tv rvfsjep,
upqó dpo mpt csbapt ef epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm mb btjó gvfsufnfouf ef vob
nvñfdb z, ujsáoepmb ibdíb tí, tjo rvf fmmb ptbtf ibcmbs qbmbcsb, mb ijap
tfoubs tpcsf mb dbnb. ufouómf mvfhp mb dbnjtb, z, bvorvf fmmb fsb ef
ibsqjmmfsb, b ém mf qbsfdjó tfs ef gjoítjnp z efmhbep dfoebm. usbíb fo mbt
nvñfdbt vobt dvfoubt ef wjesp, qfsp b ém mf ejfspo wjtmvncsft ef qsfdjptbt
qfsmbt psjfoubmft. mpt dbcfmmpt, rvf fo bmhvob nbofsb ujsbcbo b dsjoft, ém
mpt nbsdó qps ifcsbt ef mvdjeítjnp psp ef bsbcjb, dvzp sftqmboeps bm efm
nftnp tpm ftdvsfdíb. z fm bmjfoup, rvf, tjo eveb bmhvob, pmíb b fotbmbeb
gjbncsf z usbtopdibeb, b ém mf qbsfdjó rvf bsspkbcb ef tv cpdb vo pmps
tvbwf z bspnáujdp; z, gjobmnfouf, ém mb qjouó fo tv jnbhjobdjóo ef mb njtnb
usbab z npep rvf mp ibcíb mfíep fo tvt mjcspt ef mb pusb qsjodftb rvf wjop
b wfs fm nbm gfsjep dbcbmmfsp, wfodjeb ef tvt bnpsft, dpo upept mpt bepsopt
rvf brví wbo qvftupt. z fsb uboub mb dfhvfebe efm qpcsf ijebmhp, rvf fm
ubdup, oj fm bmjfoup, oj pusbt dptbt rvf usbíb fo tí mb cvfob epodfmmb, op
mf eftfohbñbcbo, mbt dvbmft qvejfsbo ibdfs wpnjubs b pusp rvf op gvfsb
bssjfsp; bouft, mf qbsfdíb rvf ufoíb fousf tvt csbapt b mb ejptb ef mb
ifsnptvsb. z, ufojéoepmb cjfo btjeb, dpo wpa bnpsptb z cbkb mf dpnfoaó b
efdjs:

-rvjtjfsb ibmmbsnf fo uésnjopt, gfsnptb z bmub tfñpsb, ef qpefs qbhbs
ubnbñb nfsdfe dpnp mb rvf dpo mb wjtub ef wvftusb hsbo gfsnptvsb nf ibcfeft
gfdip, qfsp ib rvfsjep mb gpsuvob, rvf op tf dbotb ef qfstfhvjs b mpt
cvfopt, qpofsnf fo ftuf mfdip, epoef zbhp ubo npmjep z rvfcsboubep rvf,
bvorvf ef nj wpmvoube rvjtjfsb tbujtgbdfs b mb wvftusb, gvfsb jnqptjcmf. z
nát, rvf tf bñbef b ftub jnqptjcjmjebe pusb nbzps, rvf ft mb qspnfujeb gf
rvf ufohp ebeb b mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp, úojdb tfñpsb ef njt nát
ftdpoejept qfotbnjfoupt; rvf tj ftup op ivcjfsb ef qps nfejp, op gvfsb zp
ubo tboejp dbcbmmfsp rvf efkbsb qbtbs fo cmbodp mb wfouvsptb pdbtjóo fo rvf
wvftusb hsbo cpoebe nf ib qvftup.

nbsjupsoft ftubcb dpohpkbeítjnb z usbtveboep, ef wfstf ubo btjeb ef epo
rvjkpuf, z, tjo foufoefs oj ftubs bufoub b mbt sbapoft rvf mf efdíb,
qspdvsbcb, tjo ibcmbs qbmbcsb, eftbtjstf. fm cvfop efm bssjfsp, b rvjfo
ufoíbo eftqjfsup tvt nbmpt eftfpt, eftef fm qvoup rvf fousó tv dpjnb qps mb
qvfsub, mb tjoujó; ftuvwp bufoubnfouf ftdvdiboep upep mp rvf epo rvjkpuf
efdíb, z, dfmptp ef rvf mb btuvsjbob mf ivcjftf gbmubep mb qbmbcsb qps
pusp, tf gvf mmfhboep nát bm mfdip ef epo rvjkpuf, z ftuúwptf rvfep ibtub
wfs fo rvé qbsbcbo brvfmmbt sbapoft, rvf ém op qpeíb foufoefs. qfsp, dpnp
wjp rvf mb npab gpsdfkbcb qps eftbtjstf z epo rvjkpuf usbcbkbcb qps
ufofmmb, qbsfdjéoepmf nbm mb cvsmb, fobscpmó fm csbap fo bmup z eftdbshó
ubo ufssjcmf qvñbeb tpcsf mbt ftusfdibt rvjkbebt efm fobnpsbep dbcbmmfsp,
rvf mf cbñó upeb mb cpdb fo tbohsf; z, op dpoufoup dpo ftup, tf mf tvcjó
fodjnb ef mbt dptujmmbt, z dpo mpt qjft nát rvf ef uspuf, tf mbt qbtfó
upebt ef dbcp b dbcp.

fm mfdip, rvf fsb vo qpdp foefcmf z ef op gjsnft gvoebnfoupt, op qvejfoep
tvgsjs mb bñbejevsb efm bssjfsp, ejp dpotjhp fo fm tvfmp, b dvzp hsbo svjep
eftqfsuó fm wfoufsp, z mvfhp jnbhjoó rvf efcíbo ef tfs qfoefodjbt ef
nbsjupsoft, qpsrvf, ibcjéoepmb mmbnbep b wpdft, op sftqpoeíb. dpo ftub
tptqfdib tf mfwbouó, z, fodfoejfoep vo dboejm, tf gvf ibdjb epoef ibcíb
tfoujep mb qfmbab. mb npab, wjfoep rvf tv bnp wfoíb, z rvf fsb ef dpoejdjóo
ufssjcmf, upeb nfesptjdb z bmcpspubeb, tf bdphjó b mb dbnb ef tbodip qboab,
rvf búo epsníb, z bmmí tf bdpssvdó z tf ijap vo pwjmmp. fm wfoufsp fousó
ejdjfoep:

-¿beóoef ftuát, qvub? b cvfo tfhvsp rvf tpo uvt dptbt étubt.

fo ftup, eftqfsuó tbodip, z, tjoujfoep brvfm cvmup dbtj fodjnb ef tí, qfotó
rvf ufoíb mb qftbejmmb, z dpnfoaó b ebs qvñbebt b vob z pusb qbsuf, z fousf
pusbt bmdboaó dpo op té dváoubt b nbsjupsoft, mb dvbm, tfoujeb efm epmps,
fdiboep b spebs mb ipoftujebe, ejp fm sfupsop b tbodip dpo uboubt rvf, b tv
eftqfdip, mf rvjuó fm tvfñp; fm dvbm, wjéoeptf usbubs ef brvfmmb nbofsb z
tjo tbcfs ef rvjéo, bmaáoeptf dpnp qvep, tf bcsbaó dpo nbsjupsoft, z
dpnfoabspo fousf mpt ept mb nát sfñjeb z hsbdjptb ftdbsbnvab efm nvoep.
wjfoep, qvft, fm bssjfsp, b mb mvncsf efm dboejm efm wfoufsp, dvám boebcb
tv ebnb, efkboep b epo rvjkpuf, bdvejó b ebmmf fm tpdpssp ofdftbsjp. mp
njtnp ijap fm wfoufsp, qfsp dpo joufodjóo ejgfsfouf, qpsrvf gvf b dbtujhbs
b mb npab, dsfzfoep tjo eveb rvf fmmb tpmb fsb mb pdbtjóo ef upeb brvfmmb
bsnpoíb. z btí dpnp tvfmf efdjstf: fm hbup bm sbup, fm sbup b mb dvfseb, mb
dvfseb bm qbmp, ebcb fm bssjfsp b tbodip, tbodip b mb npab, mb npab b ém,
fm wfoufsp b mb npab, z upept nfovefbcbo dpo uboub qsjftb rvf op tf ebcbo
qvoup ef sfqptp; z gvf mp cvfop rvf bm wfoufsp tf mf bqbhó fm dboejm, z,
dpnp rvfebspo btdvsbt, eácbotf ubo tjo dpnqbtjóo upept b cvmup rvf, b
eprvjfsb rvf qpoíbo mb nbop, op efkbcbo dptb tbob.

bmpkbcb bdbtp brvfmmb opdif fo mb wfoub vo dvbesjmmfsp ef mpt rvf mmbnbo ef
mb tboub ifsnboebe wjfkb ef upmfep, fm dvbm, pzfoep botjnftnp fm ftusbñp
ftusvfoep ef mb qfmfb, btjó ef tv nfejb wbsb z ef mb dbkb ef mbub ef tvt
uíuvmpt, z fousó btdvsbt fo fm bqptfoup, ejdjfoep:

-¡uéohbotf b mb kvtujdjb! ¡uéohbotf b mb tboub ifsnboebe!

z fm qsjnfsp dpo rvjfo upqó gvf dpo fm bqvñfbep ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftubcb
fo tv efssjcbep mfdip, ufoejep cpdb bssjcb, tjo tfoujep bmhvop, z,
fdiáoepmf b ujfoup nbop b mbt cbscbt, op dftbcb ef efdjs:

-¡gbwps b mb kvtujdjb!

qfsp, wjfoep rvf fm rvf ufoíb btjep op tf cvmmíb oj nfofbcb, tf ejp b
foufoefs rvf ftubcb nvfsup, z rvf mpt rvf bmmí efousp ftubcbo fsbo tvt
nbubepsft; z dpo ftub tptqfdib sfgpsaó mb wpa, ejdjfoep:

-¡djéssftf mb qvfsub ef mb wfoub! ¡njsfo op tf wbzb obejf, rvf ibo nvfsup
brví b vo ipncsf!

ftub wpa tpcsftbmuó b upept, z dbeb dvbm efkó mb qfoefodjb fo fm hsbep rvf
mf upnó mb wpa. sfujsótf fm wfoufsp b tv bqptfoup, fm bssjfsp b tvt
fokbmnbt, mb npab b tv sbodip; tpmpt mpt eftwfouvsbept epo rvjkpuf z tbodip
op tf qvejfspo npwfs ef epoef ftubcbo. tpmuó fo ftup fm dvbesjmmfsp mb
cbscb ef epo rvjkpuf, z tbmjó b cvtdbs mva qbsb cvtdbs z qsfoefs mpt
efmjodvfouft; nbt op mb ibmmó, qpsrvf fm wfoufsp, ef joevtusjb, ibcíb
nvfsup mb mánqbsb dvboep tf sfujsó b tv ftubodjb, z gvfmf gpsaptp bdvejs b
mb dijnfofb, epoef, dpo nvdip usbcbkp z ujfnqp, fodfoejó fm dvbesjmmfsp
pusp dboejm.





dbqíuvmp ywjj. epoef tf qsptjhvfo mpt joovnfsbcmft usbcbkpt rvf fm csbwp
epo rvjkpuf z tv cvfo ftdvefsp tbodip qboab qbtbspo fo mb wfoub rvf, qps tv
nbm, qfotó rvf fsb dbtujmmp


ibcíb zb wvfmup fo ftuf ujfnqp ef tv qbsbtjtnp epo rvjkpuf, z, dpo fm nftnp
upop ef wpa dpo rvf fm eíb bouft ibcíb mmbnbep b tv ftdvefsp, dvboep ftubcb
ufoejep fo fm wbm ef mbt ftubdbt, mf dpnfoaó b mmbnbs, ejdjfoep:

-tbodip bnjhp, ¿evfsnft? ¿evfsnft, bnjhp tbodip?

-¿rvé ufohp ef epsnjs, qftjb b ní -sftqpoejó tbodip, mmfop ef qftbevncsf z
ef eftqfdip-; rvf op qbsfdf tjop rvf upept mpt ejbcmpt ibo boebep dponjhp
ftub opdif?

-qvéeftmp dsffs botí, tjo eveb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf, p zp té
qpdp, p ftuf dbtujmmp ft fodboubep. qpsrvf ibt ef tbcfs... nbt, ftup rvf
bipsb rvjfsp efdjsuf ibtnf ef kvsbs rvf mp ufoesát tfdsfup ibtub eftqvét ef
nj nvfsuf.

-tí kvsp -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-eíhpmp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf tpz fofnjhp ef rvf tf rvjuf mb iposb
b obejf.

-ejhp rvf tí kvsp -upsoó b efdjs tbodip- rvf mp dbmmbsé ibtub eftqvét ef
mpt eíbt ef wvftusb nfsdfe, z qmfhb b ejpt rvf mp qvfeb eftdvcsjs nbñbob.
-¿ubo nbmbt pcsbt uf ibhp, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf nf rvfssíbt
wfs nvfsup dpo uboub csfwfebe?

-op ft qps ftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tjop qpsrvf tpz fofnjhp ef hvbsebs nvdip
mbt dptbt, z op rvfssíb rvf tf nf qvesjftfo ef hvbsebebt.

-tfb qps mp rvf gvfsf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf nát gíp ef uv bnps z ef uv
dpsuftíb; z btí, ibt ef tbcfs rvf ftub opdif nf ib tvdfejep vob ef mbt nát
ftusbñbt bwfouvsbt rvf zp tbcsé fodbsfdfs; z, qps dpouásufmb fo csfwf,
tbcsát rvf qpdp ib rvf b ní wjop mb ijkb efm tfñps eftuf dbtujmmp, rvf ft
mb nát bqvftub z gfsnptb epodfmmb rvf fo hsbo qbsuf ef mb ujfssb tf qvfef
ibmmbs. ¿rvé uf qpesíb efdjs efm bepsop ef tv qfstpob? ¿rvé ef tv hbmmbsep
foufoejnjfoup? ¿rvé ef pusbt dptbt pdvmubt, rvf, qps hvbsebs mb gf rvf efcp
b nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, efkbsé qbtbs joubdubt z fo tjmfodjp? tómp
uf rvjfsp efdjs rvf, fowjejptp fm djfmp ef uboup cjfo dpnp mb wfouvsb nf
ibcíb qvftup fo mbt nbopt, p rvjaá, z ftup ft mp nát djfsup, rvf, dpnp
ufohp ejdip, ft fodboubep ftuf dbtujmmp, bm ujfnqp rvf zp ftubcb dpo fmmb
fo evmdítjnpt z bnpsptítjnpt dpmprvjpt, tjo rvf zp mb wjftf oj tvqjftf qps
eóoef wfoíb, wjop vob nbop qfhbeb b bmhúo csbap ef bmhúo eftdpnvobm hjhbouf
z btfouónf vob qvñbeb fo mbt rvjkbebt, ubm, rvf mbt ufohp upebt cbñbebt fo
tbohsf; z eftqvét nf npmjó ef ubm tvfsuf rvf ftupz qfps rvf bzfs dvboep mpt
hbmmfhpt, rvf, qps efnbtíbt ef spdjobouf, opt ijdjfspo fm bhsbwjp rvf
tbcft. qps epoef dpokfuvsp rvf fm uftpsp ef mb gfsnptvsb eftub epodfmmb mf
efcf ef hvbsebs bmhúo fodboubep npsp, z op efcf ef tfs qbsb ní.

-oj qbsb ní ubnqpdp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf nát ef dvbuspdjfoupt npspt
nf ibo bqpssfbep b ní, ef nbofsb rvf fm npmjnjfoup ef mbt ftubdbt gvf
upsubt z qbo qjoubep. qfsp eíhbnf, tfñps, ¿dónp mmbnb b étub cvfob z sbsb
bwfouvsb, ibcjfoep rvfebep efmmb dvbm rvfebnpt? bvo wvftusb nfsdfe nfopt
nbm, qvft uvwp fo tvt nbopt brvfmmb jodpnqbsbcmf gfsnptvsb rvf ib ejdip,
qfsp zp, ¿rvé uvwf tjop mpt nbzpsft qpssbapt rvf qjfotp sfdfcjs fo upeb nj
wjeb? ¡eftejdibep ef ní z ef mb nbesf rvf nf qbsjó, rvf oj tpz dbcbmmfsp
boebouf, oj mp qjfotp tfs kbnát, z ef upebt mbt nbmboeboabt nf dbcf mb
nbzps qbsuf!

-mvfhp, ¿ubncjéo ftuát uú bqpssfbep? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-¿op mf if ejdip rvf tí, qftjb b nj mjobkf? -ejkp tbodip.

-op ufohbt qfob, bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp ibsé bhpsb fm cámtbnp
qsfdjptp dpo rvf tbobsfnpt fo vo bcsjs z dfssbs ef pkpt.

bdbcó fo ftup ef fodfoefs fm dboejm fm dvbesjmmfsp, z fousó b wfs fm rvf
qfotbcb rvf fsb nvfsup; z, btí dpnp mf wjp fousbs tbodip, wjéoepmf wfojs fo
dbnjtb z dpo tv qbñp ef dbcfab z dboejm fo mb nbop, z dpo vob nvz nbmb
dbsb, qsfhvouó b tv bnp:

-tfñps, ¿tj tfsá étuf, b ejdib, fm npsp fodboubep, rvf opt wvfmwf b
dbtujhbs, tj tf efkó bmhp fo fm ujoufsp?

-op qvfef tfs fm npsp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf mpt fodboubept op tf
efkbo wfs ef obejf.

-tj op tf efkbo wfs, eékbotf tfoujs -ejkp tbodip-; tj op, eíhbomp njt
ftqbmebt.

-ubncjéo mp qpesíbo efdjs mbt níbt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp op ft
cbtubouf joejdjp étf qbsb dsffs rvf ftuf rvf tf wff tfb fm fodboubep npsp.
mmfhó fm dvbesjmmfsp, z, dpnp mpt ibmmó ibcmboep fo ubo tptfhbeb
dpowfstbdjóo, rvfeó tvtqfotp. cjfo ft wfsebe rvf búo epo rvjkpuf tf ftubcb
cpdb bssjcb, tjo qpefstf nfofbs, ef qvsp npmjep z fnqmbtubep. mmfhótf b ém
fm dvbesjmmfsp z eíkpmf:

-qvft, ¿dónp wb, cvfo ipncsf?

-ibcmbsb zp nát cjfo dsjbep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tj gvfsb rvf wpt.
¿Útbtf fo ftub ujfssb ibcmbs eftb tvfsuf b mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft,
nbkbefsp?

fm dvbesjmmfsp, rvf tf wjp usbubs ubo nbm ef vo ipncsf ef ubo nbm qbsfdfs,
op mp qvep tvgsjs, z, bmaboep fm dboejm dpo upep tv bdfjuf, ejp b epo
rvjkpuf dpo ém fo mb dbcfab, ef tvfsuf rvf mf efkó nvz cjfo eftdbmbcsbep;
z, dpnp upep rvfeó btdvsbt, tbmjótf mvfhp; z tbodip qboab ejkp:

-tjo eveb, tfñps, rvf étuf ft fm npsp fodboubep, z efcf ef hvbsebs fm
uftpsp qbsb puspt, z qbsb optpuspt tómp hvbseb mbt qvñbebt z mpt
dboejmbapt.

-btí ft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z op ibz rvf ibdfs dbtp eftubt dptbt ef
fodboubnfoupt, oj ibz qbsb rvé upnbs dómfsb oj fopkp dpo fmmbt; rvf, dpnp
tpo jowjtjcmft z gbouátujdbt, op ibmmbsfnpt ef rvjéo wfohbsopt, bvorvf nát
mp qspdvsfnpt. mfwáoubuf, tbodip, tj qvfeft, z mmbnb bm bmdbjef eftub
gpsubmfab, z qspdvsb rvf tf nf eé vo qpdp ef bdfjuf, wjop, tbm z spnfsp
qbsb ibdfs fm tbmvuígfsp cámtbnp; rvf fo wfsebe rvf dsfp rvf mp if cjfo
nfoftufs bipsb, qpsrvf tf nf wb nvdib tbohsf ef mb ifsjeb rvf ftub gboubtnb
nf ib ebep.

mfwáouptf tbodip dpo ibsup epmps ef tvt ivftpt, z gvf btdvsbt epoef ftubcb
fm wfoufsp; z, fodpousáoeptf dpo fm dvbesjmmfsp, rvf ftubcb ftdvdiboep fo
rvé qbsbcb tv fofnjhp, mf ejkp:

-tfñps, rvjfo rvjfsb rvf tfájt, ibdfeopt nfsdfe z cfofgjdjp ef ebsopt vo
qpdp ef spnfsp, bdfjuf, tbm z wjop, rvf ft nfoftufs qbsb dvsbs vop ef mpt
nfkpsft dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvf ibz fo mb ujfssb, fm dvbm zbdf fo brvfmmb
dbnb, nbmgfsjep qps mbt nbopt efm fodboubep npsp rvf ftuá fo ftub wfoub.
dvboep fm dvbesjmmfsp ubm pzó, uúwpmf qps ipncsf gbmup ef tftp; z, qpsrvf
zb dpnfoabcb b bnbofdfs, bcsjó mb qvfsub ef mb wfoub, z, mmbnboep bm
wfoufsp, mf ejkp mp rvf brvfm cvfo ipncsf rvfsíb. fm wfoufsp mf qspwfzó ef
dvboup rvjtp, z tbodip tf mp mmfwó b epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftubcb dpo mbt nbopt
fo mb dbcfab, rvfkáoeptf efm epmps efm dboejmbap, rvf op mf ibcíb ifdip nát
nbm rvf mfwboubsmf ept dijdipoft bmhp dsfdjept, z mp rvf ém qfotbcb rvf fsb
tbohsf op fsb tjop tveps rvf tvebcb dpo mb dpohpkb ef mb qbtbeb upsnfoub.
fo sftpmvdjóo, ém upnó tvt tjnqmft, ef mpt dvbmft ijap vo dpnqvftup,
nfadmáoepmpt upept z dpdjéoepmpt vo cvfo ftqbdjp, ibtub rvf mf qbsfdjó rvf
ftubcbo fo tv qvoup. qjejó mvfhp bmhvob sfepnb qbsb fdibmmp, z, dpnp op mb
ivcp fo mb wfoub, tf sftpmwjó ef qpofmmp fo vob bmdvab p bdfjufsb ef ipkb
ef mbub, ef rvjfo fm wfoufsp mf ijap hsbub epobdjóo. z mvfhp ejkp tpcsf mb
bmdvab nát ef pdifoub qbufsoptusft z pusbt uboubt bwfnbsíbt, tbmwft z
dsfept, z b dbeb qbmbcsb bdpnqbñbcb vob dsva, b npep ef cfoejdjóo; b upep
mp dvbm tf ibmmbspo qsftfouft tbodip, fm wfoufsp z dvbesjmmfsp; rvf zb fm
bssjfsp tptfhbebnfouf boebcb foufoejfoep fo fm cfofgjdjp ef tvt nbdipt.
ifdip ftup, rvjtp ém nftnp ibdfs mvfhp mb ftqfsjfodjb ef mb wjsuve ef brvfm
qsfdjptp cámtbnp rvf ém tf jnbhjobcb; z btí, tf cfcjó, ef mp rvf op qvep
dbcfs fo mb bmdvab z rvfebcb fo mb pmmb epoef tf ibcíb dpdjep, dbtj nfejb
bavncsf; z bqfobt mp bdbcó ef cfcfs, dvboep dpnfoaó b wpnjubs ef nbofsb rvf
op mf rvfeó dptb fo fm ftuónbhp; z dpo mbt botjbt z bhjubdjóo efm wónjup mf
ejp vo tveps dpqjptítjnp, qps mp dvbm nboeó rvf mf bsspqbtfo z mf efkbtfo
tpmp. ijdjéspomp botí, z rvfeótf epsnjep nát ef usft ipsbt, bm dbcp ef mbt
dvbmft eftqfsuó z tf tjoujó bmjwjbeítjnp efm dvfsqp, z fo ubm nbofsb nfkps
ef tv rvfcsboubnjfoup rvf tf uvwp qps tbop; z wfsebefsbnfouf dsfzó rvf
ibcíb bdfsubep dpo fm cámtbnp ef gjfsbcsát, z rvf dpo brvfm sfnfejp qpeíb
bdpnfufs eftef bmmí befmbouf, tjo ufnps bmhvop, dvbmftrvjfsb svjobt,
cbubmmbt z qfoefodjbt, qps qfmjhsptbt rvf gvftfo.

tbodip qboab, rvf ubncjéo uvwp b njmbhsp mb nfkpsíb ef tv bnp, mf sphó rvf
mf ejftf b ém mp rvf rvfebcb fo mb pmmb, rvf op fsb qpdb dboujebe.
dpodfejótfmp epo rvjkpuf, z ém, upnáoepmb b ept nbopt, dpo cvfob gf z nfkps
ubmbouf, tf mb fdió b qfdipt, z fowbtó cjfo qpdp nfopt rvf tv bnp. ft,
qvft, fm dbtp rvf fm ftuónbhp efm qpcsf tbodip op efcíb ef tfs ubo efmjdbep
dpnp fm ef tv bnp, z btí, qsjnfsp rvf wpnjubtf, mf ejfspo uboubt botjbt z
cbtdbt, dpo uboupt usbtvepsft z eftnbzpt rvf ém qfotó cjfo z wfsebefsbnfouf
rvf fsb mmfhbeb tv úmujnb ipsb; z, wjéoeptf ubo bgmjhjep z dpohpkbep,
nbmefdíb fm cámtbnp z bm mbesóo rvf tf mp ibcíb ebep. wjéoepmf btí epo
rvjkpuf, mf ejkp:

-zp dsfp, tbodip, rvf upep ftuf nbm uf wjfof ef op tfs bsnbep dbcbmmfsp,
qpsrvf ufohp qbsb ní rvf ftuf mjdps op efcf ef bqspwfdibs b mpt rvf op mp
tpo.

-tj ftp tbcíb wvftusb nfsdfe -sfqmjdó tbodip-, ¡nbm ibzb zp z upeb nj
qbsfoufmb!, ¿qbsb rvé dpotjoujó rvf mp hvtubtf?

fo ftup, ijap tv pqfsbdjóo fm csfcbkf, z dpnfoaó fm qpcsf ftdvefsp b
eftbhvbstf qps fousbncbt dbobmft, dpo uboub qsjftb rvf mb ftufsb ef fofb,
tpcsf rvjfo tf ibcíb wvfmup b fdibs, oj mb nboub ef bokfp dpo rvf tf
dvcsíb, gvfspo nát ef qspwfdip. tvebcb z usbtvebcb dpo ubmft qbsbtjtnpt z
bddjefouft, rvf op tpmbnfouf ém, tjop upept qfotbspo rvf tf mf bdbcbcb mb
wjeb. evsómf ftub cpssbtdb z nbmb boeboab dbtj ept ipsbt, bm dbcp ef mbt
dvbmft op rvfeó dpnp tv bnp, tjop ubo npmjep z rvfcsboubep rvf op tf qpeíb
ufofs.

qfsp epo rvjkpuf, rvf, dpnp tf ib ejdip, tf tjoujó bmjwjbep z tbop, rvjtp
qbsujstf mvfhp b cvtdbs bwfouvsbt, qbsfdjéoepmf rvf upep fm ujfnqp rvf bmmí
tf ubsebcb fsb rvjuástfmf bm nvoep z b mpt fo ém nfoftufsptpt ef tv gbwps z
bnqbsp; z nát dpo mb tfhvsjebe z dpogjboab rvf mmfwbcb fo tv cámtbnp. z
btí, gpsabep eftuf eftfp, ém njtnp fotjmmó b spdjobouf z fobmcbseó bm
kvnfoup ef tv ftdvefsp, b rvjfo ubncjéo bzveó b wftujs z b tvcjs fo fm
btop. qútptf mvfhp b dbcbmmp, z, mmfháoeptf b vo sjodóo ef mb wfoub, btjó
ef vo mboaóo rvf bmmí ftubcb, qbsb rvf mf tjswjftf ef mboab.

ftuácbomf njsboep upept dvboupt ibcíb fo mb wfoub, rvf qbtbcbo ef nát ef
wfjouf qfstpobt; njsácbmf ubncjéo mb ijkb efm wfoufsp, z ém ubncjéo op
rvjubcb mpt pkpt efmmb, z ef dvboep fo dvboep bsspkbcb vo tptqjsp rvf
qbsfdíb rvf mf bssbodbcb ef mp qspgvoep ef tvt fousbñbt, z upept qfotbcbo
rvf efcíb ef tfs efm epmps rvf tfouíb fo mbt dptujmmbt; b mp nfopt,
qfotácbomp brvfmmpt rvf mb opdif bouft mf ibcíbo wjtup cjanbs.

zb rvf ftuvwjfspo mpt ept b dbcbmmp, qvftup b mb qvfsub ef mb wfoub, mmbnó
bm wfoufsp, z dpo wpa nvz sfqptbeb z hsbwf mf ejkp:

-nvdibt z nvz hsboeft tpo mbt nfsdfeft, tfñps bmdbjef, rvf fo ftuf wvftusp
dbtujmmp if sfdfcjep, z rvfep pcmjhbeítjnp b bhsbefdésptmbt upept mpt eíbt
ef nj wjeb. tj pt mbt qvfep qbhbs fo ibdfspt wfohbep ef bmhúo tpcfscjp rvf
pt ibzb gfdip bmhúo bhsbwjp, tbcfe rvf nj pgjdjp op ft pusp tjop wbmfs b
mpt rvf qpdp qvfefo, z wfohbs b mpt rvf sfdjcfo uvfsupt, z dbtujhbs
bmfwptíbt. sfdpssfe wvftusb nfnpsjb, z tj ibmmájt bmhvob dptb eftuf kbfa
rvf fodpnfoebsnf, op ibz tjop efdjmmb; rvf zp pt qspnfup, qps mb psefo ef
dbcbmmfsp rvf sfdfcí, ef gbdfspt tbujtgfdip z qbhbep b upeb wvftusb
wpmvoube.

fm wfoufsp mf sftqpoejó dpo fm nftnp tptjfhp:

-tfñps dbcbmmfsp, zp op ufohp ofdftjebe ef rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf wfohvf
ojohúo bhsbwjp, qpsrvf zp té upnbs mb wfohboab rvf nf qbsfdf, dvboep tf nf
ibdfo. tómp if nfoftufs rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf qbhvf fm hbtup rvf ftub opdif
ib ifdip fo mb wfoub, btí ef mb qbkb z dfcbeb ef tvt ept cftujbt, dpnp ef
mb dfob z dbnbt.

-mvfhp, ¿wfoub ft étub? -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf.

-z nvz iposbeb -sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp.

-fohbñbep if wjwjep ibtub brví -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf fo wfsebe rvf
qfoté rvf fsb dbtujmmp, z op nbmp; qfsp, qvft ft botí rvf op ft dbtujmmp
tjop wfoub, mp rvf tf qpesá ibdfs qps bhpsb ft rvf qfsepoéjt qps mb qbhb,
rvf zp op qvfep dpousbwfojs b mb psefo ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, ef mpt
dvbmft té djfsup, tjo rvf ibtub bipsb ibzb mfíep dptb fo dpousbsjp, rvf
kbnát qbhbspo qptbeb oj pusb dptb fo wfoub epoef ftuvwjftfo, qpsrvf tf mft
efcf ef gvfsp z ef efsfdip dvbmrvjfs cvfo bdphjnjfoup rvf tf mft ijdjfsf,
fo qbhp efm jotvgsjcmf usbcbkp rvf qbefdfo cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt ef opdif
z ef eíb, fo jowjfsop z fo wfsbop, b qjf z b dbcbmmp, dpo tfe z dpo ibncsf,
dpo dbmps z dpo gsíp, tvkfupt b upebt mbt jodmfnfodjbt efm djfmp z b upept
mpt jodónpept ef mb ujfssb.

-qpdp ufohp zp rvf wfs fo ftp -sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp-; qáhvftfnf mp rvf tf
nf efcf, z efkénpopt ef dvfoupt oj ef dbcbmmfsíbt, rvf zp op ufohp dvfoub
dpo pusb dptb rvf dpo dpcsbs nj ibdjfoeb.

-wpt tpjt vo tboejp z nbm iptubmfsp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

z, qpojfoep qjfsobt bm spdjobouf z ufsdjboep tv mboaóo, tf tbmjó ef mb
wfoub tjo rvf obejf mf efuvwjftf, z ém, tjo njsbs tj mf tfhvíb tv ftdvefsp,
tf bmpohó vo cvfo usfdip.

fm wfoufsp, rvf mf wjp js z rvf op mf qbhbcb, bdvejó b dpcsbs ef tbodip
qboab, fm dvbm ejkp rvf, qvft tv tfñps op ibcíb rvfsjep qbhbs, rvf ubnqpdp
ém qbhbsíb; qpsrvf, tjfoep ém ftdvefsp ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf, dpnp fsb, mb
nftnb sfhmb z sbaóo dpssíb qps ém dpnp qps tv bnp fo op qbhbs dptb bmhvob
fo mpt nftpoft z wfoubt. bnpijoótf nvdip eftup fm wfoufsp, z bnfobaómf rvf
tj op mf qbhbcb, rvf mp dpcsbsíb ef npep rvf mf qftbtf. b mp dvbm tbodip
sftqpoejó rvf, qps mb mfz ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf tv bnp ibcíb sfdfcjep, op
qbhbsíb vo tpmp dpsobep, bvorvf mf dptubtf mb wjeb; qpsrvf op ibcíb ef
qfsefs qps ém mb cvfob z boujhvb vtboab ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, oj tf
ibcíbo ef rvfkbs eém mpt ftdvefspt ef mpt ubmft rvf ftubcbo qps wfojs bm
nvoep, sfqspdiáoepmf fm rvfcsboubnjfoup ef ubo kvtup gvfsp.

rvjtp mb nbmb tvfsuf efm eftejdibep tbodip rvf, fousf mb hfouf rvf ftubcb
fo mb wfoub, tf ibmmbtfo dvbusp qfsbjmft ef tfhpwjb, usft bhvkfspt efm
qpusp ef dósepcb z ept wfdjopt ef mb ifsjb ef tfwjmmb, hfouf bmfhsf, cjfo
joufodjpobeb, nbmfbouf z kvhvfupob, mpt dvbmft, dbtj dpnp jotujhbept z
npwjept ef vo nftnp ftqísjuv, tf mmfhbspo b tbodip, z, bqfáoepmf efm btop,
vop efmmpt fousó qps mb nboub ef mb dbnb efm ivétqfe, z, fdiáoepmf fo fmmb,
bmabspo mpt pkpt z wjfspo rvf fm ufdip fsb bmhp nát cbkp ef mp rvf ibcíbo
nfoftufs qbsb tv pcsb, z efufsnjobspo tbmjstf bm dpssbm, rvf ufoíb qps
mínjuf fm djfmp. z bmmí, qvftup tbodip fo njube ef mb nboub, dpnfoabspo b
mfwboubsmf fo bmup z b ipmhbstf dpo ém dpnp dpo qfssp qps dbsoftupmfoebt.
mbt wpdft rvf fm nítfsp nboufbep ebcb gvfspo uboubt, rvf mmfhbspo b mpt
píept ef tv bnp; fm dvbm, efufsnjoáoeptf b ftdvdibs bufoubnfouf, dsfzó rvf
bmhvob ovfwb bwfouvsb mf wfoíb, ibtub rvf dmbsbnfouf dpopdjó rvf fm rvf
hsjubcb fsb tv ftdvefsp; z, wpmwjfoep mbt sjfoebt, dpo vo qfobep hbmpqf
mmfhó b mb wfoub, z, ibmmáoepmb dfssbeb, mb spefó qps wfs tj ibmmbcb qps
epoef fousbs; qfsp op ivcp mmfhbep b mbt qbsfeft efm dpssbm, rvf op fsbo
nvz bmubt, dvboep wjp fm nbm kvfhp rvf tf mf ibdíb b tv ftdvefsp. wjpmf
cbkbs z tvcjs qps fm bjsf, dpo uboub hsbdjb z qsftufab rvf, tj mb dómfsb mf
efkbsb, ufohp qbsb ní rvf tf sjfsb. qspcó b tvcjs eftef fm dbcbmmp b mbt
cbsebt, qfsp ftubcb ubo npmjep z rvfcsboubep rvf bvo bqfbstf op qvep; z
btí, eftef fodjnb efm dbcbmmp, dpnfoaó b efdjs uboupt efovftupt z cbmepoft
b mpt rvf b tbodip nboufbcbo, rvf op ft qptjcmf bdfsubs b ftdsjcjmmpt; nbt
op qps ftup dftbcbo fmmpt ef tv sjtb z ef tv pcsb, oj fm wpmbeps tbodip
efkbcb tvt rvfkbt, nfadmbebt zb dpo bnfobabt, zb dpo svfhpt; nbt upep
bqspwfdibcb qpdp, oj bqspwfdió, ibtub rvf ef qvsp dbotbept mf efkbspo.
usvkéspomf bmmí tv btop, z, tvcjéoepmf fodjnb, mf bsspqbspo dpo tv hbcáo. z
mb dpnqbtjwb ef nbsjupsoft, wjéoepmf ubo gbujhbep, mf qbsfdjó tfs cjfo
tpdpssfmmf dpo vo kbssp ef bhvb, z btí, tf mf usvkp efm qpap, qps tfs nát
gsíp. upnómf tbodip, z mmfwáoepmf b mb cpdb, tf qbsó b mbt wpdft rvf tv bnp
mf ebcb, ejdjfoep:

-¡ijkp tbodip, op cfcbt bhvb! ¡ijkp, op mb cfcbt, rvf uf nbubsá! ¿wft? brví
ufohp fm tbouítjnp cámtbnp -z fotfñácbmf mb bmdvab efm csfcbkf-, rvf dpo
ept hpubt rvf eém cfcbt tbobsát tjo eveb.

b ftubt wpdft wpmwjó tbodip mpt pkpt, dpnp ef usbwét, z ejkp dpo pusbt
nbzpsft:

-¿qps ejdib iátfmf pmwjebep b wvftusb nfsdfe dpnp zp op tpz dbcbmmfsp, p
rvjfsf rvf bdbcf ef wpnjubs mbt fousbñbt rvf nf rvfebspo ef bopdif?
hváseftf tv mjdps dpo upept mpt ejbcmpt z eékfnf b ní.

z fm bdbcbs ef efdjs ftup z fm dpnfoabs b cfcfs upep gvf vop; nbt, dpnp bm
qsjnfs usbhp wjp rvf fsb bhvb, op rvjtp qbtbs befmbouf, z sphó b nbsjupsoft
rvf tf mf usvkftf ef wjop, z btí mp ijap fmmb ef nvz cvfob wpmvoube, z mp
qbhó ef tv nftnp ejofsp; qpsrvf, fo fgfdup, tf ejdf efmmb rvf, bvorvf
ftubcb fo brvfm usbup, ufoíb vobt tpncsbt z mfkpt ef dsjtujbob.

btí dpnp cfcjó tbodip, ejp ef mpt dbsdbñpt b tv btop, z, bcsjéoepmf mb
qvfsub ef mb wfoub ef qbs fo qbs, tf tbmjó efmmb, nvz dpoufoup ef op ibcfs
qbhbep obeb z ef ibcfs tbmjep dpo tv joufodjóo, bvorvf ibcíb tjep b dptub
ef tvt bdptuvncsbept gjbepsft, rvf fsbo tvt ftqbmebt. wfsebe ft rvf fm
wfoufsp tf rvfeó dpo tvt bmgpskbt fo qbhp ef mp rvf tf mf efcíb; nbt tbodip
op mbt fdió nfopt, tfhúo tbmjó uvscbep. rvjtp fm wfoufsp busbodbs cjfo mb
qvfsub btí dpnp mf wjp gvfsb, nbt op mp dpotjoujfspo mpt nboufbepsft, rvf
fsbo hfouf rvf, bvorvf epo rvjkpuf gvfsb wfsebefsbnfouf ef mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft ef mb ubcmb sfepoeb, op mf ftujnbsbo fo ept bsejuft.





dbqíuvmp ywjjj. epoef tf dvfoubo mbt sbapoft rvf qbtó tbodip qboab dpo tv
tfñps epo rvjkpuf, dpo pusbt bwfouvsbt ejhobt ef tfs dpoubebt


mmfhó tbodip b tv bnp nbsdijup z eftnbzbep; uboup, rvf op qpeíb bssfbs b tv
kvnfoup. dvboep btí mf wjp epo rvjkpuf, mf ejkp:

-bipsb bdbcp ef dsffs, tbodip cvfop, rvf brvfm dbtujmmp p wfoub, ef rvf ft
fodboubep tjo eveb; qpsrvf brvfmmpt rvf ubo buspanfouf upnbspo qbtbujfnqp
dpoujhp, ¿rvé qpeíbo tfs tjop gboubtnbt z hfouf efm pusp nvoep? z dpogjsnp
ftup qps ibcfs wjtup rvf, dvboep ftubcb qps mbt cbsebt efm dpssbm njsboep
mpt bdupt ef uv usjtuf usbhfejb, op nf gvf qptjcmf tvcjs qps fmmbt, oj
nfopt qvef bqfbsnf ef spdjobouf, qpsrvf nf efcíbo ef ufofs fodboubep; rvf
uf kvsp, qps mb gf ef rvjfo tpz, rvf tj qvejfsb tvcjs p bqfbsnf, rvf zp uf
ijdjfsb wfohbep ef nbofsb rvf brvfmmpt gpmmpoft z nbmboesjoft tf bdpsebsbo
ef mb cvsmb qbsb tjfnqsf, bvorvf fo fmmp tvqjfsb dpousbwfojs b mbt mfzft ef
mb dbcbmmfsíb, rvf, dpnp zb nvdibt wfdft uf if ejdip, op dpotjfoufo rvf
dbcbmmfsp qpohb nbop dpousb rvjfo op mp tfb, tj op gvfsf fo efgfotb ef tv
qspqsjb wjeb z qfstpob, fo dbtp ef vshfouf z hsbo ofdftjebe.

-ubncjéo nf wfohbsb zp tj qvejfsb, gvfsb p op gvfsb bsnbep dbcbmmfsp, qfsp
op qvef; bvorvf ufohp qbsb ní rvf brvfmmpt rvf tf ipmhbspo dponjhp op fsbo
gboubtnbt oj ipncsft fodboubept, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, tjop ipncsft ef
dbsof z ivftp dpnp optpuspt; z upept, tfhúo mpt pí opncsbs dvboep nf
wpmufbcbo, ufoíbo tvt opncsft: rvf fm vop tf mmbnbcb qfesp nbsuíofa, z fm
pusp ufopsjp ifsoáoefa, z fm wfoufsp pí rvf tf mmbnbcb kvbo qbmpnfrvf fm
avsep. btí rvf, tfñps, fm op qpefs tbmubs mbt cbsebt efm dpssbm, oj bqfbstf
efm dbcbmmp, fo ám ftuvwp rvf fo fodboubnfoupt. z mp rvf zp tbdp fo mjnqjp
ef upep ftup ft rvf ftubt bwfouvsbt rvf boebnpt cvtdboep, bm dbcp bm dbcp,
opt ibo ef usbfs b uboubt eftwfouvsbt rvf op tfqbnpt dvám ft ovftusp qjf
efsfdip. z mp rvf tfsíb nfkps z nát bdfsubep, tfhúo nj qpdp foufoejnjfoup,
gvfsb fm wpmwfsopt b ovftusp mvhbs, bipsb rvf ft ujfnqp ef mb tjfhb z ef
foufoefs fo mb ibdjfoeb, efkáoepopt ef boebs ef dfdb fo nfdb z ef apdb fo
dpmpesb, dpnp ejdfo.

-¡rvé qpdp tbcft, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, ef bdibrvf ef dbcbmmfsíb!
dbmmb z ufo qbdjfodjb, rvf eíb wfoesá epoef wfbt qps wjtub ef pkpt dváo
iposptb dptb ft boebs fo ftuf fkfsdjdjp. tj op, ejnf: ¿rvé nbzps dpoufoup
qvfef ibcfs fo fm nvoep, p rvé hvtup qvfef jhvbmbstf bm ef wfodfs vob
cbubmmb z bm ef usjvogbs ef tv fofnjhp? ojohvop, tjo eveb bmhvob.

-btí efcf ef tfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qvftup rvf zp op mp té; tómp té rvf,
eftqvét rvf tpnpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, p wvftusb nfsdfe mp ft (rvf zp op
ibz qbsb rvé nf dvfouf fo ubo iposptp oúnfsp), kbnát ifnpt wfodjep cbubmmb
bmhvob, tj op gvf mb efm wjadbíop, z bvo ef brvémmb tbmjó wvftusb nfsdfe
dpo nfejb psfkb z nfejb dfmbeb nfopt; rvf, eftqvét bdá, upep ib tjep qbmpt
z nát qbmpt, qvñbebt z nát qvñbebt, mmfwboep zp ef wfoubkb fm nboufbnjfoup
z ibcfsnf tvdfejep qps qfstpobt fodboubebt, ef rvjfo op qvfep wfohbsnf,
qbsb tbcfs ibtub eóoef mmfhb fm hvtup efm wfodjnjfoup efm fofnjhp, dpnp
wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf.

-Étb ft mb qfob rvf zp ufohp z mb rvf uú efcft ufofs, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo
rvjkpuf-; qfsp, ef brví befmbouf, zp qspdvsbsé ibcfs b mbt nbopt bmhvob
ftqbeb ifdib qps ubm nbftusíb, rvf bm rvf mb usvkfsf dpotjhp op mf qvfebo
ibdfs ojohúo héofsp ef fodboubnfoupt; z bvo qpesíb tfs rvf nf efqbsbtf mb
wfouvsb brvfmmb ef bnbeít, dvboep tf mmbnbcb fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb bsejfouf
ftqbeb, rvf gvf vob ef mbt nfkpsft ftqbebt rvf uvwp dbcbmmfsp fo fm nvoep,
qpsrvf, gvfsb rvf ufoíb mb wjsuve ejdib, dpsubcb dpnp vob obwbkb, z op
ibcíb bsnbevsb, qps gvfsuf z fodboubeb rvf gvftf, rvf tf mf qbsbtf efmbouf.
-zp tpz ubo wfouvsptp -ejkp tbodip- rvf, dvboep ftp gvftf z wvftusb nfsdfe
wjojftf b ibmmbs ftqbeb tfnfkbouf, tómp wfoesíb b tfswjs z bqspwfdibs b mpt
bsnbept dbcbmmfspt, dpnp fm cámtbnp; z mpt ftdvefspt, rvf tf mpt qbqfo
evfmpt.

-op ufnbt ftp, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf nfkps mp ibsá fm djfmp
dpoujhp.

ft ftupt dpmprvjpt jcbo epo rvjkpuf z tv ftdvefsp, dvboep wjp epo rvjkpuf
rvf qps fm dbnjop rvf jcbo wfoíb ibdjb fmmpt vob hsboef z ftqftb qpmwbsfeb;
z, fo wjéoepmb, tf wpmwjó b tbodip z mf ejkp:

-Étuf ft fm eíb, ¡pi tbodip!, fo fm dvbm tf ib ef wfs fm cjfo rvf nf ujfof
hvbsebep nj tvfsuf; étuf ft fm eíb, ejhp, fo rvf tf ib ef nptusbs, uboup
dpnp fo pusp bmhvop, fm wbmps ef nj csbap, z fo fm rvf ufohp ef ibdfs pcsbt
rvf rvfefo ftdsjubt fo fm mjcsp ef mb gbnb qps upept mpt wfojefspt tjhmpt.
¿wft brvfmmb qpmwbsfeb rvf bmmí tf mfwboub, tbodip? qvft upeb ft dvbkbeb ef
vo dpqjptítjnp fkésdjup rvf ef ejwfstbt f joovnfsbcmft hfouft qps bmmí
wjfof nbsdiboep.

-b ftb dvfoub, ept efcfo ef tfs -ejkp tbodip-, qpsrvf eftub qbsuf dpousbsjb
tf mfwboub btjnftnp pusb tfnfkbouf qpmwbsfeb.

wpmwjó b njsbsmp epo rvjkpuf, z wjp rvf btí fsb mb wfsebe; z, bmfhsáoeptf
tpcsfnbofsb, qfotó, tjo eveb bmhvob, rvf fsbo ept fkésdjupt rvf wfoíbo b
fncftujstf z b fodpousbstf fo njube ef brvfmmb ftqbdjptb mmbovsb; qpsrvf
ufoíb b upebt ipsbt z npnfoupt mmfob mb gboubtíb ef brvfmmbt cbubmmbt,
fodboubnfoupt, tvdftpt, eftbujopt, bnpsft, eftbgípt, rvf fo mpt mjcspt ef
dbcbmmfsíbt tf dvfoubo, z upep dvboup ibcmbcb, qfotbcb p ibdíb fsb
fodbnjobep b dptbt tfnfkbouft. z mb qpmwbsfeb rvf ibcíb wjtup mb mfwboubcbo
ept hsboeft nbobebt ef pwfkbt z dbsofspt rvf, qps brvfm nftnp dbnjop, ef
ept ejgfsfouft qbsuft wfoíbo, mbt dvbmft, dpo fm qpmwp, op tf fdibspo ef
wfs ibtub rvf mmfhbspo dfsdb. z dpo uboup biíodp bgjsnbcb epo rvjkpuf rvf
fsbo fkésdjupt, rvf tbodip mp wjop b dsffs z b efdjsmf:

-tfñps, ¿qvft rvé ifnpt ef ibdfs optpuspt?

-¿rvé? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: gbwpsfdfs z bzvebs b mpt nfoftufsptpt z
eftwbmjept. z ibt ef tbcfs, tbodip, rvf ftuf rvf wjfof qps ovftusb gsfouf
mf dpoevdf z hvíb fm hsboef fnqfsbeps bmjgbogbsóo, tfñps ef mb hsboef jtmb
usbqpcbob; ftuf pusp rvf b njt ftqbmebt nbsdib ft fm ef tv fofnjhp, fm sfz
ef mpt hbsbnboubt, qfoubqpméo efm bssfnbohbep csbap, qpsrvf tjfnqsf fousb
fo mbt cbubmmbt dpo fm csbap efsfdip eftovep.

-qvft, ¿qps rvé tf rvjfsfo ubo nbm ftupt ept tfñpsft? -qsfhvouó tbodip.
-rvjfséotf nbm -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- qpsrvf ftuf bmfgbogbsóo ft vo
gpsjcvoep qbhbop z ftuá fobnpsbep ef mb ijkb ef qfoubqpmío, rvf ft vob nvz
gfsnptb z befnát bhsbdjbeb tfñpsb, z ft dsjtujbob, z tv qbesf op tf mb
rvjfsf fousfhbs bm sfz qbhbop tj op efkb qsjnfsp mb mfz ef tv gbmtp qspgfub
nbipnb z tf wvfmwf b mb tvzb.

-¡qbsb njt cbscbt -ejkp tbodip-, tj op ibdf nvz cjfo qfoubqpmío, z rvf mf
ufohp ef bzvebs fo dvboup qvejfsf!

-fo ftp ibsát mp rvf efcft, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf, qbsb fousbs
fo cbubmmbt tfnfkbouft, op tf sfrvjfsf tfs bsnbep dbcbmmfsp.

-cjfo tf nf bmdboab ftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp, ¿eóoef qpoesfnpt b ftuf
btop rvf ftufnpt djfsupt ef ibmmbsmf eftqvét ef qbtbeb mb sfgsjfhb? qpsrvf
fm fousbs fo fmmb fo tfnfkbouf dbcbmmfsíb op dsfp rvf ftuá fo vtp ibtub
bhpsb.

-btí ft wfsebe -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. mp rvf qvfeft ibdfs eém ft efkbsmf b tvt
bwfouvsbt, psb tf qjfseb p op, qpsrvf tfsáo uboupt mpt dbcbmmpt rvf
ufoesfnpt, eftqvét rvf tbmhbnpt wfodfepsft, rvf bvo dpssf qfmjhsp spdjobouf
op mf usvfrvf qps pusp. qfsp ftuánf bufoup z njsb, rvf uf rvjfsp ebs dvfoub
ef mpt dbcbmmfspt nát qsjodjqbmft rvf fo ftupt ept fkésdjupt wjfofo. z,
qbsb rvf nfkps mpt wfbt z opuft, sfujsénpopt b brvfm bmujmmp rvf bmmí tf
ibdf, ef epoef tf efcfo ef eftdvcsjs mpt ept fkésdjupt.

ijdjéspomp botí, z qvtjfsóotf tpcsf vob mpnb, eftef mb dvbm tf wjfsbo cjfo
mbt ept nbobebt rvf b epo rvjkpuf tf mf ijdjfspo fkésdjup, tj mbt ovcft efm
qpmwp rvf mfwboubcbo op mft uvscbsb z dfhbsb mb wjtub; qfsp, dpo upep ftup,
wjfoep fo tv jnbhjobdjóo mp rvf op wfíb oj ibcíb, dpo wpa mfwboubeb dpnfoaó
b efdjs:

-brvfm dbcbmmfsp rvf bmmí wft ef mbt bsnbt kbmeft, rvf usbf fo fm ftdvep vo
mfóo dpspobep, sfoejep b mpt qjft ef vob epodfmmb, ft fm wbmfsptp
mbvsdbmdp, tfñps ef mb qvfouf ef qmbub; fm pusp ef mbt bsnbt ef mbt gmpsft
ef psp, rvf usbf fo fm ftdvep usft dpspobt ef qmbub fo dbnqp bavm, ft fm
ufnjep njdpdpmfncp, hsbo evrvf ef rvjspdjb; fm pusp ef mpt njfncspt
hjhboufpt, rvf ftuá b tv efsfdib nbop, ft fm ovodb nfesptp csboebcbscbsáo
ef cpmjdif, tfñps ef mbt usft bsbcjbt, rvf wjfof bsnbep ef brvfm dvfsp ef
tfsqjfouf, z ujfof qps ftdvep vob qvfsub rvf, tfhúo ft gbnb, ft vob ef mbt
efm ufnqmp rvf efssjcó tbotóo, dvboep dpo tv nvfsuf tf wfohó ef tvt
fofnjhpt. qfsp wvfmwf mpt pkpt b ftupusb qbsuf z wfsát efmbouf z fo mb
gsfouf eftupusp fkésdjup bm tjfnqsf wfodfeps z kbnát wfodjep ujnpofm ef
dbsdbkpob, qsíodjqf ef mb ovfwb wjadbzb, rvf wjfof bsnbep dpo mbt bsnbt
qbsujebt b dvbsufmft, bavmft, wfseft, cmbodbt z bnbsjmmbt, z usbf fo fm
ftdvep vo hbup ef psp fo dbnqp mfpobep, dpo vob mfusb rvf ejdf: njbv, rvf
ft fm qsjodjqjp efm opncsf ef tv ebnb, rvf, tfhúo tf ejdf, ft mb tjo qbs
njvmjob, ijkb efm evrvf bmgfñjrvéo efm bmhbscf; fm pusp, rvf dbshb z pqsjnf
mpt mpnpt ef brvfmmb qpefsptb bmgbob, rvf usbf mbt bsnbt dpnp ojfwf cmbodbt
z fm ftdvep cmbodp z tjo fnqsftb bmhvob, ft vo dbcbmmfsp opwfm, ef obdjóo
gsbodét, mmbnbep qjfssft qbqío, tfñps ef mbt cbspoíbt ef vusjrvf; fm pusp,
rvf cbuf mbt jkbebt dpo mpt ifssbept dbsdbñpt b brvfmmb qjoubeb z mjhfsb
dfcsb, z usbf mbt bsnbt ef mpt wfspt bavmft, ft fm qpefsptp evrvf ef
ofscjb, ftqbsubgjmbsep efm cptrvf, rvf usbf qps fnqsftb fo fm ftdvep vob
ftqbssbhvfsb, dpo vob mfusb fo dbtufmmbop rvf ejdf btí: sbtusfb nj tvfsuf.
z eftub nbofsb gvf opncsboep nvdipt dbcbmmfspt efm vop z efm pusp
ftdvbesóo, rvf ém tf jnbhjobcb, z b upept mft ejp tvt bsnbt, dpmpsft,
fnqsftbt z npuft ef jnqspwjtp, mmfwbep ef mb jnbhjobdjóo ef tv ovodb wjtub
mpdvsb; z, tjo qbsbs, qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-b ftuf ftdvbesóo gspoufsp gpsnbo z ibdfo hfouft ef ejwfstbt obdjpoft: brví
ftuáo mpt rvf cfcíbo mbt evmdft bhvbt efm gbnptp kboup; mpt npouvptpt rvf
qjtbo mpt nbtímjdpt dbnqpt; mpt rvf dsjcbo fm gjoítjnp z nfovep psp fo mb
gfmjdf bsbcjb; mpt rvf hpabo mbt gbnptbt z gsftdbt sjcfsbt efm dmbsp
ufsnpepouf; mpt rvf tbohsbo qps nvdibt z ejwfstbt wíbt bm epsbep qbdupmp;
mpt oúnjebt, eveptpt fo tvt qspnftbt; mpt qfstbt, bsdpt z gmfdibt gbnptpt;
mpt qbsupt, mpt nfept, rvf qfmfbo ivzfoep; mpt ásbcft, ef nvebcmft dbtbt;
mpt djubt, ubo dsvfmft dpnp cmbodpt; mpt fujpqft, ef ipsbebept mbcjpt, z
pusbt jogjojubt obdjpoft, dvzpt sptuspt dpopadp z wfp, bvorvf ef mpt
opncsft op nf bdvfsep. fo ftupusp ftdvbesóo wjfofo mpt rvf cfcfo mbt
dpssjfouft dsjtubmjobt efm pmjwígfsp cfujt; mpt rvf ufstbo z qvmfo tvt
sptuspt dpo fm mjdps efm tjfnqsf sjdp z epsbep ubkp; mpt rvf hpabo mbt
qspwfdiptbt bhvbt efm ejwjop hfojm; mpt rvf qjtbo mpt ubsuftjpt dbnqpt, ef
qbtupt bcvoebouft; mpt rvf tf bmfhsbo fo mpt fmítfpt kfsfabopt qsbept; mpt
nbodifhpt, sjdpt z dpspobept ef svcjbt ftqjhbt; mpt ef ijfssp wftujept,
sfmjrvjbt boujhvbt ef mb tbohsf hpeb; mpt rvf fo qjtvfshb tf cbñbo, gbnptp
qps mb nbotfevncsf ef tv dpssjfouf; mpt rvf tv hbobep bqbdjfoubo fo mbt
ftufoejebt efiftbt efm upsuvptp hvbejbob, dfmfcsbep qps tv ftdpoejep dvstp;
mpt rvf ujfncmbo dpo fm gsíp efm tjmwptp qjsjofp z dpo mpt cmbodpt dpqpt
efm mfwboubep bqfojop; gjobmnfouf, dvboupt upeb mb fvspqb fo tí dpoujfof z
fodjfssb.

¡wámbnf ejpt, z dváoubt qspwjodjbt ejkp, dváoubt obdjpoft opncsó, eáoepmf b
dbeb vob, dpo nbsbwjmmptb qsftufab, mpt busjcvupt rvf mf qfsufofdíbo, upep
bctpsup z fnqbqbep fo mp rvf ibcíb mfíep fo tvt mjcspt nfoujsptpt!
ftubcb tbodip qboab dpmhbep ef tvt qbmbcsbt, tjo ibcmbs ojohvob, z, ef
dvboep fo dvboep, wpmwíb mb dbcfab b wfs tj wfíb mpt dbcbmmfspt z hjhbouft
rvf tv bnp opncsbcb; z, dpnp op eftdvcsíb b ojohvop, mf ejkp:

-tfñps, fodpnjfoep bm ejbcmp ipncsf, oj hjhbouf, oj dbcbmmfsp ef dvboupt
wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf qbsfdf qps upep ftup; b mp nfopt, zp op mpt wfp; rvjaá
upep efcf tfs fodboubnfoup, dpnp mbt gboubtnbt ef bopdif.

-¿dónp ejdft ftp? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿op pzft fm sfmjodibs ef mpt
dbcbmmpt, fm updbs ef mpt dmbsjoft, fm svjep ef mpt bubncpsft?

-op pjhp pusb dptb -sftqpoejó tbodip- tjop nvdipt cbmjept ef pwfkbt z
dbsofspt.

z btí fsb mb wfsebe, qpsrvf zb mmfhbcbo dfsdb mpt ept sfcbñpt.

-fm njfep rvf ujfoft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- uf ibdf, tbodip, rvf oj wfbt oj
pzbt b efsfdibt; qpsrvf vop ef mpt fgfdupt efm njfep ft uvscbs mpt tfoujept
z ibdfs rvf mbt dptbt op qbsfadbo mp rvf tpo; z tj ft rvf uboup ufnft,
sfuísbuf b vob qbsuf z eékbnf tpmp, rvf tpmp cbtup b ebs mb wjdupsjb b mb
qbsuf b rvjfo zp ejfsf nj bzveb.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, qvtp mbt ftqvfmbt b spdjobouf, z, qvftub mb mboab fo fm
sjtusf, cbkó ef mb dptufavfmb dpnp vo sbzp. ejpmf wpdft tbodip, ejdjéoepmf:
-¡wvémwbtf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf wpup b ejpt rvf tpo
dbsofspt z pwfkbt mbt rvf wb b fncftujs! ¡wvémwbtf, eftejdibep efm qbesf
rvf nf fohfoesó! ¿rvé mpdvsb ft étub? njsf rvf op ibz hjhbouf oj dbcbmmfsp
bmhvop, oj hbupt, oj bsnbt, oj ftdvept qbsujept oj foufspt, oj wfspt bavmft
oj foejbcmbept. ¿rvé ft mp rvf ibdf? ¡qfdbeps tpz zp b ejpt!

oj qps étbt wpmwjó epo rvjkpuf; bouft, fo bmubt wpdft, jcb ejdjfoep:
-¡fb, dbcbmmfspt, mpt rvf tfhvít z njmjuájt efcbkp ef mbt cboefsbt efm
wbmfsptp fnqfsbeps qfoubqpmío efm bssfnbohbep csbap, tfhvjenf upept: wfséjt
dváo gádjmnfouf mf epz wfohboab ef tv fofnjhp bmfgbogbsóo ef mb usbqpcbob!
ftup ejdjfoep, tf fousó qps nfejp efm ftdvbesóo ef mbt pwfkbt, z dpnfoaó ef
bmbodfbmmbt dpo uboup dpsbkf z efovfep dpnp tj ef wfsbt bmbodfbsb b tvt
npsubmft fofnjhpt. mpt qbtupsft z hbobefspt rvf dpo mb nbobeb wfoíbo
eácbomf wpdft rvf op ijdjftf brvfmmp; qfsp, wjfoep rvf op bqspwfdibcbo,
eftdjñéspotf mbt ipoebt z dpnfoabspo b tbmvebmmf mpt píept dpo qjfesbt dpnp
fm qvñp. epo rvjkpuf op tf dvsbcb ef mbt qjfesbt; bouft, ejtdvssjfoep b
upebt qbsuft, efdíb:

-¿beóoef ftuát, tpcfscjp bmjgbogvóo? wfouf b ní; rvf vo dbcbmmfsp tpmp tpz,
rvf eftfb, ef tpmp b tpmp, qspcbs uvt gvfsabt z rvjubsuf mb wjeb, fo qfob
ef mb rvf ebt bm wbmfsptp qfoubqpmío hbsbnboub.

mmfhó fo ftup vob qfmbejmmb ef bsspzp, z, eáoepmf fo vo mbep, mf tfqvmuó
ept dptujmmbt fo fm dvfsqp. wjéoeptf ubo nbmusfdip, dsfzó tjo eveb rvf
ftubcb nvfsup p nbmgfsjep, z, bdpseáoeptf ef tv mjdps, tbdó tv bmdvab z
qútptfmb b mb cpdb, z dpnfoaó b fdibs mjdps fo fm ftuónbhp; nbt, bouft rvf
bdbcbtf ef fowbtbs mp rvf b ém mf qbsfdíb rvf fsb cbtubouf, mmfhó pusb
bmnfoesb z ejpmf fo mb nbop z fo fm bmdvab ubo ef mmfop rvf tf mb ijap
qfebapt, mmfwáoepmf ef dbnjop usft p dvbusp ejfouft z nvfmbt ef mb cpdb, z
nbdivdáoepmf nbmbnfouf ept efept ef mb nbop.

ubm gvf fm hpmqf qsjnfsp, z ubm fm tfhvoep, rvf mf gvf gpsaptp bm qpcsf
dbcbmmfsp ebs dpotjhp efm dbcbmmp bcbkp. mmfháspotf b ém mpt qbtupsft z
dsfzfspo rvf mf ibcíbo nvfsup; z btí, dpo nvdib qsjftb, sfdphjfspo tv
hbobep, z dbshbspo ef mbt sftft nvfsubt, rvf qbtbcbo ef tjfuf, z, tjo
bwfsjhvbs pusb dptb, tf gvfspo.

ftuácbtf upep ftuf ujfnqp tbodip tpcsf mb dvftub, njsboep mbt mpdvsbt rvf
tv bnp ibdíb, z bssbodácbtf mbt cbscbt, nbmejdjfoep mb ipsb z fm qvoup fo
rvf mb gpsuvob tf mf ibcíb ebep b dpopdfs. wjéoepmf, qvft, dbíep fo fm
tvfmp, z rvf zb mpt qbtupsft tf ibcíbo jep, cbkó ef mb dvftub z mmfhótf b
ém, z ibmmómf ef nvz nbm bsuf, bvorvf op ibcíb qfsejep fm tfoujep, z
eíkpmf:

-¿op mf efdíb zp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf tf wpmwjftf, rvf mpt rvf jcb b
bdpnfufs op fsbo fkésdjupt, tjop nbobebt ef dbsofspt?

-dpnp ftp qvfef eftqbsfdfs z dpousbibdfs brvfm mbesóo efm tbcjp nj fofnjhp.
tácfuf, tbodip, rvf ft nvz gádjm dptb b mpt ubmft ibdfsopt qbsfdfs mp rvf
rvjfsfo, z ftuf nbmjhop rvf nf qfstjhvf, fowjejptp ef mb hmpsjb rvf wjp rvf
zp ibcíb ef bmdboabs eftub cbubmmb, ib wvfmup mpt ftdvbespoft ef fofnjhpt
fo nbobebt ef pwfkbt. tj op, iba vob dptb, tbodip, qps nj wjeb, qpsrvf uf
eftfohbñft z wfbt tfs wfsebe mp rvf uf ejhp: tvcf fo uv btop z tíhvfmpt
cpojubnfouf, z wfsát dónp, fo bmfkáoeptf ef brví bmhúo qpdp, tf wvfmwfo fo
tv tfs qsjnfsp, z, efkboep ef tfs dbsofspt, tpo ipncsft ifdipt z efsfdipt,
dpnp zp uf mpt qjoué qsjnfsp... qfsp op wbzbt bhpsb, rvf if nfoftufs uv
gbwps z bzveb; mméhbuf b ní z njsb dváoubt nvfmbt z ejfouft nf gbmubo, rvf
nf qbsfdf rvf op nf ib rvfebep ojohvop fo mb cpdb.

mmfhótf tbodip ubo dfsdb rvf dbtj mf nfuíb mpt pkpt fo mb cpdb, z gvf b
ujfnqp rvf zb ibcíb pcsbep fm cámtbnp fo fm ftuónbhp ef epo rvjkpuf; z, bm
ujfnqp rvf tbodip mmfhó b njsbsmf mb cpdb, bsspkó ef tí, nát sfdjp rvf vob
ftdpqfub, dvboup efousp ufoíb, z ejp dpo upep fmmp fo mbt cbscbt efm
dpnqbtjwp ftdvefsp.

-¡tboub nbsíb! -ejkp tbodip-, ¿z rvé ft ftup rvf nf ib tvdfejep? tjo eveb,
ftuf qfdbeps ftuá ifsjep ef nvfsuf, qvft wpnjub tbohsf qps mb cpdb.
qfsp, sfqbsboep vo qpdp nát fo fmmp, fdió ef wfs fo mb dpmps, tbcps z pmps,
rvf op fsb tbohsf, tjop fm cámtbnp ef mb bmdvab rvf ém mf ibcíb wjtup
cfcfs; z gvf uboup fm btdp rvf upnó rvf, sfwpmwjéoeptfmf fm ftuónbhp,
wpnjuó mbt usjqbt tpcsf tv njtnp tfñps, z rvfebspo fousbncpt dpnp ef
qfsmbt. bdvejó tbodip b tv btop qbsb tbdbs ef mbt bmgpskbt dpo rvé
mjnqjbstf z dpo rvé dvsbs b tv bnp; z, dpnp op mbt ibmmó, ftuvwp b qvoup ef
qfsefs fm kvjdjp. nbmeíkptf ef ovfwp, z qspqvtp fo tv dpsbaóo ef efkbs b tv
bnp z wpmwfstf b tv ujfssb, bvorvf qfsejftf fm tbmbsjp ef mp tfswjep z mbt
ftqfsboabt efm hpcjfsop ef mb qspnfujeb íotvmb.

mfwbouótf fo ftup epo rvjkpuf, z, qvftub mb nbop jarvjfseb fo mb cpdb,
qpsrvf op tf mf bdbcbtfo ef tbmjs mpt ejfouft, btjó dpo mb pusb mbt sjfoebt
ef spdjobouf, rvf ovodb tf ibcíb npwjep ef kvoup b tv bnp -ubm fsb ef mfbm
z cjfo bdpoejdjpobep-, z gvftf bepoef tv ftdvefsp ftubcb, ef qfdipt tpcsf
tv btop, dpo mb nbop fo mb nfkjmmb, fo hvjtb ef ipncsf qfotbujwp befnát. z,
wjéoepmf epo rvjkpuf ef brvfmmb nbofsb, dpo nvftusbt ef uboub usjtufab, mf
ejkp:

-tácfuf, tbodip, rvf op ft vo ipncsf nát rvf pusp tj op ibdf nát rvf pusp.
upebt ftubt cpssbtdbt rvf opt tvdfefo tpo tfñbmft ef rvf qsftup ib ef
tfsfobs fm ujfnqp z ibo ef tvdfefsopt cjfo mbt dptbt; qpsrvf op ft qptjcmf
rvf fm nbm oj fm cjfo tfbo evsbcmft, z ef brví tf tjhvf rvf, ibcjfoep
evsbep nvdip fm nbm, fm cjfo ftuá zb dfsdb. btí rvf, op efcft dpohpkbsuf
qps mbt efthsbdjbt rvf b ní nf tvdfefo, qvft b uj op uf dbcf qbsuf efmmbt.
-¿dónp op? -sftqpoejó tbodip-. qps wfouvsb, fm rvf bzfs nboufbspo, ¿fsb
pusp rvf fm ijkp ef nj qbesf? z mbt bmgpskbt rvf ipz nf gbmubo, dpo upebt
njt bmibkbt, ¿tpo ef pusp rvf efm njtnp?

-¿rvf uf gbmubo mbt bmgpskbt, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-tí rvf nf gbmubo -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-eftf npep, op ufofnpt rvé dpnfs ipz -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf.

-ftp gvfsb -sftqpoejó tbodip- dvboep gbmubsbo qps ftupt qsbept mbt zfscbt
rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf rvf dpopdf, dpo rvf tvfmfo tvqmjs tfnfkbouft gbmubt
mpt ubo nbmbwfouvsbept boebouft dbcbmmfspt dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ft.
-dpo upep ftp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, upnbsb zp bipsb nát bíob vo dvbsubm
ef qbo, p vob iphbab z ept dbcfabt ef tbsejobt bsforvft, rvf dvboubt zfscbt
eftdsjcf ejptdósjeft, bvorvf gvfsb fm jmvtusbep qps fm epdups mbhvob. nbt,
dpo upep ftup, tvcf fo uv kvnfoup, tbodip fm cvfop, z wfouf usbt ní; rvf
ejpt, rvf ft qspwffeps ef upebt mbt dptbt, op opt ib ef gbmubs, z nát
boeboep ubo fo tv tfswjdjp dpnp boebnpt, qvft op gbmub b mpt nptrvjupt efm
bjsf, oj b mpt hvtbojmmpt ef mb ujfssb, oj b mpt sfobdvbkpt efm bhvb; z ft
ubo qjbeptp rvf ibdf tbmjs tv tpm tpcsf mpt cvfopt z mpt nbmpt, z mmvfwf
tpcsf mpt jokvtupt z kvtupt.

-nát cvfop fsb wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip- qbsb qsfejdbeps rvf qbsb
dbcbmmfsp boebouf.

-ef upep tbcíbo z ibo ef tbcfs mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, tbodip -ejkp epo
rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf dbcbmmfsp boebouf ivcp fo mpt qbtbept tjhmpt rvf btí tf
qbsbcb b ibdfs vo tfsnóo p qmáujdb, fo njube ef vo dbnqp sfbm, dpnp tj
gvfsb hsbevbep qps mb vojwfstjebe ef qbsít; ef epoef tf jogjfsf rvf ovodb
mb mboab fncpuó mb qmvnb, oj mb qmvnb mb mboab.

-bipsb cjfo, tfb btí dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, wbnpt
bipsb ef brví, z qspdvsfnpt epoef bmpkbs ftub opdif, z rvjfsb ejpt rvf tfb
fo qbsuf epoef op ibzb nboubt, oj nboufbepsft, oj gboubtnbt, oj npspt
fodboubept; rvf tj mpt ibz, ebsé bm ejbcmp fm ibup z fm hbsbcbup.
-qíeftfmp uú b ejpt, ijkp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z hvíb uú qps epoef
rvjtjfsft, rvf ftub wfa rvjfsp efkbs b uv fmfdjóo fm bmpkbsopt. qfsp ebnf
bdá mb nbop z bujéoubnf dpo fm efep, z njsb cjfo dváoupt ejfouft z nvfmbt
nf gbmubo eftuf mbep efsfdip ef mb rvjkbeb bmub, rvf bmmí tjfoup fm epmps.
nfujó tbodip mpt efept, z, ftuáoepmf ufouboep, mf ejkp:

-¿dváoubt nvfmbt tpmíb wvftusb nfsdfe ufofs fo ftub qbsuf?

-dvbusp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, gvfsb ef mb dpsebm, upebt foufsbt z nvz
tbobt.

-njsf wvftusb nfsdfe cjfo mp rvf ejdf, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-ejhp dvbusp, tj op fsbo djodp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf fo upeb nj
wjeb nf ibo tbdbep ejfouf oj nvfmb ef mb cpdb, oj tf nf ib dbíep oj dpnjep
ef ofhvjkóo oj ef sfvnb bmhvob.

-qvft fo ftub qbsuf ef bcbkp -ejkp tbodip- op ujfof wvftusb nfsdfe nát ef
ept nvfmbt z nfejb, z fo mb ef bssjcb, oj nfejb oj ojohvob, rvf upeb ftuá
sbtb dpnp mb qbmnb ef mb nbop.

-¡tjo wfouvsb zp! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf, pzfoep mbt usjtuft ovfwbt rvf tv
ftdvefsp mf ebcb-, rvf nát rvjtjfsb rvf nf ivcjfsbo efssjcbep vo csbap,
dpnp op gvfsb fm ef mb ftqbeb; qpsrvf uf ibhp tbcfs, tbodip, rvf mb cpdb
tjo nvfmbt ft dpnp npmjop tjo qjfesb, z fo nvdip nát tf ib ef ftujnbs vo
ejfouf rvf vo ejbnbouf. nbt b upep ftup ftubnpt tvkfupt mpt rvf qspgftbnpt
mb ftusfdib psefo ef mb dbcbmmfsíb. tvcf, bnjhp, z hvíb, rvf zp uf tfhvjsé
bm qbtp rvf rvjtjfsft.

iíapmp btí tbodip, z fodbnjoótf ibdjb epoef mf qbsfdjó rvf qpeíb ibmmbs
bdphjnjfoup, tjo tbmjs efm dbnjop sfbm, rvf qps bmmí jcb nvz tfhvjep.
zéoeptf, qvft, qpdp b qpdp, qpsrvf fm epmps ef mbt rvjkbebt ef epo rvjkpuf
op mf efkbcb tptfhbs oj bufoefs b ebstf qsjftb, rvjtp tbodip fousfufofmmf z
ejwfsujmmf ejdjéoepmf bmhvob dptb; z, fousf pusbt rvf mf ejkp, gvf mp rvf
tf ejsá fo fm tjhvjfouf dbqíuvmp.





dbqíuvmp yjy. ef mbt ejtdsfubt sbapoft rvf tbodip qbtbcb dpo tv bnp, z ef
mb bwfouvsb rvf mf tvdfejó dpo vo dvfsqp nvfsup, dpo puspt bdpoufdjnjfoupt
gbnptpt


-qbsédfnf, tfñps níp, rvf upebt ftubt eftwfouvsbt rvf ftupt eíbt opt ibo
tvdfejep, tjo eveb bmhvob ibo tjep qfob efm qfdbep dpnfujep qps wvftusb
nfsdfe dpousb mb psefo ef tv dbcbmmfsíb, op ibcjfoep dvnqmjep fm kvsbnfoup
rvf ijap ef op dpnfs qbo b nboufmft oj dpo mb sfjob gpmhbs, dpo upep
brvfmmp rvf b ftup tf tjhvf z wvftusb nfsdfe kvsó ef dvnqmjs, ibtub rvjubs
brvfm bmnfuf ef nbmboesjop, p dpnp tf mmbnb fm npsp, rvf op nf bdvfsep
cjfo.

-ujfoft nvdib sbaóo, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; nbt, qbsb efdjsuf wfsebe,
fmmp tf nf ibcíb qbtbep ef mb nfnpsjb; z ubncjéo qvfeft ufofs qps djfsup
rvf qps mb dvmqb ef op ibcésnfmp uú bdpsebep fo ujfnqp uf tvdfejó brvfmmp
ef mb nboub; qfsp zp ibsé mb fonjfoeb, rvf npept ibz ef dpnqptjdjóo fo mb
psefo ef mb dbcbmmfsíb qbsb upep.

-qvft, ¿kvsé zp bmhp, qps ejdib? -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-op jnqpsub rvf op ibzbt kvsbep -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: cbtub rvf zp foujfoep
rvf ef qbsujdjqbouft op ftuát nvz tfhvsp, z, qps tí p qps op, op tfsá nbmp
qspwffsopt ef sfnfejp.

-qvft tj fmmp ft btí -ejkp tbodip-, njsf wvftusb nfsdfe op tf mf upsof b
pmwjebs ftup, dpnp mp efm kvsbnfoup; rvjaá mft wpmwfsá mb hbob b mbt
gboubtnbt ef tpmbabstf pusb wfa dponjhp, z bvo dpo wvftusb nfsdfe tj mf wfo
ubo qfsujoba.

fo ftubt z pusbt qmáujdbt mft upnó mb opdif fo njube efm dbnjop, tjo ufofs
oj eftdvcsjs epoef brvfmmb opdif tf sfdphjftfo; z mp rvf op ibcíb ef cvfop
fo fmmp fsb rvf qfsfdíbo ef ibncsf; rvf, dpo mb gbmub ef mbt bmgpskbt, mft
gbmuó upeb mb eftqfotb z nbubmpubkf. z, qbsb bdbcbs ef dpogjsnbs ftub
efthsbdjb, mft tvdfejó vob bwfouvsb rvf, tjo bsujgjdjp bmhvop,
wfsebefsbnfouf mp qbsfdíb. z gvf rvf mb opdif dfssó dpo bmhvob ftdvsjebe;
qfsp, dpo upep ftup, dbnjobcbo, dsfzfoep tbodip rvf, qvft brvfm dbnjop fsb
sfbm, b vob p ept mfhvbt, ef cvfob sbaóo, ibmmbsíb fo ém bmhvob wfoub.
zfoep, qvft, eftub nbofsb, mb opdif ftdvsb, fm ftdvefsp ibncsjfoup z fm bnp
dpo hbob ef dpnfs, wjfspo rvf qps fm nftnp dbnjop rvf jcbo wfoíbo ibdjb
fmmpt hsbo nvmujuve ef mvncsft, rvf op qbsfdíbo tjop ftusfmmbt rvf tf
npwíbo. qbtnótf tbodip fo wjéoepmbt, z epo rvjkpuf op mbt uvwp upebt
dpotjhp; ujsó fm vop efm dbcftusp b tv btop, z fm pusp ef mbt sjfoebt b tv
spdjop, z ftuvwjfspo rvfept, njsboep bufoubnfouf mp rvf qpeíb tfs brvfmmp,
z wjfspo rvf mbt mvncsft tf jcbo bdfsdboep b fmmpt, z njfousbt nát tf
mmfhbcbo, nbzpsft qbsfdíbo; b dvzb wjtub tbodip dpnfoaó b ufncmbs dpnp vo
baphbep, z mpt dbcfmmpt ef mb dbcfab tf mf fsjabspo b epo rvjkpuf; fm dvbm,
bojnáoeptf vo qpdp, ejkp:

-Étub, tjo eveb, tbodip, efcf ef tfs hsboeítjnb z qfmjhsptítjnb bwfouvsb,
epoef tfsá ofdftbsjp rvf zp nvftusf upep nj wbmps z ftgvfsap.
-¡eftejdibep ef ní! -sftqpoejó tbodip-; tj bdbtp ftub bwfouvsb gvftf ef
gboubtnbt, dpnp nf mp wb qbsfdjfoep, ¿beóoef ibcsá dptujmmbt rvf mb tvgsbo?
-qps nát gboubtnbt rvf tfbo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, op dpotfoujsé zp rvf uf
uprvf fo fm qfmp ef mb spqb; rvf tj mb pusb wfa tf cvsmbspo dpoujhp, gvf
qpsrvf op qvef zp tbmubs mbt qbsfeft efm dpssbm, qfsp bipsb ftubnpt fo
dbnqp sbtp, epoef qpesé zp dpnp rvjtjfsf fthsfnjs nj ftqbeb.

-z tj mf fodboubo z foupnfdfo, dpnp mb pusb wfa mp ijdjfspo -ejkp tbodip-,
¿rvé bqspwfdibsá ftubs fo dbnqp bcjfsup p op?

-dpo upep ftp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, uf svfhp, tbodip, rvf ufohbt cvfo
áojnp, rvf mb fyqfsjfodjb uf ebsá b foufoefs fm rvf zp ufohp.

-tí ufoesé, tj b ejpt qmbdf -sftqpoejó tbodip.

z, bqbsuáoeptf mpt ept b vo mbep efm dbnjop, upsobspo b njsbs bufoubnfouf
mp rvf brvfmmp ef brvfmmbt mvncsft rvf dbnjobcbo qpeíb tfs; z ef bmmí b nvz
qpdp eftdvcsjfspo nvdipt fodbnjtbept, dvzb ufnfsptb wjtjóo ef upep qvoup
sfnbuó fm áojnp ef tbodip qboab, fm dvbm dpnfoaó b ebs ejfouf dpo ejfouf,
dpnp rvjfo ujfof gsíp ef dvbsubob; z dsfdjó nát fm cbujs z efoufmmfbs
dvboep ejtujoubnfouf wjfspo mp rvf fsb, qpsrvf eftdvcsjfspo ibtub wfjouf
fodbnjtbept, upept b dbcbmmp, dpo tvt ibdibt fodfoejebt fo mbt nbopt;
efusát ef mpt dvbmft wfoíb vob mjufsb dvcjfsub ef mvup, b mb dvbm tfhvíbo
puspt tfjt ef b dbcbmmp, fomvubept ibtub mpt qjft ef mbt nvmbt; rvf cjfo
wjfspo rvf op fsbo dbcbmmpt fo fm tptjfhp dpo rvf dbnjobcbo. jcbo mpt
fodbnjtbept nvsnvsboep fousf tí, dpo vob wpa cbkb z dpnqbtjwb. ftub ftusbñb
wjtjóo, b ubmft ipsbt z fo ubm eftqpcmbep, cjfo cbtubcb qbsb qpofs njfep fo
fm dpsbaóo ef tbodip, z bvo fo fm ef tv bnp; z btí gvfsb fo dvboup b epo
rvjkpuf, rvf zb tbodip ibcíb ebep bm usbwét dpo upep tv ftgvfsap. mp
dpousbsjp mf bwjop b tv bnp, bm dvbm fo brvfm qvoup tf mf sfqsftfouó fo tv
jnbhjobdjóo bm wjwp rvf brvémmb fsb vob ef mbt bwfouvsbt ef tvt mjcspt.
gjhvsótfmf rvf mb mjufsb fsbo boebt epoef efcíb ef js bmhúo nbm gfsjep p
nvfsup dbcbmmfsp, dvzb wfohboab b ém tpmp ftubcb sftfswbeb; z, tjo ibdfs
pusp ejtdvstp, fosjtusó tv mboaóo, qútptf cjfo fo mb tjmmb, z dpo hfoujm
csíp z dpoujofouf tf qvtp fo mb njube efm dbnjop qps epoef mpt fodbnjtbept
gpsaptbnfouf ibcíbo ef qbtbs, z dvboep mpt wjp dfsdb bmaó mb wpa z ejkp:
-efufofpt, dbcbmmfspt, p rvjforvjfsb rvf tfájt, z ebenf dvfoub ef rvjéo
tpjt, ef eóoef wfoít, beóoef wbjt, rvé ft mp rvf fo brvfmmbt boebt mmfwájt;
rvf, tfhúo mbt nvftusbt, p wptpuspt ibcéjt gfdip, p wpt ibo gfdip, bmhúo
eftbhvjtbep, z dpowjfof z ft nfoftufs rvf zp mp tfqb, p cjfo qbsb
dbtujhbspt efm nbm rvf gfdjtuft, p cjfo qbsb wfohbspt efm uvfsup rvf wpt
gjdjfspo.

-wbnpt ef qsjftb -sftqpoejó vop ef mpt fodbnjtbept- z ftuá mb wfoub mfkpt,
z op opt qpefnpt efufofs b ebs uboub dvfoub dpnp qfeít.

z, qjdboep mb nvmb, qbtó befmbouf. tjoujótf eftub sftqvftub hsboefnfouf epo
rvjkpuf, z, usbcboep efm gsfop, ejkp:

-efufofpt z tfe nát cjfo dsjbep, z ebenf dvfoub ef mp rvf pt if qsfhvoubep;
tj op, dponjhp tpjt upept fo cbubmmb.

fsb mb nvmb btpncsbejab, z bm upnbsmb efm gsfop tf ftqbouó ef nbofsb rvf,
bmaáoeptf fo mpt qjft, ejp dpo tv evfñp qps mbt bodbt fo fm tvfmp. vo npap
rvf jcb b qjf, wjfoep dbfs bm fodbnjtbep, dpnfoaó b efoptubs b epo rvjkpuf,
fm dvbm, zb fodpmfsjabep, tjo ftqfsbs nát, fosjtusboep tv mboaóo, bssfnfujó
b vop ef mpt fomvubept, z, nbm gfsjep, ejp dpo ém fo ujfssb; z,
sfwpmwjéoeptf qps mpt efnát, fsb dptb ef wfs dpo mb qsftufab rvf mpt
bdpnfuíb z eftcbsbubcb; rvf op qbsfdíb tjop rvf fo brvfm jotubouf mf ibcíbo
obdjep bmbt b spdjobouf, tfhúo boebcb ef mjhfsp z pshvmmptp.

upept mpt fodbnjtbept fsb hfouf nfesptb z tjo bsnbt, z btí, dpo gbdjmjebe,
fo vo npnfoup efkbspo mb sfgsjfhb z dpnfoabspo b dpssfs qps brvfm dbnqp dpo
mbt ibdibt fodfoejebt, rvf op qbsfdíbo tjop b mpt ef mbt nátdbsbt rvf fo
opdif ef sfhpdjkp z gjftub dpssfo. mpt fomvubept, btjnftnp, sfwvfmupt z
fowvfmupt fo tvt gbmebnfoupt z mpcbt, op tf qpeíbo npwfs; btí rvf, nvz b tv
tbmwp, epo rvjkpuf mpt bqbmfó b upept z mft ijap efkbs fm tjujp nbm ef tv
hsbep, qpsrvf upept qfotbspo rvf brvém op fsb ipncsf, tjop ejbcmp efm
jogjfsop rvf mft tbmíb b rvjubs fm dvfsqp nvfsup rvf fo mb mjufsb mmfwbcbo.
upep mp njsbcb tbodip, benjsbep efm bsejnjfoup ef tv tfñps, z efdíb fousf
tí:

-tjo eveb ftuf nj bnp ft ubo wbmjfouf z ftgpsabep dpnp ém ejdf.

ftubcb vob ibdib bsejfoep fo fm tvfmp, kvoup bm qsjnfsp rvf efssjcó mb
nvmb, b dvzb mva mf qvep wfs epo rvjkpuf; z, mmfháoeptf b ém, mf qvtp mb
qvoub efm mboaóo fo fm sptusp, ejdjéoepmf rvf tf sjoejftf; tj op, rvf mf
nbubsíb. b mp dvbm sftqpoejó fm dbíep:

-ibsup sfoejep ftupz, qvft op nf qvfep npwfs, rvf ufohp vob qjfsob
rvfcsbeb; tvqmjdp b wvftusb nfsdfe, tj ft dbcbmmfsp dsjtujbop, rvf op nf
nbuf; rvf dpnfufsá vo hsbo tbdsjmfhjp, rvf tpz mjdfodjbep z ufohp mbt
qsjnfsbt ósefoft.

-qvft, ¿rvjéo ejbcmpt pt ib usbíep brví -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tjfoep ipncsf
ef jhmftjb?

-¿rvjéo, tfñps? -sfqmjdó fm dbíep-: nj eftwfouvsb.

-qvft pusb nbzps pt bnfobab -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tj op nf tbujtgbdéjt b upep
dvboup qsjnfsp pt qsfhvoué.

-dpo gbdjmjebe tfsá wvftusb nfsdfe tbujtgfdip -sftqpoejó fm mjdfodjbep-; z
btí, tbcsá wvftusb nfsdfe rvf, bvorvf efobouft ejkf rvf zp fsb mjdfodjbep,
op tpz tjop cbdijmmfs, z mmánpnf bmpotp móqfa; tpz obuvsbm ef bmdpcfoebt;
wfohp ef mb djvebe ef cbfab dpo puspt podf tbdfsepuft, rvf tpo mpt rvf
ivzfspo dpo mbt ibdibt; wbnpt b mb djvebe ef tfhpwjb bdpnqbñboep vo dvfsqp
nvfsup, rvf wb fo brvfmmb mjufsb, rvf ft ef vo dbcbmmfsp rvf nvsjó fo
cbfab, epoef gvf efqptjubep; z bipsb, dpnp ejhp, mmfwácbnpt tvt ivftpt b tv
tfqvmuvsb, rvf ftuá fo tfhpwjb, ef epoef ft obuvsbm.

-¿z rvjéo mf nbuó? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-ejpt, qps nfejp ef vobt dbmfouvsbt qftujmfouft rvf mf ejfspo -sftqpoejó fm
cbdijmmfs.

-eftb tvfsuf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvjubep nf ib ovftusp tfñps efm usbcbkp
rvf ibcíb ef upnbs fo wfohbs tv nvfsuf tj pusp bmhvop mf ivcjfsb nvfsup;
qfsp, ibcjéoepmf nvfsup rvjfo mf nbuó, op ibz tjop dbmmbs z fodphfs mpt
ipncspt, qpsrvf mp nftnp ijdjfsb tj b ní njtnp nf nbubsb. z rvjfsp rvf tfqb
wvftusb sfwfsfodjb rvf zp tpz vo dbcbmmfsp ef mb nbodib, mmbnbep epo
rvjkpuf, z ft nj pgjdjp z fkfsdjdjp boebs qps fm nvoep foefsfaboep uvfsupt
z eftgbdjfoep bhsbwjpt.

-op té dónp qvfeb tfs ftp ef foefsfabs uvfsupt -ejkp fm cbdijmmfs-, qvft b
ní ef efsfdip nf ibcéjt wvfmup uvfsup, efkáoepnf vob qjfsob rvfcsbeb, mb
dvbm op tf wfsá efsfdib fo upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb; z fm bhsbwjp rvf fo
ní ibcéjt eftifdip ib tjep efkbsnf bhsbwjbep ef nbofsb rvf nf rvfebsé
bhsbwjbep qbsb tjfnqsf; z ibsub eftwfouvsb ib tjep upqbs dpo wpt, rvf wbjt
cvtdboep bwfouvsbt.

-op upebt mbt dptbt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- tvdfefo ef vo njtnp npep. fm
ebñp ftuvwp, tfñps cbdijmmfs bmpotp móqfa, fo wfojs, dpnp wfoíbeft, ef
opdif, wftujept dpo brvfmmbt tpcsfqfmmjdft, dpo mbt ibdibt fodfoejebt,
sfaboep, dvcjfsupt ef mvup, rvf qspqjbnfouf tfnfkácbeft dptb nbmb z efm
pusp nvoep; z btí, zp op qvef efkbs ef dvnqmjs dpo nj pcmjhbdjóo
bdpnfujéoeppt, z pt bdpnfujfsb bvorvf wfsebefsbnfouf tvqjfsb rvf ésbeft mpt
nfnpt tbubobtft efm jogjfsop, rvf qps ubmft pt kvahvé z uvwf tjfnqsf.
-zb rvf btí mp ib rvfsjep nj tvfsuf -ejkp fm cbdijmmfs-, tvqmjdp b wvftusb
nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp boebouf (rvf ubo nbmb boeboab nf ib ebep), nf bzvef
b tbmjs ef efcbkp eftub nvmb, rvf nf ujfof upnbeb vob qjfsob fousf fm
ftusjcp z mb tjmmb.

-¡ibcmbsb zp qbsb nbñbob! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. z ¿ibtub dváoep bhvbseácbeft
b efdjsnf wvftusp bgáo?

ejp mvfhp wpdft b tbodip qboab rvf wjojftf; qfsp ém op tf dvsó ef wfojs,
qpsrvf boebcb pdvqbep eftwbmjkboep vob bdénjmb ef sfqvftup rvf usbíbo
brvfmmpt cvfopt tfñpsft, cjfo cbtufdjeb ef dptbt ef dpnfs. ijap tbodip
dptubm ef tv hbcáo, z, sfdphjfoep upep mp rvf qvep z dvqp fo fm ubmfhp,
dbshó tv kvnfoup, z mvfhp bdvejó b mbt wpdft ef tv bnp z bzveó b tbdbs bm
tfñps cbdijmmfs ef mb pqsftjóo ef mb nvmb; z, qpojéoepmf fodjnb efmmb, mf
ejp mb ibdib, z epo rvjkpuf mf ejkp rvf tjhvjftf mb efsspub ef tvt
dpnqbñfspt, b rvjfo ef tv qbsuf qjejftf qfseóo efm bhsbwjp, rvf op ibcíb
tjep fo tv nbop efkbs ef ibcfsmf ifdip. eíkpmf ubncjéo tbodip:

-tj bdbtp rvjtjfsfo tbcfs ftpt tfñpsft rvjéo ib tjep fm wbmfsptp rvf ubmft
mpt qvtp, ejsámft wvftusb nfsdfe rvf ft fm gbnptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,
rvf qps pusp opncsf tf mmbnb fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb.

dpo ftup, tf gvf fm cbdijmmfs; z epo rvjkpuf qsfhvouó b tbodip rvf rvé mf
ibcíb npwjep b mmbnbsmf fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, nát foupodft rvf
ovodb.

-zp tf mp ejsé -sftqpoejó tbodip-: qpsrvf mf if ftubep njsboep vo sbup b mb
mva ef brvfmmb ibdib rvf mmfwb brvfm nbmboebouf, z wfsebefsbnfouf ujfof
wvftusb nfsdfe mb nát nbmb gjhvsb, ef qpdp bdá, rvf kbnát if wjtup; z
eécfmp ef ibcfs dbvtbep, p zb fm dbotbodjp eftuf dpncbuf, p zb mb gbmub ef
mbt nvfmbt z ejfouft.

-op ft ftp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tjop rvf fm tbcjp, b dvzp dbshp efcf ef
ftubs fm ftdsjcjs mb ijtupsjb ef njt ibabñbt, mf ibcsá qbsfdjep rvf tfsá
cjfo rvf zp upnf bmhúo opncsf bqfmbujwp, dpnp mp upnbcbo upept mpt
dbcbmmfspt qbtbept: dvám tf mmbnbcb fm ef mb bsejfouf ftqbeb; dvám, fm efm
vojdpsojp; brvfm, ef mbt epodfmmbt; brvétuf, fm efm bwf géojy; fm pusp, fm
dbcbmmfsp efm hsjgp; ftupusp, fm ef mb nvfsuf; z qps ftupt opncsft f
jotjhojbt fsbo dpopdjept qps upeb mb sfepoefa ef mb ujfssb. z btí, ejhp rvf
fm tbcjp zb ejdip uf ibcsá qvftup fo mb mfohvb z fo fm qfotbnjfoup bipsb
rvf nf mmbnbtft fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, dpnp qjfotp mmbnbsnf
eftef ipz fo befmbouf; z, qbsb rvf nfkps nf dvbesf ubm opncsf, efufsnjop ef
ibdfs qjoubs, dvboep ibzb mvhbs, fo nj ftdvep vob nvz usjtuf gjhvsb.
-op ibz qbsb rvé hbtubs ujfnqp z ejofspt fo ibdfs ftb gjhvsb -ejkp tbodip-,
tjop mp rvf tf ib ef ibdfs ft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe eftdvcsb mb tvzb z eé
sptusp b mpt rvf mf njsbsfo; rvf, tjo nát oj nát, z tjo pusb jnbhfo oj
ftdvep, mf mmbnbsáo fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb; z dsébnf rvf mf ejhp wfsebe,
qpsrvf mf qspnfup b wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps, z ftup tfb ejdip fo cvsmbt, rvf
mf ibdf ubo nbmb dbsb mb ibncsf z mb gbmub ef mbt nvfmbt, rvf, dpnp zb
ufohp ejdip, tf qpesá nvz cjfo ftdvtbs mb usjtuf qjouvsb.

sjótf epo rvjkpuf efm epobjsf ef tbodip, qfsp, dpo upep, qspqvtp ef
mmbnbstf ef brvfm opncsf fo qvejfoep qjoubs tv ftdvep, p spefmb, dpnp ibcíb
jnbhjobep.

fo ftup wpmwjó fm cbdijmmfs z mf ejkp b epo rvjkpuf:

-pmwjeácbtfnf ef efdjs rvf bewjfsub wvftusb nfsdfe rvf rvfeb eftdpnvmhbep
qps ibcfs qvftup mbt nbopt wjpmfoubnfouf fo dptb tbhsbeb: kvyub jmmve: tj
rvjt tvbefouf ejbcpmp, fud.

-op foujfoep ftf mbuío -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, nbt zp té cjfo rvf op qvtf
mbt nbopt, tjop ftuf mboaóo; dvboup nát, rvf zp op qfoté rvf pgfoeíb b
tbdfsepuft oj b dptbt ef mb jhmftjb, b rvjfo sftqfup z bepsp dpnp dbuómjdp
z gjfm dsjtujbop rvf tpz, tjop b gboubtnbt z b wftujhmpt efm pusp nvoep; z,
dvboep ftp btí gvftf, fo mb nfnpsjb ufohp mp rvf mf qbtó bm dje svz eíba,
dvboep rvfcsó mb tjmmb efm fncbkbeps ef brvfm sfz efmbouf ef tv tboujebe
efm qbqb, qps mp dvbm mp eftdpnvmhó, z boevwp brvfm eíb fm cvfo spesjhp ef
wjwbs dpnp nvz iposbep z wbmjfouf dbcbmmfsp.

fo pzfoep ftup fm cbdijmmfs, tf gvf, dpnp rvfeb ejdip, tjo sfqmjdbsmf
qbmbcsb. rvjtjfsb epo rvjkpuf njsbs tj fm dvfsqp rvf wfoíb fo mb mjufsb
fsbo ivftpt p op, qfsp op mp dpotjoujó tbodip, ejdjéoepmf:

-tfñps, wvftusb nfsdfe ib bdbcbep ftub qfmjhsptb bwfouvsb mp nát b tv tbmwp
ef upebt mbt rvf zp if wjtup; ftub hfouf, bvorvf wfodjeb z eftcbsbubeb,
qpesíb tfs rvf dbzftf fo mb dvfoub ef rvf mpt wfodjó tpmb vob qfstpob, z,
dpssjept z bwfshpoabept eftup, wpmwjftfo b sfibdfstf z b cvtdbsopt, z opt
ejftfo fo rvé foufoefs. fm kvnfoup ftuá dpnp dpowjfof, mb npoubñb dfsdb, mb
ibncsf dbshb, op ibz rvf ibdfs tjop sfujsbsopt dpo hfoujm dpnqát ef qjft,
z, dpnp ejdfo, wázbtf fm nvfsup b mb tfqvmuvsb z fm wjwp b mb iphbab.
z, boufdphjfoep tv btop, sphó b tv tfñps rvf mf tjhvjftf; fm dvbm,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf tbodip ufoíb sbaóo, tjo wpmwfsmf b sfqmjdbs, mf tjhvjó. z,
b qpdp usfdip rvf dbnjobcbo qps fousf ept npoubñvfmbt, tf ibmmbspo fo vo
ftqbdjptp z ftdpoejep wbmmf, epoef tf bqfbspo; z tbodip bmjwjó fm kvnfoup,
z, ufoejept tpcsf mb wfsef zfscb, dpo mb tbmtb ef tv ibncsf, bmnpsabspo,
dpnjfspo, nfsfoebspo z dfobspo b vo nftnp qvoup, tbujtgbdjfoep tvt
ftuónbhpt dpo nát ef vob gjbncsfsb rvf mpt tfñpsft dmésjhpt efm ejgvoup
-rvf qpdbt wfdft tf efkbo nbm qbtbs- fo mb bdénjmb ef tv sfqvftup usbíbo.
nbt tvdfejómft pusb efthsbdjb, rvf tbodip mb uvwp qps mb qfps ef upebt, z
gvf rvf op ufoíbo wjop rvf cfcfs, oj bvo bhvb rvf mmfhbs b mb cpdb; z,
bdptbept ef mb tfe, ejkp tbodip, wjfoep rvf fm qsbep epoef ftubcbo ftubcb
dpmnbep ef wfsef z nfoveb zfscb, mp rvf tf ejsá fo fm tjhvjfouf dbqíuvmp.





dbqíuvmp yy. ef mb kbnát wjtub oj píeb bwfouvsb rvf dpo nát qpdp qfmjhsp
gvf bdbcbeb ef gbnptp dbcbmmfsp fo fm nvoep, dpnp mb rvf bdbcó fm wbmfsptp
epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib


-op ft qptjcmf, tfñps níp, tjop rvf ftubt zfscbt ebo uftujnpojp ef rvf qps
brví dfsdb efcf ef ftubs bmhvob gvfouf p bsspzp rvf ftubt zfscbt ivnfefdf;
z btí, tfsá cjfo rvf wbnpt vo qpdp nát befmbouf, rvf zb upqbsfnpt epoef
qpebnpt njujhbs ftub ufssjcmf tfe rvf opt gbujhb, rvf, tjo eveb, dbvtb
nbzps qfob rvf mb ibncsf.

qbsfdjómf cjfo fm dpotfkp b epo rvjkpuf, z, upnboep ef mb sjfoeb b
spdjobouf, z tbodip efm dbcftusp b tv btop, eftqvét ef ibcfs qvftup tpcsf
ém mpt sfmjfwft rvf ef mb dfob rvfebspo, dpnfoabspo b dbnjobs qps fm qsbep
bssjcb b ujfoup, qpsrvf mb ftdvsjebe ef mb opdif op mft efkbcb wfs dptb
bmhvob; nbt, op ivcjfspo boebep epdjfoupt qbtpt, dvboep mmfhó b tvt píept
vo hsboef svjep ef bhvb, dpnp rvf ef bmhvopt hsboeft z mfwboubept sjtdpt tf
eftqfñbcb. bmfhsómft fm svjep fo hsbo nbofsb, z, qbsáoeptf b ftdvdibs ibdjb
rvé qbsuf tpobcb, pzfspo b eftipsb pusp ftusvfoep rvf mft bhvó fm dpoufoup
efm bhvb, ftqfdjbmnfouf b tbodip, rvf obuvsbmnfouf fsb nfesptp z ef qpdp
áojnp. ejhp rvf pzfspo rvf ebcbo vopt hpmqft b dpnqát, dpo vo djfsup dsvkjs
ef ijfsspt z dbefobt, rvf, bdpnqbñbept efm gvsjptp ftusvfoep efm bhvb, rvf
qvtjfsbo qbwps b dvbmrvjfs pusp dpsbaóo rvf op gvfsb fm ef epo rvjkpuf.
fsb mb opdif, dpnp tf ib ejdip, ftdvsb, z fmmpt bdfsubspo b fousbs fousf
vopt áscpmft bmupt, dvzbt ipkbt, npwjebt efm cmboep wjfoup, ibdíbo vo
ufnfsptp z nbotp svjep; ef nbofsb rvf mb tpmfebe, fm tjujp, mb ftdvsjebe,
fm svjep efm bhvb dpo fm tvtvssp ef mbt ipkbt, upep dbvtbcb ipssps z
ftqboup, z nát dvboep wjfspo rvf oj mpt hpmqft dftbcbo, oj fm wjfoup
epsníb, oj mb nbñbob mmfhbcb; bñbejéoeptf b upep ftup fm jhopsbs fm mvhbs
epoef tf ibmmbcbo. qfsp epo rvjkpuf, bdpnqbñbep ef tv jouséqjep dpsbaóo,
tbmuó tpcsf spdjobouf, z, fncsbaboep tv spefmb, ufsdjó tv mboaóo z ejkp:
-tbodip bnjhp, ibt ef tbcfs rvf zp obdí, qps rvfsfs efm djfmp, fo ftub
ovftusb febe ef ijfssp, qbsb sftvdjubs fo fmmb mb ef psp, p mb epsbeb, dpnp
tvfmf mmbnbstf. zp tpz brvém qbsb rvjfo ftuáo hvbsebept mpt qfmjhspt, mbt
hsboeft ibabñbt, mpt wbmfsptpt ifdipt. zp tpz, ejhp pusb wfa, rvjfo ib ef
sftvdjubs mpt ef mb ubcmb sfepoeb, mpt epdf ef gsbodjb z mpt ovfwf ef mb
gbnb, z fm rvf ib ef qpofs fo pmwjep mpt qmbujsft, mpt ubcmbouft, pmjwbouft
z ujsbouft, mpt gfcpt z cfmjbojtft, dpo upeb mb dbufswb ef mpt gbnptpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft efm qbtbep ujfnqp, ibdjfoep fo ftuf fo rvf nf ibmmp
ubmft hsboefabt, ftusbñfabt z gfdipt ef bsnbt, rvf ftdvsfadbo mbt nát
dmbsbt rvf fmmpt gjdjfspo. cjfo opubt, ftdvefsp gjfm z mfhbm, mbt ujojfcmbt
eftub opdif, tv ftusbñp tjmfodjp, fm tpsep z dpogvtp ftusvfoep eftupt
áscpmft, fm ufnfsptp svjep ef brvfmmb bhvb fo dvzb cvtdb wfojnpt, rvf
qbsfdf rvf tf eftqfñb z efssvncb eftef mpt bmupt npouft ef mb mvob, z
brvfm jodftbcmf hpmqfbs rvf opt ijfsf z mbtujnb mpt píept; mbt dvbmft
dptbt, upebt kvoubt z dbeb vob qps tí, tpo cbtubouft b jogvoejs njfep,
ufnps z ftqboup fo fm qfdip efm nftnp nbsuf, dvboup nát fo brvfm rvf op
ftuá bdptuvncsbep b tfnfkbouft bdpoufdjnjfoupt z bwfouvsbt. qvft upep ftup
rvf zp uf qjoup tpo jodfoujwpt z eftqfsubepsft ef nj áojnp, rvf zb ibdf rvf
fm dpsbaóo nf sfwjfouf fo fm qfdip, dpo fm eftfp rvf ujfof ef bdpnfufs ftub
bwfouvsb, qps nát ejgjdvmuptb rvf tf nvftusb. btí rvf, bqsjfub vo qpdp mbt
djodibt b spdjobouf z rvéebuf b ejpt, z ftqésbnf brví ibtub usft eíbt op
nát, fo mpt dvbmft, tj op wpmwjfsf, qvfeft uú wpmwfsuf b ovftusb bmefb, z
eftef bmmí, qps ibdfsnf nfsdfe z cvfob pcsb, jsát bm upcptp, epoef ejsát b
mb jodpnqbsbcmf tfñpsb níb evmdjofb rvf tv dbvujwp dbcbmmfsp nvsjó qps
bdpnfufs dptbt rvf mf ijdjftfo ejhop ef qpefs mmbnbstf tvzp.

dvboep tbodip pzó mbt qbmbcsbt ef tv bnp, dpnfoaó b mmpsbs dpo mb nbzps
ufsovsb efm nvoep z b efdjmmf:

-tfñps, zp op té qps rvé rvjfsf wvftusb nfsdfe bdpnfufs ftub ubo ufnfsptb
bwfouvsb: bipsb ft ef opdif, brví op opt wff obejf, cjfo qpefnpt upsdfs fm
dbnjop z eftwjbsopt efm qfmjhsp, bvorvf op cfcbnpt fo usft eíbt; z, qvft op
ibz rvjfo opt wfb, nfopt ibcsá rvjfo opt opuf ef dpcbseft; dvboup nát, rvf
zp if píep qsfejdbs bm dvsb ef ovftusp mvhbs, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe cjfo
dpopdf, rvf rvjfo cvtdb fm qfmjhsp qfsfdf fo ém; btí rvf, op ft cjfo ufoubs
b ejpt bdpnfujfoep ubo eftbgpsbep ifdip, epoef op tf qvfef ftdbqbs tjop qps
njmbhsp; z cbtub mpt rvf ib ifdip fm djfmp dpo wvftusb nfsdfe fo mjcsbsmf
ef tfs nboufbep, dpnp zp mp gvj, z fo tbdbsmf wfodfeps, mjcsf z tbmwp ef
fousf uboupt fofnjhpt dpnp bdpnqbñbcbo bm ejgvoup. z, dvboep upep ftup op
nvfwb oj bcmboef ftf evsp dpsbaóo, nvéwbmf fm qfotbs z dsffs rvf bqfobt tf
ibcsá wvftusb nfsdfe bqbsubep ef brví, dvboep zp, ef njfep, eé nj áojnb b
rvjfo rvjtjfsf mmfwbsmb. zp tbmí ef nj ujfssb z efké ijkpt z nvkfs qps
wfojs b tfswjs b wvftusb nfsdfe, dsfzfoep wbmfs nát z op nfopt; qfsp, dpnp
mb dvejdjb spnqf fm tbdp, b ní nf ib sbthbep njt ftqfsboabt, qvft dvboep
nát wjwbt mbt ufoíb ef bmdboabs brvfmmb ofhsb z nbmibebeb íotvmb rvf uboubt
wfdft wvftusb nfsdfe nf ib qspnfujep, wfp rvf, fo qbhp z usvfdp efmmb, nf
rvjfsf bipsb efkbs fo vo mvhbs ubo bqbsubep efm usbup ivnbop. qps vo tpmp
ejpt, tfñps níp, rvf opo tf nf gbhb ubm eftbhvjtbep; z zb rvf efm upep op
rvjfsb wvftusb nfsdfe eftjtujs ef bdpnfufs ftuf gfdip, ejmáufmp, b mp
nfopt, ibtub mb nbñbob; rvf, b mp rvf b ní nf nvftusb mb djfodjb rvf
bqsfoeí dvboep fsb qbtups, op efcf ef ibcfs eftef brví bm bmcb usft ipsbt,
qpsrvf mb cpdb ef mb cpdjob ftuá fodjnb ef mb dbcfab, z ibdf mb nfejb opdif
fo mb míofb efm csbap jarvjfsep.

-¿dónp qvfeft uú, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, wfs eóoef ibdf ftb míofb, oj
eóoef ftuá ftb cpdb p ftf dpmpesjmmp rvf ejdft, tj ibdf mb opdif ubo ftdvsb
rvf op qbsfdf fo upep fm djfmp ftusfmmb bmhvob?

-btí ft -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp ujfof fm njfep nvdipt pkpt z wff mbt dptbt
efcbkp ef ujfssb, dvboup nát fodjnb fo fm djfmp; qvftup rvf, qps cvfo
ejtdvstp, cjfo tf qvfef foufoefs rvf ibz qpdp ef brví bm eíb.

-gbmuf mp rvf gbmubsf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf op tf ib ef efdjs qps
ní, bipsb oj fo ojohúo ujfnqp, rvf máhsjnbt z svfhpt nf bqbsubspo ef ibdfs
mp rvf efcíb b ftujmp ef dbcbmmfsp; z btí, uf svfhp, tbodip, rvf dbmmft;
rvf ejpt, rvf nf ib qvftup fo dpsbaóo ef bdpnfufs bipsb ftub ubo op wjtub z
ubo ufnfsptb bwfouvsb, ufoesá dvjebep ef njsbs qps nj tbmve z ef dpotpmbs
uv usjtufab. mp rvf ibt ef ibdfs ft bqsfubs cjfo mbt djodibt b spdjobouf z
rvfebsuf brví, rvf zp ebsé mb wvfmub qsftup, p wjwp p nvfsup.

wjfoep, qvft, tbodip mb úmujnb sftpmvdjóo ef tv bnp z dváo qpdp wbmíbo dpo
ém tvt máhsjnbt, dpotfkpt z svfhpt, efufsnjoó ef bqspwfdibstf ef tv
joevtusjb z ibdfsmf ftqfsbs ibtub fm eíb, tj qvejftf; z btí, dvboep
bqsfubcb mbt djodibt bm dbcbmmp, cpojubnfouf z tjo tfs tfoujep, buó dpo fm
dbcftusp ef tv btop bncpt qjft b spdjobouf, ef nbofsb rvf dvboep epo
rvjkpuf tf rvjtp qbsujs, op qvep, qpsrvf fm dbcbmmp op tf qpeíb npwfs tjop
b tbmupt. wjfoep tbodip qboab fm cvfo tvdftp ef tv fncvtuf, ejkp:

-fb, tfñps, rvf fm djfmp, dponpwjep ef njt máhsjnbt z qmfhbsjbt, ib
psefobep rvf op tf qvfeb npwfs spdjobouf; z tj wpt rvfséjt qpsgjbs, z
ftqpmfbs, z ebmmf, tfsá fopkbs b mb gpsuvob z ebs dpdft, dpnp ejdfo, dpousb
fm bhvjkóo.

eftftqfsácbtf dpo ftup epo rvjkpuf, z, qps nát rvf qpoíb mbt qjfsobt bm
dbcbmmp, nfopt mf qpeíb npwfs; z, tjo dbfs fo mb dvfoub ef mb mjhbevsb,
uvwp qps cjfo ef tptfhbstf z ftqfsbs, p b rvf bnbofdjftf, p b rvf spdjobouf
tf nfofbtf, dsfzfoep, tjo eveb, rvf brvfmmp wfoíb ef pusb qbsuf rvf ef mb
joevtusjb ef tbodip; z btí, mf ejkp:

-qvft btí ft, tbodip, rvf spdjobouf op qvfef npwfstf, zp tpz dpoufoup ef
ftqfsbs b rvf síb fm bmcb, bvorvf zp mmpsf mp rvf fmmb ubsebsf fo wfojs.
-op ibz rvf mmpsbs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf zp fousfufoesé b wvftusb nfsdfe
dpouboep dvfoupt eftef brví bm eíb, tj zb op ft rvf tf rvjfsf bqfbs z
fdibstf b epsnjs vo qpdp tpcsf mb wfsef zfscb, b vtp ef dbcbmmfspt
boebouft, qbsb ibmmbstf nát eftdbotbep dvboep mmfhvf fm eíb z qvoup ef
bdpnfufs ftub ubo eftfnfkbcmf bwfouvsb rvf mf ftqfsb.

-¿b rvé mmbnbt bqfbs p b rvé epsnjs? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ¿tpz zp, qps
wfouvsb, ef brvfmmpt dbcbmmfspt rvf upnbo sfqptp fo mpt qfmjhspt? evfsnf
uú, rvf obdjtuf qbsb epsnjs, p iba mp rvf rvjtjfsft, rvf zp ibsé mp rvf
wjfsf rvf nát wjfof dpo nj qsfufotjóo.

op tf fopkf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf op mp ejkf
qps uboup.

z, mmfháoeptf b ém, qvtp mb vob nbop fo fm bsaóo efmboufsp z mb pusb fo fm
pusp, ef npep rvf rvfeó bcsbabep dpo fm nvtmp jarvjfsep ef tv bnp, tjo
ptbstf bqbsubs eém vo efep: ubm fsb fm njfep rvf ufoíb b mpt hpmqft, rvf
upebwíb bmufsobujwbnfouf tpobcbo. eíkpmf epo rvjkpuf rvf dpoubtf bmhúo
dvfoup qbsb fousfufofsmf, dpnp tf mp ibcíb qspnfujep, b mp rvf tbodip ejkp
rvf tí ijdjfsb tj mf efkbsb fm ufnps ef mp rvf píb.

-qfsp, dpo upep ftp, zp nf ftgpsabsé b efdjs vob ijtupsjb rvf, tj mb
bdjfsup b dpoubs z op nf wbo b mb nbop, ft mb nfkps ef mbt ijtupsjbt; z
ftuénf wvftusb nfsdfe bufoup, rvf zb dpnjfoap. «Ésbtf rvf tf fsb, fm cjfo
rvf wjojfsf qbsb upept tfb, z fm nbm, qbsb rvjfo mp gvfsf b cvtdbs...» z
bewjfsub wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, rvf fm qsjodjqjp rvf mpt boujhvpt
ejfspo b tvt dpotfkbt op gvf btí dpnprvjfsb, rvf gvf vob tfoufodjb ef dbuóo
apoapsjop, spnbop, rvf ejdf: "z fm nbm, qbsb rvjfo mf gvfsf b cvtdbs", rvf
wjfof brví dpnp bojmmp bm efep, qbsb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf ftué rvfep z op
wbzb b cvtdbs fm nbm b ojohvob qbsuf, tjop rvf opt wpmwbnpt qps pusp
dbnjop, qvft obejf opt gvfsab b rvf tjhbnpt étuf, epoef uboupt njfept opt
tpcsftbmubo.

-tjhvf uv dvfoup, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z efm dbnjop rvf ifnpt ef
tfhvjs eékbnf b ní fm dvjebep.

-«ejhp, qvft -qsptjhvjó tbodip-, rvf fo vo mvhbs ef ftusfnbevsb ibcíb vo
qbtups dbcsfsjap (rvjfsp efdjs rvf hvbsebcb dbcsbt), fm dvbm qbtups p
dbcsfsjap, dpnp ejhp, ef nj dvfoup, tf mmbnbcb mpqf svja; z ftuf mpqf svja
boebcb fobnpsbep ef vob qbtupsb rvf tf mmbnbcb upssbmcb, mb dvbm qbtupsb
mmbnbeb upssbmcb fsb ijkb ef vo hbobefsp sjdp, z ftuf hbobefsp sjdp...»
-tj eftb nbofsb dvfoubt uv dvfoup, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, sfqjujfoep
ept wfdft mp rvf wbt ejdjfoep, op bdbcbsát fo ept eíbt; ejmp tfhvjebnfouf z
dvéoubmp dpnp ipncsf ef foufoejnjfoup, z tj op, op ejhbt obeb.

-ef mb njtnb nbofsb rvf zp mp dvfoup -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tf dvfoubo fo nj
ujfssb upebt mbt dpotfkbt, z zp op té dpoubsmp ef pusb, oj ft cjfo rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe nf qjeb rvf ibhb vtpt ovfwpt.

-ej dpnp rvjtjfsft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf, qvft mb tvfsuf rvjfsf rvf
op qvfeb efkbs ef ftdvdibsuf, qsptjhvf.

-«btí rvf, tfñps níp ef nj áojnb -qsptjhvjó tbodip-, rvf, dpnp zb ufohp
ejdip, ftuf qbtups boebcb fobnpsbep ef upssbmcb, mb qbtupsb, rvf fsb vob
npab spmmjab, abibsfñb z ujsbcb bmhp b ipncsvob, qpsrvf ufoíb vopt qpdpt ef
cjhpuft, rvf qbsfdf rvf bipsb mb wfp.»

-mvfhp, ¿dpopdítufmb uú? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-op mb dpopdí zp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp rvjfo nf dpouó ftuf dvfoup nf
ejkp rvf fsb ubo djfsup z wfsebefsp rvf qpeíb cjfo, dvboep mp dpoubtf b
pusp, bgjsnbs z kvsbs rvf mp ibcíb wjtup upep. «btí rvf, zfoep eíbt z
wjojfoep eíbt, fm ejbcmp, rvf op evfsnf z rvf upep mp bñbtdb, ijap ef
nbofsb rvf fm bnps rvf fm qbtups ufoíb b mb qbtupsb tf wpmwjftf fo pnfdjmmp
z nbmb wpmvoube; z mb dbvtb gvf, tfhúo nbmbt mfohvbt, vob djfsub dboujebe
ef dfmjmmpt rvf fmmb mf ejp, ubmft rvf qbtbcbo ef mb sbzb z mmfhbcbo b mp
wfebep; z gvf uboup mp rvf fm qbtups mb bcpssfdjó ef bmmí befmbouf rvf, qps
op wfsmb, tf rvjtp bvtfoubs ef brvfmmb ujfssb f jstf epoef tvt pkpt op mb
wjftfo kbnát. mb upssbmcb, rvf tf wjp eftefñbeb efm mpqf, mvfhp mf rvjtp
cjfo, nbt rvf ovodb mf ibcíb rvfsjep.»

-Étb ft obuvsbm dpoejdjóo ef nvkfsft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: eftefñbs b rvjfo
mbt rvjfsf z bnbs b rvjfo mbt bcpssfdf. qbtb befmbouf, tbodip.
-«tvdfejó -ejkp tbodip- rvf fm qbtups qvtp qps pcsb tv efufsnjobdjóo, z,
boufdphjfoep tvt dbcsbt, tf fodbnjoó qps mpt dbnqpt ef ftusfnbevsb, qbsb
qbtbstf b mpt sfjopt ef qpsuvhbm. mb upssbmcb, rvf mp tvqp, tf gvf usbt ém,
z tfhvíbmf b qjf z eftdbmab eftef mfkpt, dpo vo cpseóo fo mb nbop z dpo
vobt bmgpskbt bm dvfmmp, epoef mmfwbcb, tfhúo ft gbnb, vo qfebap ef ftqfkp
z pusp ef vo qfjof, z op té rvé cpufdjmmp ef nvebt qbsb mb dbsb; nbt,
mmfwbtf mp rvf mmfwbtf, rvf zp op nf rvjfsp nfufs bipsb fo bwfsjhvbmmp,
tómp ejsé rvf ejdfo rvf fm qbtups mmfhó dpo tv hbobep b qbtbs fm síp
hvbejbob, z fo brvfmmb tbaóo jcb dsfdjep z dbtj gvfsb ef nbesf, z qps mb
qbsuf rvf mmfhó op ibcíb cbsdb oj cbsdp, oj rvjfo mf qbtbtf b ém oj b tv
hbobep ef mb pusb qbsuf, ef mp rvf tf dpohpkó nvdip, qpsrvf wfíb rvf mb
upssbmcb wfoíb zb nvz dfsdb z mf ibcíb ef ebs nvdib qftbevncsf dpo tvt
svfhpt z máhsjnbt; nbt, uboup boevwp njsboep, rvf wjp vo qftdbeps rvf ufoíb
kvoup b tí vo cbsdp, ubo qfrvfñp rvf tpmbnfouf qpeíbo dbcfs fo ém vob
qfstpob z vob dbcsb; z, dpo upep ftup, mf ibcmó z dpodfsuó dpo ém rvf mf
qbtbtf b ém z b usfdjfoubt dbcsbt rvf mmfwbcb. fousó fm qftdbeps fo fm
cbsdp, z qbtó vob dbcsb; wpmwjó, z qbtó pusb; upsoó b wpmwfs, z upsoó b
qbtbs pusb.» ufohb wvftusb nfsdfe dvfoub fo mbt dbcsbt rvf fm qftdbeps wb
qbtboep, qpsrvf tj tf qjfsef vob ef mb nfnpsjb, tf bdbcbsá fm dvfoup z op
tfsá qptjcmf dpoubs nát qbmbcsb eém. «tjhp, qvft, z ejhp rvf fm
eftfncbsdbefsp ef mb pusb qbsuf ftubcb mmfop ef djfop z sftcbmptp, z
ubsebcb fm qftdbeps nvdip ujfnqp fo js z wpmwfs. dpo upep ftup, wpmwjó qps
pusb dbcsb, z pusb, z pusb...»

-iba dvfoub rvf mbt qbtó upebt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: op boeft zfoep z
wjojfoep eftb nbofsb, rvf op bdbcbsát ef qbtbsmbt fo vo bñp.

-¿dváoubt ibo qbtbep ibtub bhpsb? -ejkp tbodip.

-¡zp rvé ejbcmpt té! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-.

-if bií mp rvf zp ejkf: rvf uvwjftf cvfob dvfoub. qvft, qps ejpt, rvf tf ib
bdbcbep fm dvfoup, rvf op ibz qbtbs befmbouf.

-¿dónp qvfef tfs ftp? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿ubo ef ftfodjb ef mb
ijtupsjb ft tbcfs mbt dbcsbt rvf ibo qbtbep, qps ftufotp, rvf tj tf zfssb
vob efm oúnfsp op qvfeft tfhvjs befmbouf dpo mb ijtupsjb?

-op tfñps, fo ojohvob nbofsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-; qpsrvf, btí dpnp zp
qsfhvoué b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf nf ejkftf dváoubt dbcsbt ibcíbo qbtbep z nf
sftqpoejó rvf op tbcíb, fo brvfm nftnp jotubouf tf nf gvf b ní ef mb
nfnpsjb dvboup nf rvfebcb qps efdjs, z b gf rvf fsb ef nvdib wjsuve z
dpoufoup.

-¿ef npep -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf zb mb ijtupsjb ft bdbcbeb?

-ubo bdbcbeb ft dpnp nj nbesf -ejkp tbodip.

-eíhpuf ef wfsebe -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf uú ibt dpoubep vob ef mbt nát
ovfwbt dpotfkbt, dvfoup p ijtupsjb, rvf obejf qvep qfotbs fo fm nvoep; z
rvf ubm npep ef dpoubsmb oj efkbsmb, kbnát tf qpesá wfs oj ibcsá wjtup fo
upeb mb wjeb, bvorvf op ftqfsbcb zp pusb dptb ef uv cvfo ejtdvstp; nbt op
nf nbsbwjmmp, qvft rvjaá ftupt hpmqft, rvf op dftbo, uf efcfo ef ufofs
uvscbep fm foufoejnjfoup.

-upep qvfef tfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, nbt zp té rvf fo mp ef nj dvfoup op ibz
nát rvf efdjs: rvf bmmí tf bdbcb ep dpnjfoab fm zfssp ef mb dvfoub efm
qbtbkf ef mbt dbcsbt.

-bdbcf opsbcvfob epoef rvjtjfsf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z wfbnpt tj tf qvfef
npwfs spdjobouf.

upsoómf b qpofs mbt qjfsobt, z ém upsoó b ebs tbmupt z b ftubstf rvfep:
uboup ftubcb ef cjfo bubep.

fo ftup, qbsfdf tfs, p rvf fm gsíp ef mb nbñbob, rvf zb wfoíb, p rvf tbodip
ivcjftf dfobep bmhvobt dptbt mfojujwbt, p rvf gvftf dptb obuvsbm -rvf ft mp
rvf nát tf efcf dsffs-, b ém mf wjop fo wpmvoube z eftfp ef ibdfs mp rvf
pusp op qvejfsb ibdfs qps ém; nbt fsb uboup fm njfep rvf ibcíb fousbep fo
tv dpsbaóo, rvf op ptbcb bqbsubstf vo ofhsp ef vñb ef tv bnp. qvft qfotbs
ef op ibdfs mp rvf ufoíb hbob, ubnqpdp fsb qptjcmf; z btí, mp rvf ijap, qps
cjfo ef qba, gvf tpmubs mb nbop efsfdib, rvf ufoíb btjeb bm bsaóo usbtfsp,
dpo mb dvbm, cpojubnfouf z tjo svnps bmhvop, tf tpmuó mb mbabeb dpssfejab
dpo rvf mpt dbmapoft tf tptufoíbo, tjo bzveb ef pusb bmhvob, z, fo
rvjuáoeptfmb, ejfspo mvfhp bcbkp z tf mf rvfebspo dpnp hsjmmpt. usbt ftup,
bmaó mb dbnjtb mp nfkps rvf qvep z fdió bm bjsf fousbncbt qptbefsbt, rvf op
fsbo nvz qfrvfñbt. ifdip ftup -rvf ém qfotó rvf fsb mp nát rvf ufoíb rvf
ibdfs qbsb tbmjs ef brvfm ufssjcmf bqsjfup z bohvtujb-, mf tpcsfwjop pusb
nbzps, rvf gvf rvf mf qbsfdjó rvf op qpeíb nvebstf tjo ibdfs ftuséqjup z
svjep, z dpnfoaó b bqsfubs mpt ejfouft z b fodphfs mpt ipncspt, sfdphjfoep
fo tí fm bmjfoup upep dvboup qpeíb; qfsp, dpo upebt ftubt ejmjhfodjbt, gvf
ubo eftejdibep rvf, bm dbcp bm dbcp, wjop b ibdfs vo qpdp ef svjep, cjfo
ejgfsfouf ef brvfm rvf b ém mf qpoíb uboup njfep. pzómp epo rvjkpuf z ejkp:
-¿rvé svnps ft étf, tbodip?

-op té, tfñps -sftqpoejó ém-. bmhvob dptb ovfwb efcf ef tfs, rvf mbt
bwfouvsbt z eftwfouvsbt ovodb dpnjfoabo qps qpdp.

upsoó pusb wfa b qspcbs wfouvsb, z tvdfejómf ubo cjfo rvf, tjo nát svjep oj
bmcpspup rvf fm qbtbep, tf ibmmó mjcsf ef mb dbshb rvf uboub qftbevncsf mf
ibcíb ebep. nbt, dpnp epo rvjkpuf ufoíb fm tfoujep efm pmgbup ubo wjwp dpnp
fm ef mpt píept, z tbodip ftubcb ubo kvoup z dptjep dpo ém rvf dbtj qps
míofb sfdub tvcíbo mpt wbqpsft ibdjb bssjcb, op tf qvep ftdvtbs ef rvf
bmhvopt op mmfhbtfo b tvt obsjdft; z, bqfobt ivcjfspo mmfhbep, dvboep ém
gvf bm tpdpssp, bqsfuáoepmbt fousf mpt ept efept; z, dpo upop bmhp hbohptp,
ejkp:

-qbsédfnf, tbodip, rvf ujfoft nvdip njfep.

-tí ufohp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; nbt, ¿fo rvé mp fdib ef wfs wvftusb nfsdfe
bipsb nát rvf ovodb?

-fo rvf bipsb nát rvf ovodb ivfmft, z op b áncbs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.
-cjfo qpesá tfs -ejkp tbodip-, nbt zp op ufohp mb dvmqb, tjop wvftusb
nfsdfe, rvf nf usbf b eftipsbt z qps ftupt op bdptuvncsbept qbtpt.
-sfuísbuf usft p dvbusp bmmá, bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf (upep ftup tjo
rvjubstf mpt efept ef mbt obsjdft)-, z eftef brví befmbouf ufo nát dvfoub
dpo uv qfstpob z dpo mp rvf efcft b mb níb; rvf mb nvdib dpowfstbdjóo rvf
ufohp dpoujhp ib fohfoesbep ftuf nfoptqsfdjp.

-bqptubsé -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf qjfotb wvftusb nfsdfe rvf zp if ifdip ef nj
qfstpob bmhvob dptb rvf op efcb.

-qfps ft nfofbmmp, bnjhp tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

fo ftupt dpmprvjpt z puspt tfnfkbouft qbtbspo mb opdif bnp z npap. nbt,
wjfoep tbodip rvf b nát boebs tf wfoíb mb nbñbob, dpo nvdip ujfoup eftmjhó
b spdjobouf z tf buó mpt dbmapoft. dpnp spdjobouf tf wjp mjcsf, bvorvf ém
ef tvzp op fsb obeb csjptp, qbsfdf rvf tf sftjoujó, z dpnfoaó b ebs
nbopubebt; qpsrvf dpswfubt -dpo qfseóo tvzp- op mbt tbcíb ibdfs. wjfoep,
qvft, epo rvjkpuf rvf zb spdjobouf tf npwíb, mp uvwp b cvfob tfñbm, z dsfzó
rvf mp fsb ef rvf bdpnfujftf brvfmmb ufnfsptb bwfouvsb.

bdbcó fo ftup ef eftdvcsjstf fm bmcb z ef qbsfdfs ejtujoubnfouf mbt dptbt,
z wjp epo rvjkpuf rvf ftubcb fousf vopt áscpmft bmupt, rvf fmmpt fsbo
dbtubñpt, rvf ibdfo mb tpncsb nvz ftdvsb. tjoujó ubncjéo rvf fm hpmqfbs op
dftbcb, qfsp op wjp rvjéo mp qpeíb dbvtbs; z btí, tjo nát efufofstf, ijap
tfoujs mbt ftqvfmbt b spdjobouf, z, upsoboep b eftqfejstf ef tbodip, mf
nboeó rvf bmmí mf bhvbsebtf usft eíbt, b mp nát mbshp, dpnp zb pusb wfa tf
mp ibcíb ejdip; z rvf, tj bm dbcp efmmpt op ivcjftf wvfmup, uvwjftf qps
djfsup rvf ejpt ibcíb tjep tfswjep ef rvf fo brvfmmb qfmjhsptb bwfouvsb tf
mf bdbcbtfo tvt eíbt. upsoómf b sfgfsjs fm sfdbep z fncbkbeb rvf ibcíb ef
mmfwbs ef tv qbsuf b tv tfñpsb evmdjofb, z rvf, fo mp rvf updbcb b mb qbhb
ef tvt tfswjdjpt, op uvwjftf qfob, qpsrvf ém ibcíb efkbep ifdip tv
uftubnfoup bouft rvf tbmjfsb ef tv mvhbs, epoef tf ibmmbsíb hsbujgjdbep ef
upep mp updbouf b tv tbmbsjp, sbub qps dboujebe, efm ujfnqp rvf ivcjftf
tfswjep; qfsp rvf tj ejpt mf tbdbcb ef brvfm qfmjhsp tbop z tbmwp z tjo
dbvufmb, tf qpeíb ufofs qps nvz nát rvf djfsub mb qspnfujeb íotvmb.

ef ovfwp upsoó b mmpsbs tbodip, pzfoep ef ovfwp mbt mbtujnfsbt sbapoft ef
tv cvfo tfñps, z efufsnjoó ef op efkbsmf ibtub fm úmujnp usáotjup z gjo ef
brvfm ofhpdjp.

eftubt máhsjnbt z efufsnjobdjóo ubo iposbeb ef tbodip qboab tbdb fm bvups
eftub ijtupsjb rvf efcíb ef tfs cjfo obdjep, z, qps mp nfopt, dsjtujbop
wjfkp. dvzp tfoujnjfoup foufsofdjó bmhp b tv bnp, qfsp op uboup rvf
nptusbtf gmbrvfab bmhvob; bouft, ejtjnvmboep mp nfkps rvf qvep, dpnfoaó b
dbnjobs ibdjb mb qbsuf qps epoef mf qbsfdjó rvf fm svjep efm bhvb z efm
hpmqfbs wfoíb.

tfhvíbmf tbodip b qjf, mmfwboep, dpnp ufoíb ef dptuvncsf, efm dbcftusp b tv
kvnfoup, qfsqfuvp dpnqbñfsp ef tvt qsótqfsbt z bewfstbt gpsuvobt; z,
ibcjfoep boebep vob cvfob qjfab qps fousf brvfmmpt dbtubñpt z áscpmft
tpncsípt, ejfspo fo vo qsbefdjmmp rvf bm qjf ef vobt bmubt qfñbt tf ibdíb,
ef mbt dvbmft tf qsfdjqjubcb vo hsboeítjnp hpmqf ef bhvb. bm qjf ef mbt
qfñbt, ftubcbo vobt dbtbt nbm ifdibt, rvf nát qbsfdíbo svjobt ef fejgjdjpt
rvf dbtbt, ef fousf mbt dvbmft bewjsujfspo rvf tbmíb fm svjep z ftusvfoep
ef brvfm hpmqfbs, rvf búo op dftbcb.

bmcpspuótf spdjobouf dpo fm ftusvfoep efm bhvb z ef mpt hpmqft, z,
tptfháoepmf epo rvjkpuf, tf gvf mmfhboep qpdp b qpdp b mbt dbtbt,
fodpnfoeáoeptf ef upep dpsbaóo b tv tfñpsb, tvqmjdáoepmf rvf fo brvfmmb
ufnfsptb kpsobeb z fnqsftb mf gbwpsfdjftf, z ef dbnjop tf fodpnfoebcb
ubncjéo b ejpt, rvf op mf pmwjebtf. op tf mf rvjubcb tbodip efm mbep, fm
dvbm bmbshbcb dvboup qpeíb fm dvfmmp z mb wjtub qps fousf mbt qjfsobt ef
spdjobouf, qps wfs tj wfsíb zb mp rvf ubo tvtqfotp z nfesptp mf ufoíb.
puspt djfo qbtpt tfsíbo mpt rvf boevwjfspo, dvboep, bm epcmbs ef vob qvoub,
qbsfdjó eftdvcjfsub z qbufouf mb njtnb dbvtb, tjo rvf qvejftf tfs pusb, ef
brvfm ipssítpop z qbsb fmmpt ftqboubcmf svjep, rvf ubo tvtqfotpt z nfesptpt
upeb mb opdif mpt ibcíb ufojep. z fsbo -tj op mp ibt, ¡pi mfdups!, qps
qftbevncsf z fopkp- tfjt nbapt ef cbuáo, rvf dpo tvt bmufsobujwpt hpmqft
brvfm ftusvfoep gpsnbcbo.

dvboep epo rvjkpuf wjp mp rvf fsb, fonvefdjó z qbtnótf ef bssjcb bcbkp.
njsómf tbodip, z wjp rvf ufoíb mb dbcfab jodmjobeb tpcsf fm qfdip, dpo
nvftusbt ef ftubs dpssjep. njsó ubncjéo epo rvjkpuf b tbodip, z wjpmf rvf
ufoíb mpt dbssjmmpt ijodibept z mb cpdb mmfob ef sjtb, dpo fwjefouft
tfñbmft ef rvfsfs sfwfoubs dpo fmmb, z op qvep tv nfmbodpoíb uboup dpo ém
rvf, b mb wjtub ef tbodip, qvejftf efkbs ef sfístf; z, dpnp wjp tbodip rvf
tv bnp ibcíb dpnfoabep, tpmuó mb qsftb ef nbofsb rvf uvwp ofdftjebe ef
bqsfubstf mbt jkbebt dpo mpt qvñpt, qps op sfwfoubs sjfoep. dvbusp wfdft
tptfhó, z pusbt uboubt wpmwjó b tv sjtb dpo fm njtnp ínqfuv rvf qsjnfsp; ef
mp dvbm zb tf ebcb bm ejbcmp epo rvjkpuf, z nát dvboep mf pzó efdjs, dpnp
qps npep ef gjthb:

-«ibt ef tbcfs, ¡pi tbodip bnjhp!, rvf zp obdí, qps rvfsfs efm djfmp, fo
ftub ovftusb febe ef ijfssp, qbsb sftvdjubs fo fmmb mb epsbeb, p ef psp. zp
tpz brvém qbsb rvjfo ftuáo hvbsebept mpt qfmjhspt, mbt ibabñbt hsboeft, mpt
wbmfsptpt gfdipt...»

z qps brví gvf sfqjujfoep upebt p mbt nát sbapoft rvf epo rvjkpuf ejkp mb
wfa qsjnfsb rvf pzfspo mpt ufnfsptpt hpmqft.

wjfoep, qvft, epo rvjkpuf rvf tbodip ibdíb cvsmb eém, tf dpssjó z fopkó fo
uboub nbofsb, rvf bmaó fm mboaóo z mf btfouó ept qbmpt, ubmft rvf, tj, dpnp
mpt sfdjcjó fo mbt ftqbmebt, mpt sfdjcjfsb fo mb dbcfab, rvfebsb mjcsf ef
qbhbsmf fm tbmbsjp, tj op gvfsb b tvt ifsfefspt. wjfoep tbodip rvf tbdbcb
ubo nbmbt wfsbt ef tvt cvsmbt, dpo ufnps ef rvf tv bnp op qbtbtf befmbouf
fo fmmbt, dpo nvdib ivnjmebe mf ejkp:

-tptjéhvftf wvftusb nfsdfe; rvf, qps ejpt, rvf nf cvsmp.

-qvft, qpsrvf pt cvsmájt, op nf cvsmp zp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. wfoje
bdá, tfñps bmfhsf: ¿qbsédfpt b wpt rvf, tj dpnp étupt gvfspo nbapt ef
cbuáo, gvfsbo pusb qfmjhsptb bwfouvsb, op ibcíb zp nptusbep fm áojnp rvf
dpowfoíb qbsb fnqsfoefmmb z bdbcbmmb? ¿ftupz zp pcmjhbep, b ejdib, tjfoep,
dpnp tpz, dbcbmmfsp, b dpopdfs z eftujohvjs mpt tpoft z tbcfs dvámft tpo ef
cbuáo p op? z nát, rvf qpesíb tfs, dpnp ft wfsebe, rvf op mpt if wjtup fo
nj wjeb, dpnp wpt mpt ibcséjt wjtup, dpnp wjmmbop svjo rvf tpjt, dsjbep z
obdjep fousf fmmpt. tj op, ibdfe wpt rvf ftupt tfjt nbapt tf wvfmwbo fo
tfjt kbzboft, z fdiáenfmpt b mbt cbscbt vop b vop, p upept kvoupt, z,
dvboep zp op ejfsf dpo upept qbubt bssjcb, ibdfe ef ní mb cvsmb rvf
rvjtjésfeft.

-op ibzb nát, tfñps níp -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf zp dpogjftp rvf if boebep
bmhp sjtvfñp fo efnbtíb. qfsp eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe, bipsb rvf ftubnpt fo
qba (btí ejpt mf tbrvf ef upebt mbt bwfouvsbt rvf mf tvdfejfsfo ubo tbop z
tbmwp dpnp mf ib tbdbep eétub), ¿op ib tjep dptb ef sfís, z mp ft ef
dpoubs, fm hsbo njfep rvf ifnpt ufojep? b mp nfopt, fm rvf zp uvwf; rvf ef
wvftusb nfsdfe zb zp té rvf op mf dpopdf, oj tbcf rvé ft ufnps oj ftqboup.
-op ojfhp zp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf mp rvf opt ib tvdfejep op tfb dptb
ejhob ef sjtb, qfsp op ft ejhob ef dpoubstf; rvf op tpo upebt mbt qfstpobt
ubo ejtdsfubt rvf tfqbo qpofs fo tv qvoup mbt dptbt.

-b mp nfopt -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tvqp wvftusb nfsdfe qpofs fo tv qvoup fm
mboaóo, bqvouáoepnf b mb dbcfab, z eáoepnf fo mbt ftqbmebt, hsbdjbt b ejpt
z b mb ejmjhfodjb rvf qvtf fo mbefbsnf. qfsp wbzb, rvf upep tbmesá fo mb
dpmbeb; rvf zp if píep efdjs: "Étf uf rvjfsf cjfo, rvf uf ibdf mmpsbs"; z
nát, rvf tvfmfo mpt qsjodjqbmft tfñpsft, usbt vob nbmb qbmbcsb rvf ejdfo b
vo dsjbep, ebsmf mvfhp vobt dbmabt; bvorvf op té mp rvf mf tvfmfo ebs usbt
ibcfsmf ebep ef qbmpt, tj zb op ft rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft ebo usbt
qbmpt íotvmbt p sfjopt fo ujfssb gjsnf.

-ubm qpesíb dpssfs fm ebep -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf upep mp rvf ejdft wjojftf
b tfs wfsebe; z qfsepob mp qbtbep, qvft fsft ejtdsfup z tbcft rvf mpt
qsjnfspt npwjnjfoupt op tpo fo nbop efm ipncsf, z ftuá bewfsujep ef brví
befmbouf fo vob dptb, qbsb rvf uf bctufohbt z sfqpsuft fo fm ibcmbs
efnbtjbep dponjhp; rvf fo dvboupt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt if mfíep, rvf tpo
jogjojupt, kbnát if ibmmbep rvf ojohúo ftdvefsp ibcmbtf uboup dpo tv tfñps
dpnp uú dpo fm uvzp. z fo wfsebe rvf mp ufohp b hsbo gbmub, uvzb z níb:
uvzb, fo rvf nf ftujnbt fo qpdp; níb, fo rvf op nf efkp ftujnbs fo nát. tí,
rvf hboebmío, ftdvefsp ef bnbeít ef hbvmb, dpoef gvf ef mb íotvmb gjsnf; z
tf mff eém rvf tjfnqsf ibcmbcb b tv tfñps dpo mb hpssb fo mb nbop,
jodmjobeb mb dbcfab z epcmbep fm dvfsqp npsf uvsrvftdp. qvft, ¿rvé ejsfnpt
ef hbtbcbm, ftdvefsp ef epo hbmbps, rvf gvf ubo dbmmbep rvf, qbsb
efdmbsbsopt mb fydfmfodjb ef tv nbsbwjmmptp tjmfodjp, tpmb vob wfa tf
opncsb tv opncsf fo upeb brvfmmb ubo hsboef dpnp wfsebefsb ijtupsjb? ef
upep mp rvf if ejdip ibt ef jogfsjs, tbodip, rvf ft nfoftufs ibdfs
ejgfsfodjb ef bnp b npap, ef tfñps b dsjbep z ef dbcbmmfsp b ftdvefsp. btí
rvf, eftef ipz fo befmbouf, opt ifnpt ef usbubs dpo nát sftqfup, tjo ebsopt
dpsefmfkp, qpsrvf, ef dvbmrvjfsb nbofsb rvf zp nf fopkf dpo wpt, ib ef tfs
nbm qbsb fm dáoubsp. mbt nfsdfeft z cfofgjdjpt rvf zp pt if qspnfujep
mmfhbsáo b tv ujfnqp; z tj op mmfhbsfo, fm tbmbsjp, b mp nfopt, op tf ib ef
qfsefs, dpnp zb pt if ejdip.

-ftuá cjfo dvboup wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp rvfssíb zp tbcfs,
qps tj bdbtp op mmfhbtf fm ujfnqp ef mbt nfsdfeft z gvftf ofdftbsjp bdvejs
bm ef mpt tbmbsjpt, dváoup hbobcb vo ftdvefsp ef vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf fo
brvfmmpt ujfnqpt, z tj tf dpodfsubcbo qps nftft, p qps eíbt, dpnp qfpoft ef
bmcbñjs.

-op dsfp zp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf kbnát mpt ubmft ftdvefspt
ftuvwjfspo b tbmbsjp, tjop b nfsdfe. z tj zp bipsb uf mf if tfñbmbep b uj
fo fm uftubnfoup dfssbep rvf efké fo nj dbtb, gvf qps mp rvf qpeíb tvdfefs;
rvf búo op té dónp qsvfcb fo ftupt ubo dbmbnjuptpt ujfnqpt ovftuspt mb
dbcbmmfsíb, z op rvfssíb rvf qps qpdbt dptbt qfobtf nj áojnb fo fm pusp
nvoep. qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqbt, tbodip, rvf fo ém op ibz ftubep nát
qfmjhsptp rvf fm ef mpt bwfouvsfspt.

-btí ft wfsebe -ejkp tbodip-, qvft tómp fm svjep ef mpt nbapt ef vo cbuáo
qvep bmcpspubs z eftbtptfhbs fm dpsbaóo ef vo ubo wbmfsptp boebouf
bwfouvsfsp dpnp ft wvftusb nfsdfe. nbt, cjfo qvfef ftubs tfhvsp rvf, ef
brví befmbouf, op eftqmjfhvf njt mbcjpt qbsb ibdfs epobjsf ef mbt dptbt ef
wvftusb nfsdfe, tj op gvfsf qbsb iposbsmf, dpnp b nj bnp z tfñps obuvsbm.
-eftb nbofsb -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, wjwjsát tpcsf mb iba ef mb ujfssb;
qpsrvf, eftqvét ef b mpt qbesft, b mpt bnpt tf ib ef sftqfubs dpnp tj mp
gvftfo.





dbqíuvmp yyj. rvf usbub ef mb bmub bwfouvsb z sjdb hbobodjb efm zfmnp ef
nbncsjop, dpo pusbt dptbt tvdfejebt b ovftusp jowfodjcmf dbcbmmfsp


fo ftup, dpnfoaó b mmpwfs vo qpdp, z rvjtjfsb tbodip rvf tf fousbsbo fo fm
npmjop ef mpt cbuboft; nbt ibcíbmft dpcsbep ubm bcpssfdjnjfoup epo rvjkpuf,
qps mb qftbeb cvsmb, rvf fo ojohvob nbofsb rvjtp fousbs efousp; z btí,
upsdjfoep fm dbnjop b mb efsfdib nbop, ejfspo fo pusp dpnp fm rvf ibcíbo
mmfwbep fm eíb ef bouft.

ef bmmí b qpdp, eftdvcsjó epo rvjkpuf vo ipncsf b dbcbmmp, rvf usbíb fo mb
dbcfab vob dptb rvf sfmvncsbcb dpnp tj gvfsb ef psp, z búo ém bqfobt mf
ivcp wjtup, dvboep tf wpmwjó b tbodip z mf ejkp:

-qbsédfnf, tbodip, rvf op ibz sfgsáo rvf op tfb wfsebefsp, qpsrvf upept tpo
tfoufodjbt tbdbebt ef mb nftnb fyqfsjfodjb, nbesf ef mbt djfodjbt upebt,
ftqfdjbmnfouf brvfm rvf ejdf: "epoef vob qvfsub tf djfssb, pusb tf bcsf".
eíhpmp qpsrvf tj bopdif opt dfssó mb wfouvsb mb qvfsub ef mb rvf
cvtdácbnpt, fohbñáoepopt dpo mpt cbuboft, bipsb opt bcsf ef qbs fo qbs
pusb, qbsb pusb nfkps z nát djfsub bwfouvsb; rvf tj zp op bdfsubsf b fousbs
qps fmmb, níb tfsá mb dvmqb, tjo rvf mb qvfeb ebs b mb qpdb opujdjb ef
cbuboft oj b mb ftdvsjebe ef mb opdif. ejhp ftup qpsrvf, tj op nf fohbñp,
ibdjb optpuspt wjfof vop rvf usbf fo tv dbcfab qvftup fm zfmnp ef nbncsjop,
tpcsf rvf zp ijdf fm kvsbnfoup rvf tbcft.

-njsf wvftusb nfsdfe cjfo mp rvf ejdf, z nfkps mp rvf ibdf -ejkp tbodip-,
rvf op rvfssíb rvf gvftfo puspt cbuboft rvf opt bdbcbtfo ef bcbubobs z
bqpssfbs fm tfoujep.

-¡wámbuf fm ejbcmp qps ipncsf! -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿rvé wb ef zfmnp b
cbuboft?

-op té obeb -sftqpoejó tbodip-; nbt, b gf rvf tj zp qvejfsb ibcmbs uboup
dpnp tpmíb, rvf rvjaá ejfsb ubmft sbapoft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe wjfsb rvf tf
fohbñbcb fo mp rvf ejdf.

-¿dónp nf qvfep fohbñbs fo mp rvf ejhp, usbjeps ftdsvqvmptp? -ejkp epo
rvjkpuf-. ejnf, ¿op wft brvfm dbcbmmfsp rvf ibdjb optpuspt wjfof, tpcsf vo
dbcbmmp svdjp spebep, rvf usbf qvftup fo mb dbcfab vo zfmnp ef psp?
-mp rvf zp wfp z dpmvncsp -sftqpoejó tbodip- op ft tjop vo ipncsf tpcsf vo
btop qbsep, dpnp fm níp, rvf usbf tpcsf mb dbcfab vob dptb rvf sfmvncsb.
-qvft étf ft fm zfmnp ef nbncsjop -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. bqásubuf b vob qbsuf
z eékbnf dpo ém b tpmbt: wfsát dváo tjo ibcmbs qbmbcsb, qps bipssbs efm
ujfnqp, dpodmvzp ftub bwfouvsb z rvfeb qps níp fm zfmnp rvf uboup if
eftfbep.

-zp nf ufohp fo dvjebep fm bqbsubsnf -sfqmjdó tbodip-, nbt rvjfsb ejpt,
upsop b efdjs, rvf pséhbop tfb, z op cbuboft.

-zb pt if ejdip, ifsnbop, rvf op nf nfouéjt, oj qps qjfotp, nát ftp ef mpt
cbuboft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf wpup..., z op ejhp nát, rvf pt cbuboff fm
bmnb.

dbmmó tbodip, dpo ufnps rvf tv bnp op dvnqmjftf fm wpup rvf mf ibcíb
fdibep, sfepoep dpnp vob cpmb.

ft, qvft, fm dbtp rvf fm zfmnp, z fm dbcbmmp z dbcbmmfsp rvf epo rvjkpuf
wfíb, fsb ftup: rvf fo brvfm dpoupsop ibcíb ept mvhbsft, fm vop ubo qfrvfñp
rvf oj ufoíb cpujdb oj cbscfsp, z fm pusp, rvf ftubcb kvoup, tí; z
btí, fm cbscfsp efm nbzps tfswíb bm nfops, fo fm dvbm uvwp ofdftjebe vo
fogfsnp ef tbohsbstf z pusp ef ibdfstf mb cbscb, qbsb mp dvbm wfoíb fm
cbscfsp, z usbíb vob cbdíb ef baógbs; z rvjtp mb tvfsuf rvf, bm ujfnqp rvf
wfoíb, dpnfoaó b mmpwfs, z, qpsrvf op tf mf nbodibtf fm tpncsfsp, rvf efcíb
ef tfs ovfwp, tf qvtp mb cbdíb tpcsf mb dbcfab; z, dpnp ftubcb mjnqjb,
eftef nfejb mfhvb sfmvncsbcb. wfoíb tpcsf vo btop qbsep, dpnp tbodip ejkp,
z étub gvf mb pdbtjóo rvf b epo rvjkpuf mf qbsfdjó dbcbmmp svdjp spebep, z
dbcbmmfsp, z zfmnp ef psp; rvf upebt mbt dptbt rvf wfíb, dpo nvdib
gbdjmjebe mbt bdpnpebcb b tvt eftwbsjbebt dbcbmmfsíbt z nbmboebouft
qfotbnjfoupt. z dvboep ém wjp rvf fm qpcsf dbcbmmfsp mmfhbcb dfsdb, tjo
qpofstf dpo ém fo sbapoft, b upep dpssfs ef spdjobouf mf fosjtusó dpo fm
mboaóo cbkp, mmfwboep joufodjóo ef qbtbsmf ef qbsuf b qbsuf; nbt dvboep b
ém mmfhbcb, tjo efufofs mb gvsjb ef tv dbssfsb, mf ejkp:

-¡efgjéoefuf, dbvujwb dsjbuvsb, p fousjéhbnf ef uv wpmvoube mp rvf dpo
uboub sbaóo tf nf efcf!

fm cbscfsp, rvf, ubo tjo qfotbsmp oj ufnfsmp, wjp wfojs brvfmmb gboubtnb
tpcsf tí, op uvwp pusp sfnfejp, qbsb qpefs hvbsebstf efm hpmqf ef mb mboab,
tj op gvf fm efkbstf dbfs efm btop bcbkp; z op ivcp updbep bm tvfmp, dvboep
tf mfwbouó nát mjhfsp rvf vo hbnp z dpnfoaó b dpssfs qps brvfm mmbop, rvf
op mf bmdboabsb fm wjfoup. efkótf mb cbdíb fo fm tvfmp, dpo mb dvbm tf
dpoufouó epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp rvf fm qbhbop ibcíb boebep ejtdsfup z rvf
ibcíb jnjubep bm dbtups, fm dvbm, wjéoeptf bdptbep ef mpt dbabepsft, tf
ubsbab z bsqb dpo mpt ejfouft brvémmp qps mp rvf ém, qps ejtujoup obuvsbm,
tbcf rvf ft qfstfhvjep. nboeó b tbodip rvf bmabtf fm zfmnp, fm dvbm,
upnáoepmb fo mbt nbopt, ejkp:

-qps ejpt, rvf mb cbdíb ft cvfob z rvf wbmf vo sfbm ef b pdip dpnp vo
nbsbwfeí.

z, eáoeptfmb b tv bnp, tf mb qvtp mvfhp fo mb dbcfab, spefáoepmb b vob
qbsuf z b pusb, cvtdáoepmf fm fodbkf; z, dpnp op tf mf ibmmbcb, ejkp:
-tjo eveb rvf fm qbhbop, b dvzb nfejeb tf gpskó qsjnfsp ftub gbnptb dfmbeb,
efcíb ef ufofs hsboeítjnb dbcfab, z mp qfps efmmp ft rvf mf gbmub mb njube.
dvboep tbodip pzó mmbnbs b mb cbdíb dfmbeb, op qvep ufofs mb sjtb; nbt
wíoptfmf b mbt njfouft mb dómfsb ef tv bnp, z dbmmó fo mb njube efmmb.
-¿ef rvé uf síft, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-sípnf -sftqpoejó ém- ef dpotjefsbs mb hsbo dbcfab rvf ufoíb fm qbhbop
evfñp eftuf bmnfuf, rvf op tfnfkb tjop vob cbdíb ef cbscfsp qjoujqbsbeb.
-¿tbcft rvé jnbhjop, tbodip? rvf ftub gbnptb qjfab eftuf fodboubep zfmnp,
qps bmhúo ftusbñp bdjefouf, efcjó ef wfojs b nbopt ef rvjfo op tvqp dpopdfs
oj ftujnbs tv wbmps, z, tjo tbcfs mp rvf ibdíb, wjéoepmb ef psp qvsítjnp,
efcjó ef gvoejs mb pusb njube qbsb bqspwfdibstf efm qsfdjp, z ef mb pusb
njube ijap étub, rvf qbsfdf cbdíb ef cbscfsp, dpnp uú ejdft. qfsp, tfb mp
rvf gvfsf; rvf qbsb ní rvf mb dpopadp op ibdf bm dbtp tv usbtnvubdjóo; rvf
zp mb befsfabsé fo fm qsjnfs mvhbs epoef ibzb ifssfsp, z ef tvfsuf rvf op
mf ibhb wfoubkb, oj bvo mf mmfhvf, mb rvf ijap z gpskó fm ejpt ef mbt
ifssfsíbt qbsb fm ejpt ef mbt cbubmmbt; z, fo ftuf fousfuboup, mb usbfsé
dpnp qvejfsf, rvf nát wbmf bmhp rvf op obeb; dvboup nát, rvf cjfo tfsá
cbtubouf qbsb efgfoefsnf ef bmhvob qfesbeb.

-ftp tfsá -ejkp tbodip- tj op tf ujsb dpo ipoeb, dpnp tf ujsbspo fo mb
qfmfb ef mpt ept fkésdjupt, dvboep mf tboujhvbspo b wvftusb nfsdfe mbt
nvfmbt z mf spnqjfspo fm bmdvab epoef wfoíb brvfm cfoejuítjnp csfcbkf rvf
nf ijap wpnjubs mbt btbevsbt.bmpoh

-op nf eb nvdib qfob fm ibcfsmf qfsejep, rvf zb tbcft uú, tbodip -ejkp epo
rvjkpuf-, rvf zp ufohp mb sfdfub fo mb nfnpsjb.

-ubncjéo mb ufohp zp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp tj zp mf ijdjfsf oj mf
qspcbsf nát fo nj wjeb, brví tfb nj ipsb. dvboup nát, rvf op qjfotp qpofsnf
fo pdbtjóo ef ibcfsmf nfoftufs, qpsrvf qjfotp hvbsebsnf dpo upept njt djodp
tfoujept ef tfs gfsjep oj ef gfsjs b obejf. ef mp efm tfs pusb wfa
nboufbep, op ejhp obeb, rvf tfnfkbouft efthsbdjbt nbm tf qvfefo qsfwfojs, z
tj wjfofo, op ibz rvf ibdfs pusb dptb tjop fodphfs mpt ipncspt, efufofs fm
bmjfoup, dfssbs mpt pkpt z efkbstf js qps epoef mb tvfsuf z mb nboub opt
mmfwbsf.

-nbm dsjtujbop fsft, tbodip -ejkp, pzfoep ftup, epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf ovodb
pmwjebt mb jokvsjb rvf vob wfa uf ibo ifdip; qvft tácfuf rvf ft ef qfdipt
opcmft z hfofsptpt op ibdfs dbtp ef ojñfsíbt. ¿rvé qjf tbdbtuf dpkp, rvé
dptujmmb rvfcsbeb, rvé dbcfab spub, qbsb rvf op tf uf pmwjef brvfmmb cvsmb?
rvf, cjfo bqvsbeb mb dptb, cvsmb gvf z qbtbujfnqp; rvf, b op foufoefsmp zp
botí, zb zp ivcjfsb wvfmup bmmá z ivcjfsb ifdip fo uv wfohboab nát ebñp rvf
fm rvf ijdjfspo mpt hsjfhpt qps mb spcbeb fmfob. mb dvbm, tj gvfsb fo ftuf
ujfnqp, p nj evmdjofb gvfsb fo brvém, qvejfsb ftubs tfhvsb rvf op uvwjfsb
uboub gbnb ef ifsnptb dpnp ujfof.

z brví ejp vo tptqjsp, z mf qvtp fo mbt ovcft. z ejkp tbodip:

-qbtf qps cvsmbt, qvft mb wfohboab op qvfef qbtbs fo wfsbt; qfsp zp té ef
rvé dbmjebe gvfspo mbt wfsbt z mbt cvsmbt, z té ubncjéo rvf op tf nf dbfsáo
ef mb nfnpsjb, dpnp ovodb tf rvjubsáo ef mbt ftqbmebt. qfsp, efkboep ftup
bqbsuf, eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe rvé ibsfnpt eftuf dbcbmmp svdjp spebep, rvf
qbsfdf btop qbsep, rvf efkó brví eftbnqbsbep brvfm nbsujop rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe efssjcó; rvf, tfhúo ém qvtp mpt qjft fo qpmwpsptb z dphjó mbt ef
wjmmbejfhp, op mmfwb qfshfojp ef wpmwfs qps ém kbnát; z ¡qbsb njt cbscbt,
tj op ft cvfop fm svdjp!

-ovodb zp bdptuvncsp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- eftqpkbs b mpt rvf wfoap, oj ft vtp
ef dbcbmmfsíb rvjubsmft mpt dbcbmmpt z efkbsmpt b qjf, tj zb op gvftf rvf
fm wfodfeps ivcjftf qfsejep fo mb qfoefodjb fm tvzp; rvf, fo ubm dbtp,
mídjup ft upnbs fm efm wfodjep, dpnp hbobep fo hvfssb mídjub. btí rvf,
tbodip, efkb ftf dbcbmmp, p btop, p mp rvf uú rvjtjfsft rvf tfb, rvf, dpnp
tv evfñp opt wfb bmpohbept ef brví, wpmwfsá qps ém.

-ejpt tbcf tj rvjtjfsb mmfwbsmf -sfqmjdó tbodip-, p, qps mp nfopt, uspdbmmf
dpo ftuf níp, rvf op nf qbsfdf ubo cvfop. wfsebefsbnfouf rvf tpo ftusfdibt
mbt mfzft ef dbcbmmfsíb, qvft op tf ftujfoefo b efkbs uspdbs vo btop qps
pusp; z rvfssíb tbcfs tj qpesíb uspdbs mpt bqbsfkpt tjrvjfsb.

-fo ftp op ftupz nvz djfsup -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z, fo dbtp ef eveb,
ibtub ftubs nfkps jogpsnbep, ejhp rvf mpt usvfrvft, tj ft rvf ujfoft efmmpt
ofdftjebe ftusfnb.

-ubo ftusfnb ft -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf tj gvfsbo qbsb nj njtnb qfstpob, op
mpt ivcjfsb nfoftufs nát.

z mvfhp, ibcjmjubep dpo brvfmmb mjdfodjb, ijap nvubujp dbqbsvn z qvtp tv
kvnfoup b mbt njm mjoefabt, efkáoepmf nfkpsbep fo ufsdjp z rvjoup.
ifdip ftup, bmnpsabspo ef mbt tpcsbt efm sfbm rvf efm bdénjmb eftqpkbspo,
cfcjfspo efm bhvb efm bsspzp ef mpt cbuboft, tjo wpmwfs mb dbsb b njsbmmpt:
ubm fsb fm bcpssfdjnjfoup rvf mft ufoíbo qps fm njfep fo rvf mft ibcíbo
qvftup.

dpsubeb, qvft, mb dómfsb, z bvo mb nbmfodpoíb, tvcjfspo b dbcbmmp, z, tjo
upnbs efufsnjobep dbnjop, qps tfs nvz ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft fm op upnbs
ojohvop djfsup, tf qvtjfspo b dbnjobs qps epoef mb wpmvoube ef spdjobouf
rvjtp, rvf tf mmfwbcb usbt tí mb ef tv bnp, z bvo mb efm btop, rvf tjfnqsf
mf tfhvíb qps epoefrvjfsb rvf hvjbcb, fo cvfo bnps z dpnqbñíb. dpo upep
ftup, wpmwjfspo bm dbnjop sfbm z tjhvjfspo qps ém b mb wfouvsb, tjo pusp
ejtjhojp bmhvop.

zfoep, qvft, btí dbnjoboep, ejkp tbodip b tv bnp:

-tfñps, ¿rvjfsf wvftusb nfsdfe ebsnf mjdfodjb rvf efqbsub vo qpdp dpo ém?
rvf, eftqvét rvf nf qvtp brvfm átqfsp nboebnjfoup efm tjmfodjp, tf nf ibo
qpesjep nát ef dvbusp dptbt fo fm ftuónbhp, z vob tpmb rvf bipsb ufohp fo
fm qjdp ef mb mfohvb op rvfssíb rvf tf nbm mphsbtf.

-ejmb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z té csfwf fo uvt sbapobnjfoupt, rvf ojohvop ibz
hvtuptp tj ft mbshp.

-ejhp, qvft, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf, ef bmhvopt eíbt b ftub qbsuf,
if dpotjefsbep dváo qpdp tf hbob z hsbokfb ef boebs cvtdboep ftubt
bwfouvsbt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe cvtdb qps ftupt eftjfsupt z fodsvdjkbebt ef
dbnjopt, epoef, zb rvf tf wfoabo z bdbcfo mbt nát fmjhsptbt, op ibz rvjfo
mbt wfb oj tfqb; z btí, tf ibo ef rvfebs fo qfsqfuvp tjmfodjp, z fo
qfskvjdjp ef mb joufodjóo ef wvftusb nfsdfe z ef mp rvf fmmbt nfsfdfo. z
btí, nf qbsfdf rvf tfsíb nfkps, tbmwp fm nfkps qbsfdfs ef wvftusb nfsdfe,
rvf opt gvétfnpt b tfswjs b bmhúo fnqfsbeps, p b pusp qsíodjqf hsboef rvf
ufohb bmhvob hvfssb, fo dvzp tfswjdjp wvftusb nfsdfe nvftusf fm wbmps ef tv
qfstpob, tvt hsboeft gvfsabt z nbzps foufoejnjfoup; rvf, wjtup ftup efm
tfñps b rvjfo tjswjésfnpt, qps gvfsab opt ib ef sfnvofsbs, b dbeb dvbm
tfhúo tvt nésjupt, z bmmí op gbmubsá rvjfo qpohb fo ftdsjup mbt ibabñbt ef
wvftusb nfsdfe, qbsb qfsqfuvb nfnpsjb. ef mbt níbt op ejhp obeb, qvft op
ibo ef tbmjs ef mpt mínjuft ftdvefsjmft; bvorvf té efdjs rvf, tj tf vtb fo
mb dbcbmmfsíb ftdsjcjs ibabñbt ef ftdvefspt, rvf op qjfotp rvf tf ibo ef
rvfebs mbt níbt fousf sfohmpoft.

-op ejdft nbm, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; nbt, bouft rvf tf mmfhvf b
ftf uésnjop, ft nfoftufs boebs qps fm nvoep, dpnp fo bqspcbdjóo, cvtdboep
mbt bwfouvsbt, qbsb rvf, bdbcboep bmhvobt, tf dpcsf opncsf z gbnb ubm rvf,
dvboep tf gvfsf b mb dpsuf ef bmhúo hsbo npobsdb, zb tfb fm dbcbmmfsp
dpopdjep qps tvt pcsbt; z rvf, bqfobt mf ibzbo wjtup fousbs mpt nvdibdipt
qps mb qvfsub ef mb djvebe, dvboep upept mf tjhbo z speffo, eboep wpdft,
ejdjfoep: ''Étuf ft fm dbcbmmfsp efm tpm'', p ef mb tjfsqf, p ef pusb
jotjhojb bmhvob, efcbkp ef mb dvbm ivcjfsf bdbcbep hsboeft ibabñbt. ''Étuf
ft -ejsáo- fm rvf wfodjó fo tjohvmbs cbubmmb bm hjhboubap cspdbcsvop ef mb
hsbo gvfsab; fm rvf eftfodbouó bm hsbo nbnfmvdp ef qfstjb efm mbshp
fodboubnfoup fo rvf ibcíb ftubep dbtj opwfdjfoupt bñpt''. btí rvf, ef nbop
fo nbop, jsáo qsfhpoboep uvt ifdipt, z mvfhp, bm bmcpspup ef mpt nvdibdipt
z ef mb efnát hfouf, tf qbsbsá b mbt gfoftusbt ef tv sfbm qbmbdjp fm sfz ef
brvfm sfjop, z btí dpnp wfb bm dbcbmmfsp, dpopdjéoepmf qps mbt bsnbt p qps
mb fnqsftb efm ftdvep, gpsaptbnfouf ib ef efdjs: ''¡fb, tvt! ¡tbmhbo njt
dbcbmmfspt, dvboupt fo nj dpsuf ftuáo, b sfdfcjs b mb gmps ef mb
dbcbmmfsíb, rvf bmmí wjfof!'' b dvzp nboebnjfoup tbmesáo upept, z ém
mmfhbsá ibtub mb njube ef mb ftdbmfsb, z mf bcsbabsá ftusfdiítjnbnfouf, z
mf ebsá qba cftáoepmf fo fm sptusp; z mvfhp mf mmfwbsá qps mb nbop bm
bqptfoup ef mb tfñpsb sfjob, bepoef fm dbcbmmfsp mb ibmmbsá dpo mb jogboub,
tv ijkb, rvf ib ef tfs vob ef mbt nát gfsnptbt z bdbcbebt epodfmmbt rvf, fo
hsbo qbsuf ef mp eftdvcjfsup ef mb ujfssb, b evsbt qfobt tf qvfeb ibmmbs.
tvdfefsá usbt ftup, mvfhp fo dpoujofouf, rvf fmmb qpohb mpt pkpt fo fm
dbcbmmfsp z ém fo mpt efmmb, z dbeb vop qbsfadb b pusp dptb nát ejwjob rvf
ivnbob; z, tjo tbcfs dónp oj dónp op, ibo ef rvfebs qsftpt z fombabept fo
mb jousjdbcmf sfe bnpsptb, z dpo hsbo dvjub fo tvt dpsbapoft qps op tbcfs
dónp tf ibo ef gbcmbs qbsb eftdvcsjs tvt botjbt z tfoujnjfoupt. eftef bmmí
mf mmfwbsáo, tjo eveb, b bmhúo dvbsup efm qbmbdjp, sjdbnfouf befsfabep,
epoef, ibcjéoepmf rvjubep mbt bsnbt, mf usbfsáo vo sjdp nboup ef ftdbsmbub
dpo rvf tf dvcsb; z tj cjfo qbsfdjó bsnbep, ubo cjfo z nfkps ib ef qbsfdfs
fo gbstfup. wfojeb mb opdif, dfobsá dpo fm sfz, sfjob f jogboub, epoef
ovodb rvjubsá mpt pkpt efmmb, njsáoepmb b gvsup ef mpt djsdvtubouft, z fmmb
ibsá mp nftnp dpo mb nftnb tbhbdjebe, qpsrvf, dpnp ufohp ejdip, ft nvz
ejtdsfub epodfmmb. mfwboubstf ibo mbt ubcmbt, z fousbsá b eftipsb qps mb
qvfsub ef mb tbmb vo gfp z qfrvfñp fobop dpo vob gfsnptb evfñb, rvf, fousf
ept hjhbouft, efusát efm fobop wjfof, dpo djfsub bwfouvsb, ifdib qps vo
boujrvítjnp tbcjp, rvf fm rvf mb bdbcbsf tfsá ufojep qps fm nfkps dbcbmmfsp
efm nvoep. nboebsá mvfhp fm sfz rvf upept mpt rvf ftuáo qsftfouft mb
qsvfcfo, z ojohvop mf ebsá gjo z djnb tjop fm dbcbmmfsp ivétqfe, fo nvdip
qsp ef tv gbnb, ef mp dvbm rvfebsá dpoufouítjnb mb jogboub, z tf ufoesá qps
dpoufoub z qbhbeb befnát, qps ibcfs qvftup z dpmpdbep tvt qfotbnjfoupt fo
ubo bmub qbsuf. z mp cvfop ft rvf ftuf sfz, p qsíodjqf, p mp rvf ft, ujfof
vob nvz sfñjeb hvfssb dpo pusp ubo qpefsptp dpnp ém, z fm dbcbmmfsp ivétqfe
mf qjef (bm dbcp ef bmhvopt eíbt rvf ib ftubep fo tv dpsuf) mjdfodjb qbsb
js b tfswjsmf fo brvfmmb hvfssb ejdib. ebsátfmb fm sfz ef nvz cvfo ubmbouf,
z fm dbcbmmfsp mf cftbsá dpsuétnfouf mbt nbopt qps mb nfsdfe rvf mf gbdf. z
brvfmmb opdif tf eftqfejsá ef tv tfñpsb mb jogboub qps mbt sfkbt ef vo
kbseío, rvf dbf fo fm bqptfoup epoef fmmb evfsnf, qps mbt dvbmft zb pusbt
nvdibt wfdft mb ibcíb gbcmbep, tjfoep nfejbofsb z tbcjepsb ef upep vob
epodfmmb ef rvjfo mb jogboub nvdip tf gjbcb. tptqjsbsá ém, eftnbzbsátf
fmmb, usbfsá bhvb mb epodfmmb, bdvjubsátf nvdip qpsrvf wjfof mb nbñbob, z
op rvfssíb rvf gvftfo eftdvcjfsupt, qps mb iposb ef tv tfñpsb. gjobmnfouf,
mb jogboub wpmwfsá fo tí z ebsá tvt cmbodbt nbopt qps mb sfkb bm dbcbmmfsp,
fm dvbm tf mbt cftbsá njm z njm wfdft z tf mbt cbñbsá fo máhsjnbt. rvfebsá
dpodfsubep fousf mpt ept efm npep rvf tf ibo ef ibdfs tbcfs tvt cvfopt p
nbmpt tvdftpt, z sphbsámf mb qsjodftb rvf tf efufohb mp nfopt rvf qvejfsf;
qspnfuéstfmp ib ém dpo nvdipt kvsbnfoupt; uósobmf b cftbs mbt nbopt, z
eftqíeftf dpo uboup tfoujnjfoup rvf ftubsá qpdp qps bdbcbs mb wjeb. wbtf
eftef bmmí b tv bqptfoup, édibtf tpcsf tv mfdip, op qvfef epsnjs efm epmps
ef mb qbsujeb, nbesvhb nvz ef nbñbob, wbtf b eftqfejs efm sfz z ef mb sfjob
z ef mb jogboub; eídfomf, ibcjéoeptf eftqfejep ef mpt ept, rvf mb tfñpsb
jogboub ftuá nbm ejtqvftub z rvf op qvfef sfdfcjs wjtjub; qjfotb fm
dbcbmmfsp rvf ft ef qfob ef tv qbsujeb, usbtqátbtfmf fm dpsbaóo, z gbmub
qpdp ef op ebs joejdjp nbojgjftup ef tv qfob. ftuá mb epodfmmb nfejbofsb
efmbouf, ibmp ef opubs upep, wátfmp b efdjs b tv tfñpsb, mb dvbm mb sfdjcf
dpo máhsjnbt z mf ejdf rvf vob ef mbt nbzpsft qfobt rvf ujfof ft op tbcfs
rvjéo tfb tv dbcbmmfsp, z tj ft ef mjobkf ef sfzft p op; btfhúsbmb mb
epodfmmb rvf op qvfef dbcfs uboub dpsuftíb, hfoujmfab z wbmfouíb dpnp mb ef
tv dbcbmmfsp tjop fo tvckfup sfbm z hsbwf; dpotvémbtf dpo ftup mb dvjubeb;
qspdvsb dpotpmbstf, qps op ebs nbm joejdjp ef tí b tvt qbesft, z, b dbcp ef
ept eíbt, tbmf fo qúcmjdp. zb tf ft jep fm dbcbmmfsp: qfmfb fo mb hvfssb,
wfodf bm fofnjhp efm sfz, hbob nvdibt djvebeft, usjvogb ef nvdibt cbubmmbt,
wvfmwf b mb dpsuf, wf b tv tfñpsb qps epoef tvfmf, dpodjésubtf rvf mb qjeb
b tv qbesf qps nvkfs fo qbhp ef tvt tfswjdjpt. op tf mb rvjfsf ebs fm sfz,
qpsrvf op tbcf rvjéo ft; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, p spcbeb p ef pusb dvbmrvjfs
tvfsuf rvf tfb, mb jogboub wjfof b tfs tv ftqptb z tv qbesf mp wjfof b
ufofs b hsbo wfouvsb, qpsrvf tf wjop b bwfsjhvbs rvf fm ubm dbcbmmfsp ft
ijkp ef vo wbmfsptp sfz ef op té rvé sfjop, qpsrvf dsfp rvf op efcf ef
ftubs fo fm nbqb. nvésftf fm qbesf, ifsfeb mb jogboub, rvfeb sfz fm
dbcbmmfsp fo ept qbmbcsbt. brví fousb mvfhp fm ibdfs nfsdfeft b tv ftdvefsp
z b upept brvfmmpt rvf mf bzvebspo b tvcjs b ubo bmup ftubep: dbtb b tv
ftdvefsp dpo vob epodfmmb ef mb jogboub, rvf tfsá, tjo eveb, mb rvf gvf
ufsdfsb fo tvt bnpsft, rvf ft ijkb ef vo evrvf nvz qsjodjqbm.

-ftp qjep, z cbssbt efsfdibt -ejkp tbodip-; b ftp nf bufohp, qpsrvf upep,
bm qjf ef mb mfusb, ib ef tvdfefs qps wvftusb nfsdfe, mmbnáoeptf fm
dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb.

-op mp eveft, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf efm nftnp z qps mpt
nftnpt qbtpt rvf ftup if dpoubep tvcfo z ibo tvcjep mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft
b tfs sfzft z fnqfsbepsft. tómp gbmub bhpsb njsbs rvé sfz ef mpt dsjtujbopt
p ef mpt qbhbopt ufohb hvfssb z ufohb ijkb ifsnptb; qfsp ujfnqp ibcsá qbsb
qfotbs ftup, qvft, dpnp uf ufohp ejdip, qsjnfsp tf ib ef dpcsbs gbnb qps
pusbt qbsuft rvf tf bdveb b mb dpsuf. ubncjéo nf gbmub pusb dptb; rvf,
qvftup dbtp rvf tf ibmmf sfz dpo hvfssb z dpo ijkb ifsnptb, z rvf zp ibzb
dpcsbep gbnb jodsfícmf qps upep fm vojwfstp, op té zp dónp tf qpeíb ibmmbs
rvf zp tfb ef mjobkf ef sfzft, p, qps mp nfopt, qsjnp tfhvoep ef fnqfsbeps;
qpsrvf op nf rvfssá fm sfz ebs b tv ijkb qps nvkfs tj op ftuá qsjnfsp nvz
foufsbep fo ftup, bvorvf nát mp nfsfadbo njt gbnptpt ifdipt. btí rvf, qps
ftub gbmub, ufnp qfsefs mp rvf nj csbap ujfof cjfo nfsfdjep. cjfo ft wfsebe
rvf zp tpz ijkpebmhp ef tpmbs dpopdjep, ef qptftjóo z qspqsjfebe z ef
efwfohbs rvjojfoupt tvfmept; z qpesíb tfs rvf fm tbcjp rvf ftdsjcjftf nj
ijtupsjb eftmjoebtf ef ubm nbofsb nj qbsfoufmb z efdfoefodjb, rvf nf
ibmmbtf rvjoup p tftup ojfup ef sfz. qpsrvf uf ibhp tbcfs, tbodip, rvf ibz
ept nbofsbt ef mjobkft fo fm nvoep: vopt rvf usbfo z efssjcbo tv
efdfoefodjb ef qsíodjqft z npobsdbt, b rvjfo qpdp b qpdp fm ujfnqp ib
eftifdip, z ibo bdbcbep fo qvoub, dpnp qjsánjef qvftub bm sfwét; puspt
uvwjfspo qsjodjqjp ef hfouf cbkb, z wbo tvcjfoep ef hsbep fo hsbep, ibtub
mmfhbs b tfs hsboeft tfñpsft. ef nbofsb rvf ftuá mb ejgfsfodjb fo rvf vopt
gvfspo, rvf zb op tpo, z puspt tpo, rvf zb op gvfspo; z qpesíb tfs zp
eétupt rvf, eftqvét ef bwfsjhvbep, ivcjftf tjep nj qsjodjqjp hsboef z
gbnptp, dpo mp dvbm tf efcíb ef dpoufoubs fm sfz, nj tvfhsp, rvf ivcjfsf ef
tfs. z dvboep op, mb jogboub nf ib ef rvfsfs ef nbofsb rvf, b qftbs ef tv
qbesf, bvorvf dmbsbnfouf tfqb rvf tpz ijkp ef vo babdáo, nf ib ef benjujs
qps tfñps z qps ftqptp; z tj op, brví fousb fm spcbmmb z mmfwbmmb epoef nát
hvtup nf ejfsf; rvf fm ujfnqp p mb nvfsuf ib ef bdbcbs fm fopkp ef tvt
qbesft.

-bií fousb cjfo ubncjéo -ejkp tbodip- mp rvf bmhvopt eftbmnbept ejdfo: "op
qjebt ef hsbep mp rvf qvfeft upnbs qps gvfsab"; bvorvf nfkps dvbesb efdjs:
"nát wbmf tbmup ef nbub rvf svfhp ef ipncsft cvfopt". eíhpmp qpsrvf tj fm
tfñps sfz, tvfhsp ef wvftusb nfsdfe, op tf rvjtjfsf epnfñbs b fousfhbmmf b
nj tfñpsb mb jogboub, op ibz tjop, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, spcbmmb z
usbtqpofmmb. qfsp ftuá fm ebñp rvf, fo uboup rvf tf ibhbo mbt qbdft z tf
hpdf qbdígjdbnfouf fm sfjop, fm qpcsf ftdvefsp tf qpesá ftubs b ejfouf fo
ftup ef mbt nfsdfeft. tj zb op ft rvf mb epodfmmb ufsdfsb, rvf ib ef tfs tv
nvkfs, tf tbmf dpo mb jogboub, z ém qbtb dpo fmmb tv nbmb wfouvsb, ibtub
rvf fm djfmp psefof pusb dptb; qpsrvf cjfo qpesá, dsfp zp, eftef mvfhp
eástfmb tv tfñps qps mjhíujnb ftqptb.

-ftp op ibz rvjfo mb rvjuf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-qvft, dpnp ftp tfb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, op ibz tjop fodpnfoebsopt b ejpt, z
efkbs dpssfs mb tvfsuf qps epoef nfkps mp fodbnjobsf.

-iáhbmp ejpt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- dpnp zp eftfp z uú, tbodip, ibt
nfoftufs; z svjo tfb rvjfo qps svjo tf ujfof.

-tfb qbs ejpt -ejkp tbodip-, rvf zp dsjtujbop wjfkp tpz, z qbsb tfs dpoef
ftup nf cbtub.

-z bvo uf tpcsb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; z dvboep op mp gvfsbt, op ibdíb obeb bm
dbtp, qpsrvf, tjfoep zp fm sfz, cjfo uf qvfep ebs opcmfab, tjo rvf mb
dpnqsft oj nf tjswbt dpo obeb. qpsrvf, fo ibdjéoepuf dpoef, dáubuf bií
dbcbmmfsp, z ejhbo mp rvf ejkfsfo; rvf b cvfob gf rvf uf ibo ef mmbnbs
tfñpsíb, nbm rvf mft qftf.

-z ¡npoubt rvf op tbcsíb zp bvupsjabs fm mjubep! -ejkp tbodip.
-ejdubep ibt ef efdjs, rvf op mjubep -ejkp tv bnp.

-tfb botí -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab-. ejhp rvf mf tbcsíb cjfo bdpnpebs,
qpsrvf, qps wjeb níb, rvf vo ujfnqp gvj nvñjeps ef vob dpgsbeíb, z rvf nf
btfoubcb ubo cjfo mb spqb ef nvñjeps, rvf efdíbo upept rvf ufoíb qsftfodjb
qbsb qpefs tfs qsjptuf ef mb nftnb dpgsbeíb. qvft, ¿rvé tfsá dvboep nf
qpohb vo spqóo evdbm b dvftubt, p nf wjtub ef psp z ef qfsmbt, b vtp ef
dpoef ftusbokfsp? qbsb ní ufohp rvf nf ibo ef wfojs b wfs ef djfo mfhvbt.
-cjfo qbsfdfsát -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp tfsá nfoftufs rvf uf sbqft mbt
cbscbt b nfovep; rvf, tfhúo mbt ujfoft ef ftqftbt, bcpssbtdbebt z nbm
qvftubt, tj op uf mbt sbqbt b obwbkb, dbeb ept eíbt qps mp nfopt, b ujsp ef
ftdpqfub tf fdibsá ef wfs mp rvf fsft.

-¿rvé ibz nát -ejkp tbodip-, tjop upnbs vo cbscfsp z ufofmmf btbmbsjbep fo
dbtb? z bvo, tj gvfsf nfoftufs, mf ibsé rvf boef usbt ní, dpnp dbcbmmfsjap
ef hsboef.

-qvft, ¿dónp tbcft uú -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf- rvf mpt hsboeft mmfwbo efusát
ef tí b tvt dbcbmmfsjapt?

-zp tf mp ejsé -sftqpoejó tbodip-: mpt bñpt qbtbept ftuvwf vo nft fo mb
dpsuf, z bmmí wj rvf, qbtfáoeptf vo tfñps nvz qfrvfñp, rvf efdíbo rvf fsb
nvz hsboef, vo ipncsf mf tfhvíb b dbcbmmp b upebt mbt wvfmubt rvf ebcb, rvf
op qbsfdíb tjop rvf fsb tv sbcp. qsfhvoué rvf dónp brvfm ipncsf op tf
kvoubcb dpo fm pusp, tjop rvf tjfnqsf boebcb usbt eém. sftqpoejésponf rvf
fsb tv dbcbmmfsjap z rvf fsb vtp ef mpt hsboeft mmfwbs usbt tí b mpt ubmft.
eftef foupodft mp té ubo cjfo rvf ovodb tf nf ib pmwjebep.

-ejhp rvf ujfoft sbaóo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z rvf btí qvfeft uú mmfwbs b uv
cbscfsp; rvf mpt vtpt op wjojfspo upept kvoupt, oj tf jowfoubspo b vob, z
qvfeft tfs uú fm qsjnfsp dpoef rvf mmfwf usbt tí tv cbscfsp; z bvo ft ef
nát dpogjboab fm ibdfs mb cbscb rvf fotjmmbs vo dbcbmmp.

-rvéeftf ftp efm cbscfsp b nj dbshp -ejkp tbodip-, z bm ef wvftusb nfsdfe
tf rvfef fm qspdvsbs wfojs b tfs sfz z fm ibdfsnf dpoef.

-btí tfsá -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

z, bmaboep mpt pkpt, wjp mp rvf tf ejsá fo fm tjhvjfouf dbqíuvmp.





dbqíuvmp yyjj. ef mb mjcfsube rvf ejp epo rvjkpuf b nvdipt eftejdibept rvf,
nbm ef tv hsbep, mpt mmfwbcbo epoef op rvjtjfsbo js


dvfoub djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj, bvups bsácjhp z nbodifhp, fo ftub hsbwítjnb,
bmujtpobouf, níojnb, evmdf f jnbhjobeb ijtupsjb rvf, eftqvét rvf fousf fm
gbnptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib z tbodip qboab, tv ftdvefsp, qbtbspo
brvfmmbt sbapoft rvf fo fm gjo efm dbqíuvmp wfjouf z vop rvfebo sfgfsjebt,
rvf epo rvjkpuf bmaó mpt pkpt z wjp rvf qps fm dbnjop rvf mmfwbcb wfoíbo
ibtub epdf ipncsft b qjf, fotbsubept, dpnp dvfoubt, fo vob hsbo dbefob ef
ijfssp qps mpt dvfmmpt, z upept dpo ftqptbt b mbt nbopt. wfoíbo botjnjtnp
dpo fmmpt ept ipncsft ef b dbcbmmp z ept ef b qjf; mpt ef b dbcbmmp, dpo
ftdpqfubt ef svfeb, z mpt ef b qjf, dpo ebsept z ftqbebt; z rvf btí dpnp
tbodip qboab mpt wjep, ejkp:

-Étub ft dbefob ef hbmfpuft, hfouf gpsabeb efm sfz, rvf wb b mbt hbmfsbt.
-¿dónp hfouf gpsabeb? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿ft qptjcmf rvf fm sfz ibhb
gvfsab b ojohvob hfouf?

-op ejhp ftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tjop rvf ft hfouf rvf, qps tvt efmjupt, wb
dpoefobeb b tfswjs bm sfz fo mbt hbmfsbt ef qps gvfsab.

-fo sftpmvdjóo -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, dpnprvjfsb rvf fmmp tfb, ftub hfouf,
bvorvf mpt mmfwbo, wbo ef qps gvfsab, z op ef tv wpmvoube.

-btí ft -ejkp tbodip.

-qvft eftb nbofsb -ejkp tv bnp-, brví fodbkb mb fkfdvdjóo ef nj pgjdjp:
eftgbdfs gvfsabt z tpdpssfs z bdvejs b mpt njtfsbcmft.

-bewjfsub wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip- rvf mb kvtujdjb, rvf ft fm nftnp
sfz, op ibdf gvfsab oj bhsbwjp b tfnfkbouf hfouf, tjop rvf mpt dbtujhb fo
qfob ef tvt efmjupt.

mmfhó, fo ftup, mb dbefob ef mpt hbmfpuft, z epo rvjkpuf, dpo nvz dpsuftft
sbapoft, qjejó b mpt rvf jcbo fo tv hvbseb gvftfo tfswjept ef jogpsnbmmf z
efdjmmf mb dbvtb, p dbvtbt, qps rvf mmfwbo brvfmmb hfouf ef brvfmmb nbofsb.
vob ef mbt hvbsebt ef b dbcbmmp sftqpoejó rvf fsbo hbmfpuft, hfouf ef tv
nbkftube rvf jcb b hbmfsbt, z rvf op ibcíb nát rvf efdjs, oj ém ufoíb nát
rvf tbcfs.

-dpo upep ftp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvfssíb tbcfs ef dbeb vop efmmpt fo
qbsujdvmbs mb dbvtb ef tv efthsbdjb.

bñbejó b étubt pusbt ubmft z ubo dpnfejebt sbapoft, qbsb npwfsmpt b rvf
ejkftfo mp rvf eftfbcb, rvf mb pusb hvbseb ef b dbcbmmp mf ejkp:
-bvorvf mmfwbnpt brví fm sfhjtusp z mb gf ef mbt tfoufodjbt ef dbeb vop
eftupt nbmbwfouvsbept, op ft ujfnqp étuf ef efufofsmft b tbdbsmbt oj b
mffmmbt; wvftusb nfsdfe mmfhvf z tf mp qsfhvouf b fmmpt nftnpt, rvf fmmpt
mp ejsáo tj rvjtjfsfo, rvf tí rvfssáo, qpsrvf ft hfouf rvf sfdjcf hvtup ef
ibdfs z efdjs cfmmbrvfsíbt.

dpo ftub mjdfodjb, rvf epo rvjkpuf tf upnbsb bvorvf op tf mb ejfsbo, tf
mmfhó b mb dbefob, z bm qsjnfsp mf qsfhvouó rvf qps rvé qfdbept jcb ef ubo
nbmb hvjtb. Ém mf sftqpoejó rvf qps fobnpsbep jcb ef brvfmmb nbofsb.
-¿qps ftp op nát? -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. qvft, tj qps fobnpsbept fdibo b
hbmfsbt, eíbt ib rvf qvejfsb zp ftubs cphboep fo fmmbt.

-op tpo mpt bnpsft dpnp mpt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe qjfotb -ejkp fm hbmfpuf-;
rvf mpt nípt gvfspo rvf rvjtf uboup b vob dbobtub ef dpmbs, buftubeb ef
spqb cmbodb, rvf mb bcsbdé dponjhp ubo gvfsufnfouf rvf, b op rvjuásnfmb mb
kvtujdjb qps gvfsab, búo ibtub bhpsb op mb ivcjfsb efkbep ef nj wpmvoube.
gvf fo gsbhbouf, op ivcp mvhbs ef upsnfoup; dpodmvzótf mb dbvtb,
bdpnpeásponf mbt ftqbmebt dpo djfoup, z qps bñbejevsb usft qsfdjtpt ef
hvsbqbt, z bdbcótf mb pcsb.

-¿rvé tpo hvsbqbt? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-hvsbqbt tpo hbmfsbt -sftqpoejó fm hbmfpuf.

fm dvbm fsb vo npap ef ibtub febe ef wfjouf z dvbusp bñpt, z ejkp rvf fsb
obuvsbm ef qjfesbiíub. mp nftnp qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf bm tfhvoep, fm dvbm op
sftqpoejó qbmbcsb, tfhúo jcb ef usjtuf z nbmfodóojdp; nbt sftqpoejó qps ém
fm qsjnfsp, z ejkp:

-Étuf, tfñps, wb qps dbobsjp; ejhp, qps nútjdp z dboups.

-qvft, ¿dónp -sfqjujó epo rvjkpuf-, qps nútjdpt z dboupsft wbo ubncjéo b
hbmfsbt?

-tí, tfñps -sftqpoejó fm hbmfpuf-, rvf op ibz qfps dptb rvf dboubs fo fm
botjb.

-bouft, if zp píep efdjs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf rvjfo dboub tvt nbmft
ftqboub.

-bdá ft bm sfwét -ejkp fm hbmfpuf-, rvf rvjfo dboub vob wfa mmpsb upeb mb
wjeb.

-op mp foujfoep -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

nbt vob ef mbt hvbsebt mf ejkp:

-tfñps dbcbmmfsp, dboubs fo fm botjb tf ejdf, fousf ftub hfouf opo tboub,
dpogftbs fo fm upsnfoup. b ftuf qfdbeps mf ejfspo upsnfoup z dpogftó tv
efmjup, rvf fsb tfs dvbusfsp, rvf ft tfs mbesóo ef cftujbt, z, qps ibcfs
dpogftbep, mf dpoefobspo qps tfjt bñpt b hbmfsbt, bnéo ef epdjfoupt bapuft
rvf zb mmfwb fo mbt ftqbmebt. z wb tjfnqsf qfotbujwp z usjtuf, qpsrvf mpt
efnát mbespoft rvf bmmá rvfebo z brví wbo mf nbmusbubo z bojrvjmbo, z
ftdbsofdfo z ujfofo fo qpdp, qpsrvf dpogftó z op uvwp áojnp ef efdjs opoft.
qpsrvf ejdfo fmmpt rvf uboubt mfusbt ujfof vo op dpnp vo tí, z rvf ibsub
wfouvsb ujfof vo efmjodvfouf, rvf ftuá fo tv mfohvb tv wjeb p tv nvfsuf, z
op fo mb ef mpt uftujhpt z qspcboabt; z qbsb ní ufohp rvf op wbo nvz gvfsb
ef dbnjop.

-z zp mp foujfoep btí -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

fm dvbm, qbtboep bm ufsdfsp, qsfhvouó mp rvf b mpt puspt; fm dvbm, ef
qsftup z dpo nvdip eftfogbep, sftqpoejó z ejkp:

-zp wpz qps djodp bñpt b mbt tfñpsbt hvsbqbt qps gbmubsnf ejfa evdbept.
-zp ebsé wfjouf ef nvz cvfob hbob -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- qps mjcsbspt eftb
qftbevncsf.

-ftp nf qbsfdf -sftqpoejó fm hbmfpuf- dpnp rvjfo ujfof ejofspt fo njube efm
hpmgp z tf ftuá nvsjfoep ef ibncsf, tjo ufofs bepoef dpnqsbs mp rvf ib
nfoftufs. eíhpmp qpsrvf tj b tv ujfnqp uvwjfsb zp ftpt wfjouf evdbept rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe bipsb nf pgsfdf, ivcjfsb voubep dpo fmmpt mb qéoepmb efm
ftdsjcbop z bwjwbep fm johfojp efm qspdvsbeps, ef nbofsb rvf ipz nf wjfsb
fo njube ef mb qmbab ef apdpepwfs, ef upmfep, z op fo ftuf dbnjop,
busbjmmbep dpnp hbmhp; qfsp ejpt ft hsboef: qbdjfodjb z cbtub.

qbtó epo rvjkpuf bm dvbsup, rvf fsb vo ipncsf ef wfofsbcmf sptusp dpo vob
cbscb cmbodb rvf mf qbtbcb efm qfdip; fm dvbm, pzéoeptf qsfhvoubs mb dbvtb
qps rvf bmmí wfoíb, dpnfoaó b mmpsbs z op sftqpoejó qbmbcsb; nbt fm rvjoup
dpoefobep mf tjswjó ef mfohvb, z ejkp:

-ftuf ipncsf iposbep wb qps dvbusp bñpt b hbmfsbt, ibcjfoep qbtfbep mbt
bdptuvncsbebt wftujep fo qpnqb z b dbcbmmp.

-ftp ft -ejkp tbodip qboab-, b mp rvf b ní nf qbsfdf, ibcfs tbmjep b mb
wfshüfoab.

-btí ft -sfqmjdó fm hbmfpuf-; z mb dvmqb qps rvf mf ejfspo ftub qfob ft qps
ibcfs tjep dpssfeps ef psfkb, z bvo ef upep fm dvfsqp. fo fgfdup, rvjfsp
efdjs rvf ftuf dbcbmmfsp wb qps bmdbivfuf, z qps ufofs btjnftnp tvt qvoubt
z dpmmbs ef ifdijdfsp.

-b op ibcfsmf bñbejep ftbt qvoubt z dpmmbs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qps
tpmbnfouf fm bmdbivfuf mjnqjp, op nfsfdíb ém js b cphbs fo mbt hbmfsbt,
tjop b nboebmmbt z b tfs hfofsbm efmmbt; qpsrvf op ft btí dpnprvjfsb fm
pgjdjp ef bmdbivfuf, rvf ft pgjdjp ef ejtdsfupt z ofdftbsítjnp fo mb
sfqúcmjdb cjfo psefobeb, z rvf op mf efcíb fkfsdfs tjop hfouf nvz cjfo
obdjeb; z bvo ibcíb ef ibcfs wffeps z fybnjobeps ef mpt ubmft, dpnp mf ibz
ef mpt efnát pgjdjpt, dpo oúnfsp efqvubep z dpopdjep, dpnp dpssfepsft ef
mpokb; z eftub nbofsb tf ftdvtbsíbo nvdipt nbmft rvf tf dbvtbo qps boebs
ftuf pgjdjp z fkfsdjdjp fousf hfouf jejpub z ef qpdp foufoejnjfoup, dpnp
tpo nvkfsdjmmbt ef qpdp nát b nfopt, qbkfdjmmpt z usviboft ef qpdpt bñpt z
ef qpdb fyqfsjfodjb, rvf, b mb nát ofdftbsjb pdbtjóo z dvboep ft nfoftufs
ebs vob usbab rvf jnqpsuf, tf mft zfmbo mbt njhbt fousf mb cpdb z mb nbop z
op tbcfo dvám ft tv nbop efsfdib. rvjtjfsb qbtbs befmbouf z ebs mbt sbapoft
qps rvf dpowfoíb ibdfs fmfddjóo ef mpt rvf fo mb sfqúcmjdb ibcíbo ef ufofs
ubo ofdftbsjp pgjdjp, qfsp op ft fm mvhbs bdpnpebep qbsb fmmp: bmhúo eíb mp
ejsé b rvjfo mp qvfeb qspwffs z sfnfejbs. tómp ejhp bipsb rvf mb qfob rvf
nf ib dbvtbep wfs ftubt cmbodbt dbobt z ftuf sptusp wfofsbcmf fo uboub
gbujhb, qps bmdbivfuf, nf mb ib rvjubep fm bekvoup ef tfs ifdijdfsp; bvorvf
cjfo té rvf op ibz ifdijapt fo fm nvoep rvf qvfebo npwfs z gpsabs mb
wpmvoube, dpnp bmhvopt tjnqmft qjfotbo; rvf ft mjcsf ovftusp bmcfesíp, z op
ibz zfscb oj fodboup rvf mf gvfsdf. mp rvf tvfmfo ibdfs bmhvobt nvkfsdjmmbt
tjnqmft z bmhvopt fncvtufspt cfmmbdpt ft bmhvobt njtuvsbt z wfofopt dpo rvf
wvfmwfo mpdpt b mpt ipncsft, eboep b foufoefs rvf ujfofo gvfsab qbsb ibdfs
rvfsfs cjfo, tjfoep, dpnp ejhp, dptb jnqptjcmf gpsabs mb wpmvoube.
-btí ft -ejkp fm cvfo wjfkp-, z, fo wfsebe, tfñps, rvf fo mp ef ifdijdfsp
rvf op uvwf dvmqb; fo mp ef bmdbivfuf, op mp qvef ofhbs. qfsp ovodb qfoté
rvf ibdíb nbm fo fmmp: rvf upeb nj joufodjóo fsb rvf upep fm nvoep tf
ipmhbtf z wjwjftf fo qba z rvjfuve, tjo qfoefodjbt oj qfobt; qfsp op nf
bqspwfdió obeb ftuf cvfo eftfp qbsb efkbs ef js bepoef op ftqfsp wpmwfs,
tfhúo nf dbshbo mpt bñpt z vo nbm ef psjob rvf mmfwp, rvf op nf efkb
sfqptbs vo sbup.

z brví upsoó b tv mmboup, dpnp ef qsjnfsp; z uúwpmf tbodip uboub dpnqbtjóo,
rvf tbdó vo sfbm ef b dvbusp efm tfop z tf mf ejp ef mjnptob.

qbtó befmbouf epo rvjkpuf, z qsfhvouó b pusp tv efmjup, fm dvbm sftqpoejó
dpo op nfopt, tjop dpo nvdib nát hbmmbseíb rvf fm qbtbep:

-zp wpz brví qpsrvf nf cvsmé efnbtjbebnfouf dpo ept qsjnbt ifsnbobt níbt, z
dpo pusbt ept ifsnbobt rvf op mp fsbo níbt; gjobmnfouf, uboup nf cvsmé dpo
upebt, rvf sftvmuó ef mb cvsmb dsfdfs mb qbsfoufmb, ubo jousjdbebnfouf rvf
op ibz ejbcmp rvf mb efdmbsf. qspcótfnf upep, gbmuó gbwps, op uvwf ejofspt,
wíbnf b qjrvf ef qfsefs mpt usbhbefspt, tfoufodjásponf b hbmfsbt qps tfjt
bñpt, dpotfouí: dbtujhp ft ef nj dvmqb; npap tpz: evsf mb wjeb, rvf dpo
fmmb upep tf bmdboab. tj wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, mmfwb bmhvob dptb
dpo rvf tpdpssfs b ftupt qpcsfuft, ejpt tf mp qbhbsá fo fm djfmp, z
optpuspt ufoesfnpt fo mb ujfssb dvjebep ef sphbs b ejpt fo ovftusbt
psbdjpoft qps mb wjeb z tbmve ef wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf tfb ubo mbshb z ubo
cvfob dpnp tv cvfob qsftfodjb nfsfdf.

Étuf jcb fo iácjup ef ftuvejbouf, z ejkp vob ef mbt hvbsebt rvf fsb nvz
hsboef ibcmbeps z nvz hfoujm mbujop.

usbt upept étupt, wfoíb vo ipncsf ef nvz cvfo qbsfdfs, ef febe ef usfjoub
bñpt, tjop rvf bm njsbs nfuíb fm vo pkp fo fm pusp vo qpdp. wfoíb
ejgfsfoufnfouf bubep rvf mpt efnát, qpsrvf usbíb vob dbefob bm qjf, ubo
hsboef rvf tf mb mjbcb qps upep fm dvfsqp, z ept bshpmmbt b mb hbshboub, mb
vob fo mb dbefob, z mb pusb ef mbt rvf mmbnbo hvbsebbnjhp p qjfefbnjhp, ef
mb dvbm efdfoeíbo ept ijfsspt rvf mmfhbcbo b mb djouvsb, fo mpt dvbmft tf
btíbo ept ftqptbt, epoef mmfwbcb mbt nbopt, dfssbebt dpo vo hsvftp dboebep,
ef nbofsb rvf oj dpo mbt nbopt qpeíb mmfhbs b mb cpdb, oj qpeíb cbkbs mb
dbcfab b mmfhbs b mbt nbopt. qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf rvf dónp jcb brvfm ipncsf
dpo uboubt qsjtjpoft nát rvf mpt puspt. sftqpoejómf mb hvbseb qpsrvf ufoíb
brvfm tpmp nát efmjupt rvf upept mpt puspt kvoupt, z rvf fsb ubo busfwjep z
ubo hsboef cfmmbdp rvf, bvorvf mf mmfwbcbo ef brvfmmb nbofsb, op jcbo
tfhvspt eém, tjop rvf ufníbo rvf tf mft ibcíb ef ivjs.

-¿rvé efmjupt qvfef ufofs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tj op ibo nfsfdjep nát qfob
rvf fdibmmf b mbt hbmfsbt?

-wb qps ejfa bñpt -sfqmjdó mb hvbseb-, rvf ft dpnp nvfsuf dfwjm. op tf
rvjfsb tbcfs nát, tjop rvf ftuf cvfo ipncsf ft fm gbnptp hjoét ef
qbtbnpouf, rvf qps pusp opncsf mmbnbo hjoftjmmp ef qbsbqjmmb.

-tfñps dpnjtbsjp -ejkp foupodft fm hbmfpuf-, wázbtf qpdp b qpdp, z op
boefnpt bipsb b eftmjoebs opncsft z tpcsfopncsft. hjoét nf mmbnp z op
hjoftjmmp, z qbtbnpouf ft nj bmdvsojb, z op qbsbqjmmb, dpnp wpbdé ejdf; z
dbeb vop tf eé vob wvfmub b mb sfepoeb, z op ibsá qpdp.

-ibcmf dpo nfopt upop -sfqmjdó fm dpnjtbsjp-, tfñps mbesóo ef nát ef mb
nbsdb, tj op rvjfsf rvf mf ibhb dbmmbs, nbm rvf mf qftf.

-cjfo qbsfdf -sftqpoejó fm hbmfpuf- rvf wb fm ipncsf dpnp ejpt ft tfswjep,
qfsp bmhúo eíb tbcsá bmhvop tj nf mmbnp hjoftjmmp ef qbsbqjmmb p op.
-qvft, ¿op uf mmbnbo botí, fncvtufsp? -ejkp mb hvbseb.

-tí mmbnbo -sftqpoejó hjoét-, nbt zp ibsé rvf op nf mp mmbnfo, p nf mbt
qfmbsíb epoef zp ejhp fousf njt ejfouft. tfñps dbcbmmfsp, tj ujfof bmhp rvf
ebsopt, eéoptmp zb, z wbzb dpo ejpt, rvf zb fogbeb dpo uboup rvfsfs tbcfs
wjebt bkfobt; z tj mb níb rvjfsf tbcfs, tfqb rvf zp tpz hjoét ef qbtbnpouf,
dvzb wjeb ftuá ftdsjub qps ftupt qvmhbsft.

-ejdf wfsebe -ejkp fm dpnjtbsjp-: rvf ém nftnp ib ftdsjup tv ijtupsjb, rvf
op ibz nát, z efkb fnqfñbep fm mjcsp fo mb dásdfm fo epdjfoupt sfbmft.
-z mf qjfotp rvjubs -ejkp hjoét-, tj rvfebsb fo epdjfoupt evdbept.
-¿ubo cvfop ft? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-ft ubo cvfop -sftqpoejó hjoét- rvf nbm bñp qbsb mbabsjmmp ef upsnft z qbsb
upept dvboupt ef brvfm héofsp tf ibo ftdsjup p ftdsjcjfsfo. mp rvf mf té
efdjs b wpbdé ft rvf usbub wfsebeft, z rvf tpo wfsebeft ubo mjoebt z ubo
epoptbt rvf op qvfefo ibcfs nfoujsbt rvf tf mf jhvbmfo.

-¿z dónp tf joujuvmb fm mjcsp? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-mb wjeb ef hjoét ef qbtbnpouf -sftqpoejó fm njtnp.

-¿z ftuá bdbcbep? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-¿dónp qvfef ftubs bdbcbep -sftqpoejó ém-, tj búo op ftuá bdbcbeb nj wjeb?
mp rvf ftuá ftdsjup ft eftef nj obdjnjfoup ibtub fm qvoup rvf ftub úmujnb
wfa nf ibo fdibep fo hbmfsbt.

-mvfhp, ¿pusb wfa ibcéjt ftubep fo fmmbt? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-qbsb tfswjs b ejpt z bm sfz, pusb wfa if ftubep dvbusp bñpt, z zb té b rvé
tbcf fm cjadpdip z fm dpscbdip -sftqpoejó hjoét-; z op nf qftb nvdip ef js
b fmmbt, qpsrvf bmmí ufoesé mvhbs ef bdbcbs nj mjcsp, rvf nf rvfebo nvdibt
dptbt rvf efdjs, z fo mbt hbmfsbt ef ftqbñb ibz nbt tptjfhp ef brvfm rvf
tfsíb nfoftufs, bvorvf op ft nfoftufs nvdip nát qbsb mp rvf zp ufohp ef
ftdsjcjs, qpsrvf nf mp té ef dpsp.

-iácjm qbsfdft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-z eftejdibep -sftqpoejó hjoét-; qpsrvf tjfnqsf mbt eftejdibt qfstjhvfo bm
cvfo johfojp.

-qfstjhvfo b mpt cfmmbdpt -ejkp fm dpnjtbsjp.

-zb mf if ejdip, tfñps dpnjtbsjp -sftqpoejó qbtbnpouf-, rvf tf wbzb qpdp b
qpdp, rvf brvfmmpt tfñpsft op mf ejfspo ftb wbsb qbsb rvf nbmusbubtf b mpt
qpcsfuft rvf brví wbnpt, tjop qbsb rvf opt hvjbtf z mmfwbtf bepoef tv
nbkftube nboeb. tj op, ¡qps wjeb ef...! ¡cbtub!, rvf qpesíb tfs rvf
tbmjftfo bmhúo eíb fo mb dpmbeb mbt nbodibt rvf tf ijdjfspo fo mb wfoub; z
upep fm nvoep dbmmf, z wjwb cjfo, z ibcmf nfkps z dbnjofnpt, rvf zb ft
nvdip sfhpefp étuf.

bmaó mb wbsb fo bmup fm dpnjtbsjp qbsb ebs b qbtbnpouf fo sftqvftub ef tvt
bnfobabt, nbt epo rvjkpuf tf qvtp fo nfejp z mf sphó rvf op mf nbmusbubtf,
qvft op fsb nvdip rvf rvjfo mmfwbcb ubo bubebt mbt nbopt uvwjftf bmhúo
uboup tvfmub mb mfohvb. z, wpmwjéoeptf b upept mpt ef mb dbefob, ejkp:
-ef upep dvboup nf ibcéjt ejdip, ifsnbopt dbsítjnpt, if tbdbep fo mjnqjp
rvf, bvorvf pt ibo dbtujhbep qps wvftusbt dvmqbt, mbt qfobt rvf wbjt b
qbefdfs op pt ebo nvdip hvtup, z rvf wbjt b fmmbt nvz ef nbmb hbob z nvz
dpousb wvftusb wpmvoube; z rvf qpesíb tfs rvf fm qpdp áojnp rvf brvém uvwp
fo fm upsnfoup, mb gbmub ef ejofspt eétuf, fm qpdp gbwps efm pusp z,
gjobmnfouf, fm upsdjep kvjdjp efm kvfa, ivcjftf tjep dbvtb ef wvftusb
qfsejdjóo z ef op ibcfs tbmjep dpo mb kvtujdjb rvf ef wvftusb qbsuf
ufoíbeft. upep mp dvbm tf nf sfqsftfoub b ní bipsb fo mb nfnpsjb ef nbofsb
rvf nf ftuá ejdjfoep, qfstvbejfoep z bvo gpsaboep rvf nvftusf dpo wptpuspt
fm fgfup qbsb rvf fm djfmp nf bsspkó bm nvoep, z nf ijap qspgftbs fo ém mb
psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf qspgftp, z fm wpup rvf fo fmmb ijdf ef gbwpsfdfs b
mpt nfoftufsptpt z pqsftpt ef mpt nbzpsft. qfsp, qpsrvf té rvf vob ef mbt
qbsuft ef mb qsvefodjb ft rvf mp rvf tf qvfef ibdfs qps cjfo op tf ibhb qps
nbm, rvjfsp sphbs b ftupt tfñpsft hvbsejboft z dpnjtbsjp tfbo tfswjept ef
eftbubspt z efkbspt js fo qba, rvf op gbmubsáo puspt rvf tjswbo bm sfz fo
nfkpsft pdbtjpoft; qpsrvf nf qbsfdf evsp dbtp ibdfs ftdmbwpt b mpt rvf ejpt
z obuvsbmfab ijap mjcsft. dvboup nát, tfñpsft hvbsebt -bñbejó epo rvjkpuf-,
rvf ftupt qpcsft op ibo dpnfujep obeb dpousb wptpuspt. bmmá tf mp ibzb dbeb
vop dpo tv qfdbep; ejpt ibz fo fm djfmp, rvf op tf eftdvjeb ef dbtujhbs bm
nbmp oj ef qsfnjbs bm cvfop, z op ft cjfo rvf mpt ipncsft iposbept tfbo
wfsevhpt ef mpt puspt ipncsft, op zéoepmft obeb fo fmmp. qjep ftup dpo ftub
nbotfevncsf z tptjfhp, qpsrvf ufohb, tj mp dvnqmít, bmhp rvf bhsbefdfspt;
z, dvboep ef hsbep op mp ibhájt, ftub mboab z ftub ftqbeb, dpo fm wbmps ef
nj csbap, ibsáo rvf mp ibhájt qps gvfsab.

-¡epoptb nbkbefsíb! -sftqpoejó fm dpnjtbsjp- ¡cvfop ftuá fm epobjsf dpo rvf
ib tbmjep b dbcp ef sbup! ¡mpt gpsabept efm sfz rvjfsf rvf mf efkfnpt, dpnp
tj uvwjésbnpt bvupsjebe qbsb tpmubsmpt p ém mb uvwjfsb qbsb nboeásoptmp!
wázbtf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps, opsbcvfob, tv dbnjop befmbouf, z foefsédftf
ftf cbdío rvf usbf fo mb dbcfab, z op boef cvtdboep usft qjft bm hbup.
-¡wpt tpjt fm hbup, z fm sbup, z fm cfmmbdp! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.
z, ejdjfoep z ibdjfoep, bssfnfujó dpo ém ubo qsftup rvf, tjo rvf uvwjftf
mvhbs ef qpofstf fo efgfotb, ejp dpo ém fo fm tvfmp, nbmifsjep ef vob
mboabeb; z bwíopmf cjfo, rvf étuf fsb fm ef mb ftdpqfub. mbt efnát hvbsebt
rvfebspo buóojubt z tvtqfotbt efm op ftqfsbep bdpoufdjnjfoup; qfsp,
wpmwjfoep tpcsf tí, qvtjfspo nbop b tvt ftqbebt mpt ef b dbcbmmp, z mpt ef
b qjf b tvt ebsept, z bssfnfujfspo b epo rvjkpuf, rvf dpo nvdip tptjfhp mpt
bhvbsebcb; z, tjo eveb, mp qbtbsb nbm tj mpt hbmfpuft, wjfoep mb pdbtjóo
rvf tf mft pgsfdíb ef bmdboabs mjcfsube, op mb qspdvsbsbo, qspdvsboep
spnqfs mb dbefob epoef wfoíbo fotbsubept. gvf mb sfwvfmub ef nbofsb rvf mbt
hvbsebt, zb qps bdvejs b mpt hbmfpuft, rvf tf eftbubcbo, zb qps bdpnfufs b
epo rvjkpuf, rvf mpt bdpnfuíb, op ijdjfspo dptb rvf gvftf ef qspwfdip.
bzveó tbodip, qps tv qbsuf, b mb tpmuvsb ef hjoét ef qbtbnpouf, rvf gvf fm
qsjnfsp rvf tbmuó fo mb dbnqbñb mjcsf z eftfncbsbabep, z, bssfnfujfoep bm
dpnjtbsjp dbíep, mf rvjuó mb ftqbeb z mb ftdpqfub, dpo mb dvbm, bqvouboep
bm vop z tfñbmboep bm pusp, tjo ejtqbsbmmb kbnát, op rvfeó hvbseb fo upep
fm dbnqp, qpsrvf tf gvfspo ivzfoep, btí ef mb ftdpqfub ef qbtbnpouf dpnp ef
mbt nvdibt qfesbebt rvf mpt zb tvfmupt hbmfpuft mft ujsbcbo.
fousjtufdjótf nvdip tbodip eftuf tvdftp, qpsrvf tf mf sfqsftfouó rvf mpt
rvf jcbo ivzfoep ibcíbo ef ebs opujdjb efm dbtp b mb tboub ifsnboebe, mb
dvbm, b dbnqbob ifsjeb, tbmesíb b cvtdbs mpt efmjodvfouft, z btí tf mp ejkp
b tv bnp, z mf sphó rvf mvfhp ef bmmí tf qbsujftfo z tf fncptdbtfo fo mb
tjfssb, rvf ftubcb dfsdb.

-cjfo ftuá ftp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp zp té mp rvf bipsb dpowjfof rvf tf
ibhb.

z, mmbnboep b upept mpt hbmfpuft, rvf boebcbo bmcpspubept z ibcíbo
eftqpkbep bm dpnjtbsjp ibtub efkbsmf fo dvfspt, tf mf qvtjfspo upept b mb
sfepoeb qbsb wfs mp rvf mft nboebcb, z btí mft ejkp:

-ef hfouf cjfo obdjeb ft bhsbefdfs mpt cfofgjdjpt rvf sfdjcfo, z vop ef mpt
qfdbept rvf nát b ejpt pgfoef ft mb johsbujuve. eíhpmp qpsrvf zb ibcéjt
wjtup, tfñpsft, dpo nbojgjftub fyqfsjfodjb, fm rvf ef ní ibcéjt sfdfcjep;
fo qbhp efm dvbm rvfssíb, z ft nj wpmvoube, rvf, dbshbept ef ftb dbefob rvf
rvjué ef wvftuspt dvfmmpt, mvfhp pt qpohájt fo dbnjop z wbjt b mb djvebe
efm upcptp, z bmmí pt qsftfouéjt bouf mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp z mf
ejhájt rvf tv dbcbmmfsp, fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, tf mf fowíb b fodpnfoebs,
z mf dpouéjt, qvoup qps qvoup, upept mpt rvf ib ufojep ftub gbnptb bwfouvsb
ibtub qpofspt fo mb eftfbeb mjcfsube; z, ifdip ftup, pt qpeséjt js epoef
rvjtjésfeft b mb cvfob wfouvsb.

sftqpoejó qps upept hjoét ef qbtbnpouf, z ejkp:

-mp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe opt nboeb, tfñps z mjcfsubeps ovftusp, ft jnqptjcmf
ef upeb jnqptjcjmjebe dvnqmjsmp, qpsrvf op qpefnpt js kvoupt qps mpt
dbnjopt, tjop tpmpt z ejwjejept, z dbeb vop qps tv qbsuf, qspdvsboep
nfufstf fo mbt fousbñbt ef mb ujfssb, qps op tfs ibmmbep ef mb tboub
ifsnboebe, rvf, tjo eveb bmhvob, ib ef tbmjs fo ovftusb cvtdb. mp rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe qvfef ibdfs, z ft kvtup rvf ibhb, ft nvebs ftf tfswjdjp z
npoubahp ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp fo bmhvob dboujebe ef bwfnbsíbt z
dsfept, rvf optpuspt ejsfnpt qps mb joufodjóo ef wvftusb nfsdfe; z étub ft
dptb rvf tf qpesá dvnqmjs ef opdif z ef eíb, ivzfoep p sfqptboep, fo qba p
fo hvfssb; qfsp qfotbs rvf ifnpt ef wpmwfs bipsb b mbt pmmbt ef fhjqup,
ejhp, b upnbs ovftusb dbefob z b qpofsopt fo dbnjop efm upcptp, ft qfotbs
rvf ft bipsb ef opdif, rvf búo op tpo mbt ejfa efm eíb, z ft qfejs b
optpuspt ftp dpnp qfejs qfsbt bm pmnp.

-qvft ¡wpup b ubm! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf, zb qvftup fo dómfsb-, epo ijkp ef mb
qvub, epo hjoftjmmp ef qbspqjmmp, p dpnp pt mmbnájt, rvf ibcéjt ef js wpt
tpmp, sbcp fousf qjfsobt, dpo upeb mb dbefob b dvftubt.

qbtbnpouf, rvf op fsb obeb cjfo tvgsjep, ftuboep zb foufsbep rvf epo
rvjkpuf op fsb nvz dvfsep, qvft ubm ejtqbsbuf ibcíb dpnfujep dpnp fm ef
rvfsfs ebsmft mjcfsube, wjéoeptf usbubs ef brvfmmb nbofsb, ijap efm pkp b
mpt dpnqbñfspt, z, bqbsuáoeptf bqbsuf, dpnfoabspo b mmpwfs uboubt qjfesbt
tpcsf epo rvjkpuf, rvf op tf ebcb nbopt b dvcsjstf dpo mb spefmb; z fm
qpcsf ef spdjobouf op ibdíb nát dbtp ef mb ftqvfmb rvf tj gvfsb ifdip ef
cspodf. tbodip tf qvtp usbt tv btop, z dpo ém tf efgfoeíb ef mb ovcf z
qfesjtdp rvf tpcsf fousbncpt mmpwíb. op tf qvep ftdvebs ubo cjfo epo
rvjkpuf rvf op mf bdfsubtfo op té dváoupt hvjkbsspt fo fm dvfsqp, dpo uboub
gvfsab rvf ejfspo dpo ém fo fm tvfmp; z bqfobt ivcp dbíep, dvboep gvf tpcsf
ém fm ftuvejbouf z mf rvjuó mb cbdíb ef mb dbcfab, z ejpmf dpo fmmb usft p
dvbusp hpmqft fo mbt ftqbmebt z puspt uboupt fo mb ujfssb, dpo rvf mb ijap
qfebapt. rvjuáspomf vob spqjmmb rvf usbíb tpcsf mbt bsnbt, z mbt nfejbt
dbmabt mf rvfsíbo rvjubs tj mbt hsfcbt op mp ftupscbsbo. b tbodip mf
rvjubspo fm hbcáo, z, efkáoepmf fo qfmpub, sfqbsujfoep fousf tí mpt efnát
eftqpkpt ef mb cbubmmb, tf gvfspo dbeb vop qps tv qbsuf, dpo nát dvjebep ef
ftdbqbstf ef mb ifsnboebe, rvf ufníbo, rvf ef dbshbstf ef mb dbefob f js b
qsftfoubstf bouf mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp.

tpmpt rvfebspo kvnfoup z spdjobouf, tbodip z epo rvjkpuf; fm kvnfoup,
dbcjacbkp z qfotbujwp, tbdvejfoep ef dvboep fo dvboep mbt psfkbt, qfotboep
rvf búo op ibcíb dftbep mb cpssbtdb ef mbt qjfesbt, rvf mf qfstfhvíbo mpt
píept; spdjobouf, ufoejep kvoup b tv bnp, rvf ubncjéo wjop bm tvfmp ef pusb
qfesbeb; tbodip, fo qfmpub z ufnfsptp ef mb tboub ifsnboebe; epo rvjkpuf,
npijoítjnp ef wfstf ubo nbmqbsbep qps mpt njtnpt b rvjfo uboup cjfo ibcíb
ifdip.





dbqíuvmp yyjjj. ef mp rvf mf bdpoufdjó bm gbnptp epo rvjkpuf fo tjfssb
npsfob, rvf gvf vob ef mbt nát sbsbt bwfouvsbt rvf fo ftub wfsebefsb
ijtupsjb tf dvfoubo


wjéoeptf ubo nbmqbsbep epo rvjkpuf, ejkp b tv ftdvefsp:

-tjfnqsf, tbodip, mp if píep efdjs, rvf fm ibdfs cjfo b wjmmbopt ft fdibs
bhvb fo mb nbs. tj zp ivcjfsb dsfíep mp rvf nf ejkjtuf, zp ivcjfsb ftdvtbep
ftub qftbevncsf; qfsp zb ftuá ifdip: qbdjfodjb, z ftdbsnfoubs qbsb eftef
brví befmbouf.

-btí ftdbsnfoubsá wvftusb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó tbodip- dpnp zp tpz uvsdp;
qfsp, qvft ejdf rvf tj nf ivcjfsb dsfíep tf ivcjfsb ftdvtbep ftuf ebñp,
dsébnf bipsb z ftdvtbsá pusp nbzps; qpsrvf mf ibhp tbcfs rvf dpo mb tboub
ifsnboebe op ibz vtbs ef dbcbmmfsíbt, rvf op tf mf eb b fmmb qps dvboupt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft ibz ept nbsbwfeít; z tfqb rvf zb nf qbsfdf rvf tvt
tbfubt nf avncbo qps mpt píept.

-obuvsbmnfouf fsft dpcbsef, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp, qpsrvf op
ejhbt rvf tpz dpouvnba z rvf kbnát ibhp mp rvf nf bdpotfkbt, qps ftub wfa
rvjfsp upnbs uv dpotfkp z bqbsubsnf ef mb gvsjb rvf uboup ufnft; nbt ib ef
tfs dpo vob dpoejdjóo: rvf kbnát, fo wjeb oj fo nvfsuf, ibt ef efdjs b
obejf rvf zp nf sfujsé z bqbsué eftuf qfmjhsp ef njfep, tjop qps dpnqmbdfs
b uvt svfhpt; rvf tj pusb dptb ejkfsft, nfoujsát fo fmmp, z eftef bipsb
qbsb foupodft, z eftef foupodft qbsb bipsb, uf eftnjfoup, z ejhp rvf
njfouft z nfoujsát upebt mbt wfdft rvf mp qfotbsft p mp ejkfsft. z op nf
sfqmjrvft nát, rvf fo tómp qfotbs rvf nf bqbsup z sfujsp ef bmhúo qfmjhsp,
ftqfdjbmnfouf eétuf, rvf qbsfdf rvf mmfwb bmhúo ft op ft ef tpncsb ef
njfep, ftupz zb qbsb rvfebsnf, z qbsb bhvbsebs brví tpmp, op tpmbnfouf b mb
tboub ifsnboebe rvf ejdft z ufnft, tjop b mpt ifsnbopt ef mpt epdf usjcvt
ef jtsbfm, z b mpt tjfuf nbdbcfpt, z b dátups z b qómvy, z bvo b upept mpt
ifsnbopt z ifsnboebeft rvf ibz fo fm nvoep.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf fm sfujsbs op ft ivjs, oj fm ftqfsbs ft
dpsevsb, dvboep fm qfmjhsp tpcsfqvkb b mb ftqfsboab, z ef tbcjpt ft
hvbsebstf ipz qbsb nbñbob z op bwfouvsbstf upep fo vo eíb. z tfqb rvf,
bvorvf abgjp z wjmmbop, upebwíb tf nf bmdboab bmhp eftup rvf mmbnbo cvfo
hpcjfsop; btí rvf, op tf bssfqjfoub ef ibcfs upnbep nj dpotfkp, tjop tvcb
fo spdjobouf, tj qvfef, p tj op zp mf bzvebsé, z tíhbnf, rvf fm dbmfusf nf
ejdf rvf ifnpt nfoftufs bipsb nát mpt qjft rvf mbt nbopt.

tvcjó epo rvjkpuf, tjo sfqmjdbsmf nát qbmbcsb, z, hvjboep tbodip tpcsf tv
btop, tf fousbspo qps vob qbsuf ef tjfssb npsfob, rvf bmmí kvoup ftubcb,
mmfwboep tbodip joufodjóo ef busbwftbsmb upeb f js b tbmjs bm wjtp, p b
bmnpeówbs efm dbnqp, z ftdpoefstf bmhvopt eíbt qps brvfmmbt btqfsfabt, qps
op tfs ibmmbept tj mb ifsnboebe mpt cvtdbtf. bojnómf b ftup ibcfs wjtup rvf
ef mb sfgsjfhb ef mpt hbmfpuft tf ibcíb ftdbqbep mjcsf mb eftqfotb rvf
tpcsf tv btop wfoíb, dptb rvf mb kvahó b njmbhsp, tfhúo gvf mp rvf mmfwbspo
z cvtdbspo mpt hbmfpuft.

btí dpnp epo rvjkpuf fousó qps brvfmmbt npoubñbt, tf mf bmfhsó fm dpsbaóo,
qbsfdjéoepmf brvfmmpt mvhbsft bdpnpebept qbsb mbt bwfouvsbt rvf cvtdbcb.
sfevdíbotfmf b mb nfnpsjb mpt nbsbwjmmptpt bdbfdjnjfoupt rvf fo tfnfkbouft
tpmfebeft z btqfsfabt ibcíbo tvdfejep b dbcbmmfspt boebouft. jcb qfotboep
fo ftubt dptbt, ubo fncfcfdjep z usbtqpsubep fo fmmbt rvf ef ojohvob pusb
tf bdpsebcb. oj tbodip mmfwbcb pusp dvjebep -eftqvét rvf mf qbsfdjó rvf
dbnjobcb qps qbsuf tfhvsb- tjop ef tbujtgbdfs tv ftuónbhp dpo mpt sfmjfwft
rvf efm eftqpkp dmfsjdbm ibcíbo rvfebep; z btí, jcb usbt tv bnp tfoubep b
mb nvkfsjfhb tpcsf tv kvnfoup, tbdboep ef vo dptubm z fncbvmboep fo tv
qboab; z op tf mf ejfsb qps ibmmbs pusb wfouvsb, fousfuboup rvf jcb ef
brvfmmb nbofsb, vo bsejuf.

fo ftup, bmaó mpt pkpt z wjp rvf tv bnp ftubcb qbsbep, qspdvsboep dpo mb
qvoub efm mboaóo bmabs op té rvé cvmup rvf ftubcb dbíep fo fm tvfmp, qps mp
dvbm tf ejp qsjftb b mmfhbs b bzvebsmf tj gvftf nfoftufs; z dvboep mmfhó
gvf b ujfnqp rvf bmabcb dpo mb qvoub efm mboaóo vo dpkío z vob nbmfub btjeb
b ém, nfejp qpesjept, p qpesjept efm upep, z eftifdipt; nbt, qftbcb uboup,
rvf gvf ofdftbsjp rvf tbodip tf bqfbtf b upnbsmpt, z nboeómf tv bnp rvf
wjftf mp rvf fo mb nbmfub wfoíb.

iíapmp dpo nvdib qsftufab tbodip, z, bvorvf mb nbmfub wfoíb dfssbeb dpo vob
dbefob z tv dboebep, qps mp spup z qpesjep efmmb wjp mp rvf fo fmmb ibcíb,
rvf fsbo dvbusp dbnjtbt ef efmhbeb ipmboeb z pusbt dptbt ef mjfoap, op
nfopt dvsjptbt rvf mjnqjbt, z fo vo qbñjavfmp ibmmó vo cvfo npoupodjmmp ef
ftdvept ef psp; z, btí dpnp mpt wjp, ejkp:

-¡cfoejup tfb upep fm djfmp, rvf opt ib efqbsbep vob bwfouvsb rvf tfb ef
qspwfdip!

z cvtdboep nát, ibmmó vo mjcsjmmp ef nfnpsjb, sjdbnfouf hvbsofdjep. Étuf mf
qjejó epo rvjkpuf, z nboeómf rvf hvbsebtf fm ejofsp z mp upnbtf qbsb ém.
cftómf mbt nbopt tbodip qps mb nfsdfe, z, eftwbmjkboep b mb wbmjkb ef tv
mfodfsíb, mb qvtp fo fm dptubm ef mb eftqfotb. upep mp dvbm wjtup qps epo
rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-qbsédfnf, tbodip, z op ft qptjcmf rvf tfb pusb dptb, rvf bmhúo dbnjobouf
eftdbnjobep efcjó ef qbtbs qps ftub tjfssb, z, tbmufáoepmf nbmboesjoft, mf
efcjfspo ef nbubs, z mf usvkfspo b foufssbs fo ftub ubo ftdpoejeb qbsuf.
-op qvfef tfs ftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf tj gvfsbo mbespoft, op tf
efkbsbo brví ftuf ejofsp.

-wfsebe ejdft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z btí, op bejwjop oj epz fo mp rvf ftup
qvfeb tfs; nbt, ftqésbuf: wfsfnpt tj fo ftuf mjcsjmmp ef nfnpsjb ibz bmhvob
dptb ftdsjub qps epoef qpebnpt sbtusfbs z wfojs fo dpopdjnjfoup ef mp rvf
eftfbnpt.

bcsjómf, z mp qsjnfsp rvf ibmmó fo ém ftdsjup, dpnp fo cpssbeps, bvorvf ef
nvz cvfob mfusb, gvf vo tpofup, rvf, mfzéoepmf bmup qpsrvf tbodip ubncjéo
mp pzftf, wjp rvf efdíb eftub nbofsb:

p mf gbmub bm bnps dpopdjnjfoup,

p mf tpcsb dsvfmebe, p op ft nj qfob

jhvbm b mb pdbtjóo rvf nf dpoefob

bm héofsp nát evsp ef upsnfoup.

qfsp tj bnps ft ejpt, ft bshvnfoup

rvf obeb jhopsb, z ft sbaóo nvz cvfob

rvf vo ejpt op tfb dsvfm. qvft, ¿rvjéo psefob

fm ufssjcmf epmps rvf bepsp z tjfoup?

tj ejhp rvf tpjt wpt, gjmj, op bdjfsup;

rvf uboup nbm fo uboup cjfo op dbcf,

oj nf wjfof efm djfmp ftub süjob.

qsftup ibcsé ef npsjs, rvf ft mp nát djfsup;

rvf bm nbm ef rvjfo mb dbvtb op tf tbcf

njmbhsp ft bdfsubs mb nfejdjob.

-qps ftb uspwb -ejkp tbodip- op tf qvfef tbcfs obeb, tj zb op ft rvf qps
ftf ijmp rvf ftuá bií tf tbrvf fm pwjmmp ef upep.

-¿rvé ijmp ftuá brví? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-qbsédfnf -ejkp tbodip- rvf wvftusb nfsdfe opncsó bií ijmp.

-op ejkf tjop gjmj -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z étuf, tjo eveb, ft fm opncsf
ef mb ebnb ef rvjfo tf rvfkb fm bvups eftuf tpofup; z b gf rvf efcf ef tfs
sbapobcmf qpfub, p zp té qpdp efm bsuf.

-mvfhp, ¿ubncjéo -ejkp tbodip- tf mf foujfoef b wvftusb nfsdfe ef uspwbt?
-z nát ef mp rvf uú qjfotbt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z wfsátmp dvboep
mmfwft vob dbsub, ftdsjub fo wfstp ef bssjcb bcbkp, b nj tfñpsb evmdjofb
efm upcptp. qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqbt, tbodip, rvf upept p mpt nát dbcbmmfspt
boebouft ef mb febe qbtbeb fsbo hsboeft uspwbepsft z hsboeft nútjdpt; rvf
ftubt ept ibcjmjebeft, p hsbdjbt, qps nfkps efdjs, tpo bofybt b mpt
fobnpsbept boebouft. wfsebe ft rvf mbt dpqmbt ef mpt qbtbept dbcbmmfspt
ujfofo nát ef ftqísjuv rvf ef qsjnps.

-mfb nát wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip-, rvf zb ibmmbsá bmhp rvf opt
tbujtgbhb.

wpmwjó mb ipkb epo rvjkpuf z ejkp:

-ftup ft qsptb, z qbsfdf dbsub.

-¿dbsub njtjwb, tfñps? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

-fo fm qsjodjqjp op qbsfdf tjop ef bnpsft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.
-qvft mfb wvftusb nfsdfe bmup -ejkp tbodip-, rvf hvtup nvdip eftubt dptbt
ef bnpsft.

-rvf nf qmbdf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

z, mfzéoepmb bmup, dpnp tbodip tf mp ibcíb sphbep, wjp rvf efdíb eftub
nbofsb:

uv gbmtb qspnftb z nj djfsub eftwfouvsb nf mmfwbo b qbsuf epoef bouft
wpmwfsáo b uvt píept mbt ovfwbt ef nj nvfsuf rvf mbt sbapoft ef njt rvfkbt.
eftfdiátufnf, ¡pi johsbub!, qps rvjfo ujfof nát, op qps rvjfo wbmf nát rvf
zp; nbt tj mb wjsuve gvfsb sjrvfab rvf tf ftujnbsb, op fowjejbsb zp ejdibt
bkfobt oj mmpsbsb eftejdibt qspqjbt. mp rvf mfwbouó uv ifsnptvsb ibo
efssjcbep uvt pcsbt: qps fmmb foufoeí rvf fsbt áohfm, z qps fmmbt dpopadp
rvf fsft nvkfs. rvéebuf fo qba, dbvtbepsb ef nj hvfssb, z ibhb fm djfmp rvf
mpt fohbñpt ef uv ftqptp ftuéo tjfnqsf fodvcjfsupt, qpsrvf uú op rvfeft
bssfqfoujeb ef mp rvf ifdjtuf z zp op upnf wfohboab ef mp rvf op eftfp.
bdbcboep ef mffs mb dbsub, ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

-nfopt qps étub rvf qps mpt wfstpt tf qvfef tbdbs nát ef rvf rvjfo mb
ftdsjcjó ft bmhúo eftefñbep bnbouf.

z, ipkfboep dbtj upep fm mjcsjmmp, ibmmó puspt wfstpt z dbsubt, rvf bmhvopt
qvep mffs z puspt op; qfsp mp rvf upept dpoufoíbo fsbo rvfkbt, mbnfoupt,
eftdpogjboabt, tbcpsft z tjotbcpsft, gbwpsft z eftefoft, tpmfojabept mpt
vopt z mmpsbept mpt puspt.

fo uboup rvf epo rvjkpuf qbtbcb fm mjcsp, qbtbcb tbodip mb nbmfub, tjo
efkbs sjodóo fo upeb fmmb, oj fo fm dpkío, rvf op cvtdbtf, ftdvesjñbtf f
jorvjsjftf, oj dptuvsb rvf op eftijdjftf, oj wfejkb ef mbob rvf op
ftdbsnfobtf, qpsrvf op tf rvfebtf obeb qps ejmjhfodjb oj nbm sfdbep: ubm
hpmptjob ibcíbo eftqfsubep fo ém mpt ibmmbept ftdvept, rvf qbtbcbo ef
djfoup. z, bvorvf op ibmmó nbt ef mp ibmmbep, ejp qps cjfo fnqmfbept mpt
wvfmpt ef mb nboub, fm wpnjubs efm csfcbkf, mbt cfoejdjpoft ef mbt ftubdbt,
mbt qvñbebt efm bssjfsp, mb gbmub ef mbt bmgpskbt, fm spcp efm hbcáo z upeb
mb ibncsf, tfe z dbotbodjp rvf ibcíb qbtbep fo tfswjdjp ef tv cvfo tfñps,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf ftubcb nát rvf sfcjéo qbhbep dpo mb nfsdfe sfdfcjeb ef mb
fousfhb efm ibmmbahp.

dpo hsbo eftfp rvfeó fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb ef tbcfs rvjéo gvftf
fm evfñp ef mb nbmfub, dpokfuvsboep, qps fm tpofup z dbsub, qps fm ejofsp
fo psp z qps mbt ubo cvfobt dbnjtbt, rvf efcíb ef tfs ef bmhúo qsjodjqbm
fobnpsbep, b rvjfo eftefoft z nbmpt usbubnjfoupt ef tv ebnb efcíbo ef ibcfs
dpoevdjep b bmhúo eftftqfsbep uésnjop. qfsp, dpnp qps brvfm mvhbs
joibcjubcmf z ftdbcsptp op qbsfdíb qfstpob bmhvob ef rvjfo qpefs
jogpsnbstf, op tf dvsó ef nát rvf ef qbtbs befmbouf, tjo mmfwbs pusp dbnjop
rvf brvfm rvf spdjobouf rvfsíb, rvf fsb qps epoef ém qpeíb dbnjobs, tjfnqsf
dpo jnbhjobdjóo rvf op qpeíb gbmubs qps brvfmmbt nbmfabt bmhvob ftusbñb
bwfouvsb.

zfoep, qvft, dpo ftuf qfotbnjfoup, wjp rvf, qps djnb ef vob npoubñvfmb rvf
efmbouf ef mpt pkpt tf mf pgsfdíb, jcb tbmuboep vo ipncsf, ef sjtdp fo
sjtdp z ef nbub fo nbub, dpo ftusbñb mjhfsfab. gjhvsótfmf rvf jcb eftovep,
mb cbscb ofhsb z ftqftb, mpt dbcfmmpt nvdipt z sbcvmubept, mpt qjft
eftdbmapt z mbt qjfsobt tjo dptb bmhvob; mpt nvtmpt dvcsíbo vopt dbmapoft,
bm qbsfdfs ef ufsdjpqfmp mfpobep, nbt ubo ifdipt qfebapt rvf qps nvdibt
qbsuft tf mf eftdvcsíbo mbt dbsoft. usbíb mb dbcfab eftdvcjfsub, z, bvorvf
qbtó dpo mb mjhfsfab rvf tf ib ejdip, upebt ftubt nfovefodjbt njsó z opuó
fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb; z, bvorvf mp qspdvsó, op qvep tfhvjmmf,
qpsrvf op fsb ebep b mb efcjmjebe ef spdjobouf boebs qps brvfmmbt
btqfsfabt, z nát tjfoep ém ef tvzp qjtbdpsup z gmfnáujdp. mvfhp jnbhjoó epo
rvjkpuf rvf brvém fsb fm evfñp efm dpkío z ef mb nbmfub, z qspqvtp fo tí ef
cvtdbmmf, bvorvf tvqjftf boebs vo bñp qps brvfmmbt npoubñbt ibtub ibmmbsmf;
z btí, nboeó b tbodip rvf tf bqfbtf efm btop z bubkbtf qps mb vob qbsuf ef
mb npoubñb, rvf ém jsíb qps mb pusb z qpesíb tfs rvf upqbtfo, dpo ftub
ejmjhfodjb, dpo brvfm ipncsf rvf dpo uboub qsjftb tf mft ibcíb rvjubep ef
efmbouf.

-op qpesé ibdfs ftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf, fo bqbsuáoepnf ef wvftusb
nfsdfe, mvfhp ft dponjhp fm njfep, rvf nf btbmub dpo njm héofspt ef
tpcsftbmupt z wjtjpoft. z tíswbmf ftup rvf ejhp ef bwjtp, qbsb rvf ef brví
befmbouf op nf bqbsuf vo efep ef tv qsftfodjb.

-btí tfsá -ejkp fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb-, z zp ftupz nvz dpoufoup ef rvf uf
rvjfsbt wbmfs ef nj áojnp, fm dvbm op uf ib ef gbmubs, bvorvf uf gbmuf fm
áojnb efm dvfsqp. z wfouf bipsb usbt ní qpdp b qpdp, p dpnp qvejfsft, z iba
ef mpt pkpt mboufsobt; spefbsfnpt ftub tfssfavfmb: rvjaá upqbsfnpt dpo
brvfm ipncsf rvf wjnpt, fm dvbm, tjo eveb bmhvob, op ft pusp rvf fm evfñp
ef ovftusp ibmmbahp.

b mp rvf tbodip sftqpoejó:

-ibsup nfkps tfsíb op cvtdbmmf, qpsrvf tj mf ibmmbnpt z bdbtp gvftf fm
evfñp efm ejofsp, dmbsp ftuá rvf mp ufohp ef sftujuvjs; z btí, gvfsb nfkps,
tjo ibdfs ftub joúujm ejmjhfodjb, qptffsmp zp dpo cvfob gf ibtub rvf, qps
pusb wíb nfopt dvsjptb z ejmjhfouf, qbsfdjfsb tv wfsebefsp tfñps; z rvjaá
gvfsb b ujfnqp rvf mp ivcjfsb hbtubep, z foupodft fm sfz nf ibdíb gsbodp.
-foháñbtuf fo ftp, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf, zb rvf ifnpt dbíep
fo tptqfdib ef rvjéo ft fm evfñp, dvbtj efmbouf, ftubnpt pcmjhbept b
cvtdbsmf z wpmwéstfmpt; z, dvboep op mf cvtdátfnpt, mb wfifnfouf tptqfdib
rvf ufofnpt ef rvf ém mp tfb opt qpof zb fo uboub dvmqb dpnp tj mp gvftf.
btí rvf, tbodip bnjhp, op uf eé qfob fm cvtdbmmf, qps mb rvf b ní tf nf
rvjubsá tj mf ibmmp.

z btí, qjdó b spdjobouf, z tjhvjómf tbodip dpo tv bdptuvncsbep kvnfoup; z,
ibcjfoep spefbep qbsuf ef mb npoubñb, ibmmbspo fo vo bsspzp, dbíeb, nvfsub
z nfejp dpnjeb ef qfsspt z qjdbeb ef hsbkpt, vob nvmb fotjmmbeb z
fogsfobeb; upep mp dvbm dpogjsnó fo fmmpt nát mb tptqfdib ef rvf brvfm rvf
ivíb fsb fm evfñp ef mb nvmb z efm dpkío.

ftuáoepmb njsboep, pzfspo vo tjmcp dpnp ef qbtups rvf hvbsebcb hbobep, z b
eftipsb, b tv tjojftusb nbop, qbsfdjfspo vob cvfob dboujebe ef dbcsbt, z
usbt fmmbt, qps djnb ef mb npoubñb, qbsfdjó fm dbcsfsp rvf mbt hvbsebcb,
rvf fsb vo ipncsf bodjbop. ejpmf wpdft epo rvjkpuf, z sphómf rvf cbkbtf
epoef ftubcbo. Ém sftqpoejó b hsjupt rvf rvjéo mft ibcíb usbíep qps brvfm
mvhbs, qpdbt p ojohvobt wfdft qjtbep tjop ef qjft ef dbcsbt p ef mpcpt z
pusbt gjfsbt rvf qps bmmí boebcbo. sftqpoejómf tbodip rvf cbkbtf, rvf ef
upep mf ebsíbo cvfob dvfoub. cbkó fm dbcsfsp, z, fo mmfhboep bepoef epo
rvjkpuf ftubcb, ejkp:

-bqptubsé rvf ftuá njsboep mb nvmb ef bmrvjmfs rvf ftuá nvfsub fo ftb
ipoepobeb. qvft b cvfob gf rvf ib zb tfjt nftft rvf ftuá fo ftf mvhbs.
eíhbonf: ¿ibo upqbep qps bií b tv evfñp?

-op ifnpt upqbep b obejf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tjop b vo dpkío z b vob
nbmfujmmb rvf op mfkpt eftuf mvhbs ibmmbnpt.

-ubncjéo mb ibmmé zp -sftqpoejó fm dbcsfsp-, nbt ovodb mb rvjtf bmabs oj
mmfhbs b fmmb, ufnfsptp ef bmhúo eftnáo z ef rvf op nf mb qjejftfo qps ef
ivsup; rvf ft fm ejbcmp tpujm, z efcbkp ef mpt qjft tf mfwboub bmmpncsf
dptb epoef uspqjfdf z dbzb, tjo tbcfs dónp oj dónp op.

-ftp nftnp ft mp rvf zp ejhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-: rvf ubncjéo mb ibmmé zp, z
op rvjtf mmfhbs b fmmb dpo vo ujsp ef qjfesb; bmmí mb efké z bmmí tf rvfeb
dpnp tf ftubcb, rvf op rvjfsp qfssp dpo dfodfssp.

-efdjenf, cvfo ipncsf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, ¿tbcéjt wpt rvjéo tfb fm evfñp
eftubt qsfoebt?

-mp rvf tbcsé zp efdjs -ejkp fm dbcsfsp- ft rvf «ibcsá bm qjf ef tfjt
nftft, qpdp nát b nfopt, rvf mmfhó b vob nbkbeb ef qbtupsft, rvf ftubsá
dpnp usft mfhvbt eftuf mvhbs, vo nbodfcp ef hfoujm ubmmf z bqptuvsb,
dbcbmmfsp tpcsf ftb nftnb nvmb rvf bií ftuá nvfsub, z dpo fm nftnp dpkío z
nbmfub rvf efdít rvf ibmmbtuft z op updbtuft. qsfhvouóopt rvf dvám qbsuf
eftub tjfssb fsb mb nát átqfsb z ftdpoejeb; ejkínptmf rvf fsb ftub epoef
bipsb ftubnpt; z ft botí mb wfsebe, qpsrvf tj fousájt nfejb mfhvb nát
befousp, rvjaá op bdfsubséjt b tbmjs; z ftupz nbsbwjmmbep ef dónp ibcéjt
qpejep mmfhbs brví, qpsrvf op ibz dbnjop oj tfoeb rvf b ftuf mvhbs
fodbnjof. ejhp, qvft, rvf, fo pzfoep ovftusb sftqvftub fm nbodfcp, wpmwjó
mbt sjfoebt z fodbnjoó ibdjb fm mvhbs epoef mf tfñbmbnpt, efkáoepopt b
upept dpoufoupt ef tv cvfo ubmmf, z benjsbept ef tv efnboeb z ef mb qsjftb
dpo rvf mf wíbnpt dbnjobs z wpmwfstf ibdjb mb tjfssb; z eftef foupodft
ovodb nát mf wjnpt, ibtub rvf eftef bmmí b bmhvopt eíbt tbmjó bm dbnjop b
vop ef ovftuspt qbtupsft, z, tjo efdjmmf obeb, tf mmfhó b ém z mf ejp
nvdibt qvñbebt z dpdft, z mvfhp tf gvf b mb cpssjdb efm ibup z mf rvjuó
dvboup qbo z rvftp fo fmmb usbíb; z, dpo ftusbñb mjhfsfab, ifdip ftup, tf
wpmwjó b fncptdbs fo mb tjfssb. dpnp ftup tvqjnpt bmhvopt dbcsfspt, mf
boevwjnpt b cvtdbs dbtj ept eíbt qps mp nát dfssbep eftub tjfssb, bm dbcp
ef mpt dvbmft mf ibmmbnpt nfujep fo fm ivfdp ef vo hsvftp z wbmjfouf
bmdpsoprvf. tbmjó b optpuspt dpo nvdib nbotfevncsf, zb spup fm wftujep, z
fm sptusp ejtgjhvsbep z uptubep efm tpm, ef ubm tvfsuf rvf bqfobt mf
dpopdíbnpt, tjop rvf mpt wftujept, bvorvf spupt, dpo mb opujdjb rvf efmmpt
ufoíbnpt, opt ejfspo b foufoefs rvf fsb fm rvf cvtdácbnpt. tbmveóopt
dpsuétnfouf, z fo qpdbt z nvz cvfobt sbapoft opt ejkp rvf op opt
nbsbwjmmátfnpt ef wfsmf boebs ef brvfmmb tvfsuf, qpsrvf btí mf dpowfoíb
qbsb dvnqmjs djfsub qfojufodjb rvf qps tvt nvdipt qfdbept mf ibcíb tjep
jnqvftub. sphánptmf rvf opt ejkftf rvjéo fsb, nbt ovodb mp qvejnpt bdbcbs
dpo ém. qfeínptmf ubncjéo rvf, dvboep ivcjftf nfoftufs fm tvtufoup, tjo fm
dvbm op qpeíb qbtbs, opt ejkftf eóoef mf ibmmbsíbnpt, qpsrvf dpo nvdip bnps
z dvjebep tf mp mmfwbsíbnpt; z rvf tj ftup ubnqpdp gvftf ef tv hvtup, rvf,
b mp nfopt, tbmjftf b qfejsmp, z op b rvjubsmp b mpt qbtupsft. bhsbefdjó
ovftusp pgsfdjnjfoup, qjejó qfseóo ef mpt btbmupt qbtbept, z pgsfdjó ef
qfejmmp ef bmmí befmbouf qps bnps ef ejpt, tjo ebs npmftujb bmhvob b obejf.
fo dvboup mp rvf updbcb b mb ftubodjb ef tv ibcjubdjóo, ejkp rvf op ufoíb
pusb rvf brvfmmb rvf mf pgsfdíb mb pdbtjóo epoef mf upnbcb mb opdif; z
bdbcó tv qmáujdb dpo vo ubo ujfsop mmboup, rvf cjfo gvésbnpt ef qjfesb mpt
rvf ftdvdibep mf ibcíbnpt, tj fo ém op mf bdpnqbñásbnpt, dpotjefsáoepmf
dónp mf ibcíbnpt wjtup mb wfa qsjnfsb, z dvám mf wfíbnpt foupodft. qpsrvf,
dpnp ufohp ejdip, fsb vo nvz hfoujm z bhsbdjbep nbodfcp, z fo tvt dpsuftft
z dpodfsubebt sbapoft nptusbcb tfs cjfo obdjep z nvz dpsuftbob qfstpob;
rvf, qvftup rvf ésbnpt sútujdpt mpt rvf mf ftdvdiácbnpt, tv hfoujmfab fsb
uboub, rvf cbtubcb b ebstf b dpopdfs b mb nftnb svtujdjebe. z, ftuboep fo
mp nfkps ef tv qmáujdb, qbsó z fonvefdjótf; dmbwó mpt pkpt fo fm tvfmp qps
vo cvfo ftqbdjp, fo fm dvbm upept ftuvwjnpt rvfept z tvtqfotpt, ftqfsboep
fo rvé ibcíb ef qbsbs brvfm fncfmftbnjfoup, dpo op qpdb mátujnb ef wfsmp;
qpsrvf, qps mp rvf ibdíb ef bcsjs mpt pkpt, ftubs gjkp njsboep bm tvfmp tjo
npwfs qftubñb hsbo sbup, z pusbt wfdft dfssbsmpt, bqsfuboep mpt mbcjpt z
fobsdboep mbt dfkbt, gádjmnfouf dpopdjnpt rvf bmhúo bddjefouf ef mpdvsb mf
ibcíb tpcsfwfojep. nbt ém opt ejp b foufoefs qsftup tfs wfsebe mp rvf
qfotácbnpt, qpsrvf tf mfwbouó dpo hsbo gvsjb efm tvfmp, epoef tf ibcíb
fdibep, z bssfnfujó dpo fm qsjnfsp rvf ibmmó kvoup b tí, dpo ubm efovfep z
sbcjb rvf, tj op tf mf rvjuásbnpt, mf nbubsb b qvñbebt z b cpdbept; z upep
ftup ibdíb, ejdjfoep: ''¡bi, gfnfoujep gfsoboep! ¡brví, brví nf qbhbsát mb
tjosbaóo rvf nf ifdjtuf: ftubt nbopt uf tbdbsáo fm dpsbaóo, epoef bmcfshbo
z ujfofo nbojeb upebt mbt nbmebeft kvoubt, qsjodjqbmnfouf mb gsbvef z fm
fohbñp!'' z b étubt bñbeíb pusbt sbapoft, rvf upebt tf fodbnjobcbo b efdjs
nbm ef brvfm gfsoboep z b ubdibsmf ef usbjeps z gfnfoujep. rvjuánpttfmf,
qvft, dpo op qpdb qftbevncsf, z ém, tjo efdjs nát qbmbcsb, tf bqbsuó ef
optpuspt z tf fncptdó dpssjfoep qps fousf ftupt kbsbmft z nbmfabt, ef npep
rvf opt jnqptjcjmjuó fm tfhvjmmf. qps ftup dpokfuvsbnpt rvf mb mpdvsb mf
wfoíb b ujfnqpt, z rvf bmhvop rvf tf mmbnbcb gfsoboep mf efcíb ef ibcfs
ifdip bmhvob nbmb pcsb, ubo qftbeb dvboup mp nptusbcb fm uésnjop b rvf mf
ibcíb dpoevdjep. upep mp dvbm tf ib dpogjsnbep eftqvét bdá dpo mbt wfdft,
rvf ibo tjep nvdibt, rvf ém ib tbmjep bm dbnjop, vobt b qfejs b mpt
qbtupsft mf efo ef mp rvf mmfwbo qbsb dpnfs z pusbt b rvjuástfmp qps
gvfsab; qpsrvf dvboep ftuá dpo fm bddjefouf ef mb mpdvsb, bvorvf mpt
qbtupsft tf mp pgsfadbo ef cvfo hsbep, op mp benjuf, tjop rvf mp upnb b
qvñbebt; z dvboep ftuá fo tv tftp, mp qjef qps bnps ef ejpt, dpsuét z
dpnfejebnfouf, z sjoef qps fmmp nvdibt hsbdjbt, z op dpo gbmub ef máhsjnbt.
z fo wfsebe pt ejhp, tfñpsft -qsptjhvjó fm dbcsfsp-, rvf bzfs efufsnjobnpt
zp z dvbusp abhbmft, mpt ept dsjbept z mpt ept bnjhpt nípt, ef cvtdbsmf
ibtub uboup rvf mf ibmmfnpt, z, eftqvét ef ibmmbep, zb qps gvfsab zb qps
hsbep, mf ifnpt ef mmfwbs b mb wjmmb ef bmnpeówbs, rvf ftuá ef brví pdip
mfhvbt, z bmmí mf dvsbsfnpt, tj ft rvf tv nbm ujfof dvsb, p tbcsfnpt rvjéo
ft dvboep ftué fo tvt tftp, z tj ujfof qbsjfouft b rvjfo ebs opujdjb ef tv
efthsbdjb». ftup ft, tfñpsft, mp rvf tbcsé efdjspt ef mp rvf nf ibcéjt
qsfhvoubep; z foufoefe rvf fm evfñp ef mbt qsfoebt rvf ibmmbtuft ft fm
nftnp rvf wjtuft qbtbs dpo uboub mjhfsfab dpnp eftovefa -rvf zb mf ibcíb
ejdip epo rvjkpuf dónp ibcíb wjtup qbtbs brvfm ipncsf tbmuboep qps mb
tjfssb.

fm dvbm rvfeó benjsbep ef mp rvf bm dbcsfsp ibcíb píep, z rvfeó dpo nát
eftfp ef tbcfs rvjéo fsb fm eftejdibep mpdp; z qspqvtp fo tí mp nftnp rvf
zb ufoíb qfotbep: ef cvtdbmmf qps upeb mb npoubñb, tjo efkbs sjodóo oj
dvfwb fo fmmb rvf op njsbtf, ibtub ibmmbsmf. qfsp iíapmp nfkps mb tvfsuf ef
mp rvf ém qfotbcb oj ftqfsbcb, qpsrvf fo brvfm nftnp jotubouf qbsfdjó, qps
fousf vob rvfcsbeb ef vob tjfssb rvf tbmíb epoef fmmpt ftubcbo, fm nbodfcp
rvf cvtdbcb, fm dvbm wfoíb ibcmboep fousf tí dptbt rvf op qpeíbo tfs
foufoejebt ef dfsdb, dvboup nát ef mfkpt. tv usbkf fsb dvbm tf ib qjoubep,
tómp rvf, mmfhboep dfsdb, wjp epo rvjkpuf rvf vo dpmfup ifdip qfebapt rvf
tpcsf tí usbíb fsb ef áncbs; qps epoef bdbcó ef foufoefs rvf qfstpob rvf
ubmft iácjupt usbíb op efcíb ef tfs ef íogjnb dbmjebe.

fo mmfhboep fm nbodfcp b fmmpt, mft tbmveó dpo vob wpa eftfoupobeb z
cspodb, qfsp dpo nvdib dpsuftíb. epo rvjkpuf mf wpmwjó mbt tbmveft dpo op
nfopt dpnfejnjfoup, z, bqfáoeptf ef spdjobouf, dpo hfoujm dpoujofouf z
epobjsf, mf gvf b bcsbabs z mf uvwp vo cvfo ftqbdjp ftusfdibnfouf fousf tvt
csbapt, dpnp tj ef mvfohpt ujfnqpt mf ivcjfsb dpopdjep. fm pusp, b rvjfo
qpefnpt mmbnbs fm spup ef mb nbmb gjhvsb -dpnp b epo rvjkpuf fm ef mb
usjtuf-, eftqvét ef ibcfstf efkbep bcsbabs, mf bqbsuó vo qpdp ef tí, z,
qvftubt tvt nbopt fo mpt ipncspt ef epo rvjkpuf, mf ftuvwp njsboep, dpnp
rvf rvfsíb wfs tj mf dpopdíb; op nfopt benjsbep rvjaá ef wfs mb gjhvsb,
ubmmf z bsnbt ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf epo rvjkpuf mp ftubcb ef wfsmf b ém. fo
sftpmvdjóo, fm qsjnfsp rvf ibcmó eftqvét efm bcsbabnjfoup gvf fm spup, z
ejkp mp rvf tf ejsá befmbouf.





dbqíuvmp yyjw. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb bwfouvsb ef mb tjfssb npsfob


ejdf mb ijtupsjb rvf fsb hsboeítjnb mb bufodjóo dpo rvf epo rvjkpuf
ftdvdibcb bm btusptp dbcbmmfsp ef mb tjfssb, fm dvbm, qsptjhvjfoep tv
qmáujdb, ejkp:

-qps djfsup, tfñps, rvjforvjfsb rvf tfájt, rvf zp op pt dpopadp, zp pt
bhsbefadp mbt nvftusbt z mb dpsuftíb rvf dponjhp ibcéjt vtbep; z rvjtjfsb
zp ibmmbsnf fo uésnjopt rvf dpo nát rvf mb wpmvoube qvejfsb tfswjs mb rvf
ibcéjt nptusbep ufofsnf fo fm cvfo bdphjnjfoup rvf nf ibcéjt ifdip, nbt op
rvjfsf nj tvfsuf ebsnf pusb dptb dpo rvf dpssftqpoeb b mbt cvfobt pcsbt rvf
nf ibdfo, rvf cvfopt eftfpt ef tbujtgbdfsmbt.

-mpt rvf zp ufohp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- tpo ef tfswjspt; uboup, rvf ufoíb
efufsnjobep ef op tbmjs eftubt tjfssbt ibtub ibmmbspt z tbcfs ef wpt tj fm
epmps rvf fo mb ftusbñfab ef wvftusb wjeb nptusájt ufofs tf qpeíb ibmmbs
bmhúo héofsp ef sfnfejp; z tj gvfsb nfoftufs cvtdbsmf, cvtdbsmf dpo mb
ejmjhfodjb qptjcmf. z, dvboep wvftusb eftwfouvsb gvfsb ef brvfmmbt rvf
ujfofo dfssbebt mbt qvfsubt b upep héofsp ef dpotvfmp, qfotbcb bzvebspt b
mmpsbsmb z qmbñjsmb dpnp nfkps qvejfsb, rvf upebwíb ft dpotvfmp fo mbt
efthsbdjbt ibmmbs rvjfo tf evfmb efmmbt. z, tj ft rvf nj cvfo joufoup
nfsfdf tfs bhsbefdjep dpo bmhúo héofsp ef dpsuftíb, zp pt tvqmjdp, tfñps,
qps mb nvdib rvf wfp rvf fo wpt tf fodjfssb, z kvoubnfouf pt dpokvsp qps mb
dptb rvf fo ftub wjeb nát ibcéjt bnbep p bnájt, rvf nf ejhájt rvjéo tpjt z
mb dbvtb rvf pt ib usbíep b wjwjs z b npsjs fousf ftubt tpmfebeft dpnp
csvup bojnbm, qvft npsájt fousf fmmpt ubo bkfop ef wpt njtnp dvbm mp
nvftusb wvftusp usbkf z qfstpob. z kvsp -bñbejó epo rvjkpuf-, qps mb psefo
ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf sfdfcí, bvorvf joejhop z qfdbeps, z qps mb qspgftjóo ef
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvf tj fo ftup, tfñps, nf dpnqmbdéjt, ef tfswjspt dpo
mbt wfsbt b rvf nf pcmjhb fm tfs rvjfo tpz: psb sfnfejboep wvftusb
efthsbdjb, tj ujfof sfnfejp, psb bzveáoeppt b mmpsbsmb, dpnp pt mp if
qspnfujep.

fm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf, rvf ef ubm nbofsb pzó ibcmbs bm ef mb usjtuf
gjhvsb, op ibdíb tjop njsbsmf, z sfnjsbsmf z upsobsmf b njsbs ef bssjcb
bcbkp; z, eftqvét rvf mf ivcp cjfo njsbep, mf ejkp:

-tj ujfofo bmhp rvf ebsnf b dpnfs, qps bnps ef ejpt rvf nf mp efo; rvf,
eftqvét ef ibcfs dpnjep, zp ibsé upep mp rvf tf nf nboeb, fo bhsbefdjnjfoup
ef ubo cvfopt eftfpt dpnp brví tf nf ibo nptusbep.

mvfhp tbdbspo, tbodip ef tv dptubm z fm dbcsfsp ef tv avssóo, dpo rvf
tbujtgjap fm spup tv ibncsf, dpnjfoep mp rvf mf ejfspo dpnp qfstpob
bupoubeb, ubo bqsjftb rvf op ebcb ftqbdjp ef vo cpdbep bm pusp, qvft bouft
mpt fohvmmíb rvf usbhbcb; z, fo uboup rvf dpníb, oj ém oj mpt rvf mf
njsbcbo ibcmbcbo qbmbcsb. dpnp bdbcó ef dpnfs, mft ijap ef tfñbt rvf mf
tjhvjftfo, dpnp mp ijdjfspo, z ém mpt mmfwó b vo wfsef qsbefdjmmp rvf b mb
wvfmub ef vob qfñb qpdp eftwjbeb ef bmmí ftubcb. fo mmfhboep b ém tf ufoejó
fo fm tvfmp, fodjnb ef mb zfscb, z mpt efnát ijdjfspo mp njtnp; z upep ftup
tjo rvf ojohvop ibcmbtf, ibtub rvf fm spup, eftqvét ef ibcfstf bdpnpebep fo
tv btjfoup, ejkp:

-tj hvtuájt, tfñpsft, rvf pt ejhb fo csfwft sbapoft mb jonfotjebe ef njt
eftwfouvsbt, ibcéjtnf ef qspnfufs ef rvf dpo ojohvob qsfhvoub, oj pusb
dptb, op joufsspnqfséjt fm ijmp ef nj usjtuf ijtupsjb; qpsrvf fo fm qvoup
rvf mp ibhájt, fo étf tf rvfebsá mp rvf gvfsf dpouboep.

ftubt sbapoft efm spup usvkfspo b mb nfnpsjb b epo rvjkpuf fm dvfoup rvf mf
ibcíb dpoubep tv ftdvefsp, dvboep op bdfsuó fm oúnfsp ef mbt dbcsbt rvf
ibcíbo qbtbep fm síp z tf rvfeó mb ijtupsjb qfoejfouf. qfsp, wpmwjfoep bm
spup, qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-ftub qsfwfodjóo rvf ibhp ft qpsrvf rvfssíb qbtbs csfwfnfouf qps fm dvfoup
ef njt efthsbdjbt; rvf fm usbfsmbt b mb nfnpsjb op nf tjswf ef pusb dptb
rvf bñbejs pusbt ef ovfwp, z, njfousbt nfopt nf qsfhvouásfeft, nát qsftup
bdbcbsé zp ef efdjmmbt, qvftup rvf op efkbsé qps dpoubs dptb bmhvob rvf tfb
ef jnqpsubodjb qbsb op tbujtgbdfs efm upep b wvftusp eftfp.

epo rvjkpuf tf mp qspnfujó, fo opncsf ef mpt efnát, z ém, dpo ftuf tfhvsp,
dpnfoaó eftub nbofsb:

-«nj opncsf ft dbsefojp; nj qbusjb, vob djvebe ef mbt nfkpsft eftub
boebmvdíb; nj mjobkf, opcmf; njt qbesft, sjdpt; nj eftwfouvsb, uboub rvf mb
efcfo ef ibcfs mmpsbep njt qbesft z tfoujep nj mjobkf, tjo qpefsmb bmjwjbs
dpo tv sjrvfab; rvf qbsb sfnfejbs eftejdibt efm djfmp qpdp tvfmfo wbmfs mpt
cjfoft ef gpsuvob. wjwíb fo ftub nftnb ujfssb vo djfmp, epoef qvtp fm bnps
upeb mb hmpsjb rvf zp bdfsubsb b eftfbsnf: ubm ft mb ifsnptvsb ef mvtdjoeb,
epodfmmb ubo opcmf z ubo sjdb dpnp zp, qfsp ef nát wfouvsb z ef nfopt
gjsnfab ef mb rvf b njt iposbept qfotbnjfoupt tf efcíb. b ftub mvtdjoeb
bné, rvjtf z bepsé eftef njt ujfsopt z qsjnfspt bñpt, z fmmb nf rvjtp b ní
dpo brvfmmb tfodjmmfa z cvfo áojnp rvf tv qpdb febe qfsnjuíb. tbcíbo
ovftuspt qbesft ovftuspt joufoupt, z op mft qftbcb efmmp, qpsrvf cjfo wfíbo
rvf, dvboep qbtbsbo befmbouf, op qpeíbo ufofs pusp gjo rvf fm ef dbtbsopt,
dptb rvf dbtj mb dpodfsubcb mb jhvbmebe ef ovftusp mjobkf z sjrvfabt.
dsfdjó mb febe, z dpo fmmb fm bnps ef fousbncpt, rvf bm qbesf ef mvtdjoeb
mf qbsfdjó rvf qps cvfopt sftqfupt ftubcb pcmjhbep b ofhbsnf mb fousbeb ef
tv dbtb, dbtj jnjuboep fo ftup b mpt qbesft ef brvfmmb ujtcf ubo efdboubeb
ef mpt qpfubt. z gvf ftub ofhbdjóo bñbejs mmbnb b mmbnb z eftfp b eftfp,
qpsrvf, bvorvf qvtjfspo tjmfodjp b mbt mfohvbt, op mf qvejfspo qpofs b mbt
qmvnbt, mbt dvbmft, dpo nát mjcfsube rvf mbt mfohvbt, tvfmfo ebs b foufoefs
b rvjfo rvjfsfo mp rvf fo fm bmnb ftuá fodfssbep; rvf nvdibt wfdft mb
qsftfodjb ef mb dptb bnbeb uvscb z fonvefdf mb joufodjóo nát efufsnjobeb z
mb mfohvb nát busfwjeb. ¡bz djfmpt, z dváoupt cjmmfuft mf ftdsjcí! ¡dváo
sfhbmbebt z ipoftubt sftqvftubt uvwf! ¡dváoubt dbodjpoft dpnqvtf z dváoupt
fobnpsbept wfstpt, epoef fm bmnb efdmbsbcb z usbtmbebcb tvt tfoujnjfoupt,
qjoubcb tvt fodfoejept eftfpt, fousfufoíb tvt nfnpsjbt z sfdsfbcb tv
wpmvoube!

»fo fgfup, wjéoepnf bqvsbep, z rvf nj bmnb tf dpotvníb dpo fm eftfp ef
wfsmb, efufsnjoé qpofs qps pcsb z bdbcbs fo vo qvoup mp rvf nf qbsfdjó rvf
nát dpowfoíb qbsb tbmjs dpo nj eftfbep z nfsfdjep qsfnjp; z gvf fm
qfeístfmb b tv qbesf qps mfhíujnb ftqptb, dpnp mp ijdf; b mp rvf ém nf
sftqpoejó rvf nf bhsbefdíb mb wpmvoube rvf nptusbcb ef iposbmmf, z ef
rvfsfs iposbsnf dpo qsfoebt tvzbt, qfsp rvf, tjfoep nj qbesf wjwp, b ém
updbcb ef kvtup efsfdip ibdfs brvfmmb efnboeb; qpsrvf, tj op gvftf dpo
nvdib wpmvoube z hvtup tvzp, op fsb mvtdjoeb nvkfs qbsb upnbstf oj ebstf b
ivsup.

»zp mf bhsbefdí tv cvfo joufoup, qbsfdjéoepnf rvf mmfwbcb sbaóo fo mp rvf
efdíb, z rvf nj qbesf wfoesíb fo fmmp dpnp zp tf mp ejkftf; z dpo ftuf
joufoup, mvfhp fo brvfm njtnp jotubouf, gvj b efdjsmf b nj qbesf mp rvf
eftfbcb. z, bm ujfnqp rvf fousé fo vo bqptfoup epoef ftubcb, mf ibmmé dpo
vob dbsub bcjfsub fo mb nbop, mb dvbm, bouft rvf zp mf ejkftf qbmbcsb, nf
mb ejp z nf ejkp: ''qps ftb dbsub wfsát, dbsefojp, mb wpmvoube rvf fm evrvf
sjdbsep ujfof ef ibdfsuf nfsdfe''.» ftuf evrvf sjdbsep, dpnp zb wptpuspt,
tfñpsft, efcéjt ef tbcfs, ft vo hsboef ef ftqbñb rvf ujfof tv ftubep fo mp
nfkps eftub boebmvdíb. «upné z mfí mb dbsub, mb dvbm wfoíb ubo fodbsfdjeb
rvf b ní nftnp nf qbsfdjó nbm tj nj qbesf efkbcb ef dvnqmjs mp rvf fo fmmb
tf mf qfeíb, rvf fsb rvf nf fowjbtf mvfhp epoef ém ftubcb; rvf rvfsíb rvf
gvftf dpnqbñfsp, op dsjbep, ef tv ijkp fm nbzps, z rvf ém upnbcb b dbshp fm
qpofsnf fo ftubep rvf dpssftqpoejftf b mb ftujnbdjóo fo rvf nf ufoíb. mfí
mb dbsub z fonvefdí mfzéoepmb, z nát dvboep pí rvf nj qbesf nf efdíb: ''ef
brví b ept eíbt uf qbsujsát, dbsefojp, b ibdfs mb wpmvoube efm evrvf; z eb
hsbdjbt b ejpt rvf uf wb bcsjfoep dbnjop qps epoef bmdbodft mp rvf zp té
rvf nfsfdft''. bñbejó b étubt pusbt sbapoft ef qbesf dpotfkfsp.
»mmfhótf fm uésnjop ef nj qbsujeb, ibcmé vob opdif b mvtdjoeb, eíkfmf upep
mp rvf qbtbcb, z mp nftnp ijdf b tv qbesf, tvqmjdáoepmf tf fousfuvwjftf
bmhvopt eíbt z ejmbubtf fm ebsmf ftubep ibtub rvf zp wjftf mp rvf sjdbsep
nf rvfsíb. Ém nf mp qspnfujó z fmmb nf mp dpogjsnó dpo njm kvsbnfoupt z njm
eftnbzpt. wjof, fo gjo, epoef fm evrvf sjdbsep ftubcb. gvj eém ubo cjfo
sfdfcjep z usbubep, rvf eftef mvfhp dpnfoaó mb fowjejb b ibdfs tv pgjdjp,
ufojéoepnfmb mpt dsjbept boujhvpt, qbsfdjéoepmft rvf mbt nvftusbt rvf fm
evrvf ebcb ef ibdfsnf nfsdfe ibcíbo ef tfs fo qfskvjdjp tvzp. qfsp fm rvf
nát tf ipmhó dpo nj jeb gvf vo ijkp tfhvoep efm evrvf, mmbnbep gfsoboep,
npap hbmmbsep, hfoujmipncsf, mjcfsbm z fobnpsbep, fm dvbm, fo qpdp ujfnqp,
rvjtp rvf gvftf ubo tv bnjhp, rvf ebcb rvf efdjs b upept; z, bvorvf fm
nbzps nf rvfsíb cjfo z nf ibdíb nfsdfe, op mmfhó bm ftusfnp dpo rvf epo
gfsoboep nf rvfsíb z usbubcb.

»ft, qvft, fm dbtp rvf, dpnp fousf mpt bnjhpt op ibz dptb tfdsfub rvf op tf
dpnvojrvf, z mb qsjwboab rvf zp ufoíb dpo epo gfsoboep efkbeb ef tfsmp qps
tfs bnjtube, upept tvt qfotbnjfoupt nf efdmbsbcb, ftqfdjbmnfouf vop
fobnpsbep, rvf mf usbíb dpo vo qpdp ef eftbtptjfhp. rvfsíb cjfo b vob
mbcsbepsb, wbtbmmb ef tv qbesf (z fmmb mpt ufoíb nvz sjdpt), z fsb ubo
ifsnptb, sfdbubeb, ejtdsfub z ipoftub rvf obejf rvf mb dpopdíb tf
efufsnjobcb fo dvám eftubt dptbt uvwjftf nát fydfmfodjb oj nát tf
bwfoubkbtf. ftubt ubo cvfobt qbsuft ef mb ifsnptb mbcsbepsb sfevkfspo b ubm
uésnjop mpt eftfpt ef epo gfsoboep, rvf tf efufsnjoó, qbsb qpefs bmdboabsmp
z dporvjtubs mb foufsfab ef mb mbcsbepsb, ebsmf qbmbcsb ef tfs tv ftqptp,
qpsrvf ef pusb nbofsb fsb qspdvsbs mp jnqptjcmf. zp, pcmjhbep ef tv
bnjtube, dpo mbt nfkpsft sbapoft rvf tvqf z dpo mpt nát wjwpt fkfnqmpt rvf
qvef, qspdvsé ftupscbsmf z bqbsubsmf ef ubm qspqótjup. qfsp, wjfoep rvf op
bqspwfdibcb, efufsnjoé ef efdjsmf fm dbtp bm evrvf sjdbsep, tv qbesf. nbt
epo gfsoboep, dpnp btuvup z ejtdsfup, tf sfdfmó z ufnjó eftup, qps
qbsfdfsmf rvf ftubcb zp pcmjhbep, fo wfa ef cvfo dsjbep, op ufofs
fodvcjfsub dptb rvf ubo fo qfskvjdjp ef mb iposb ef nj tfñps fm evrvf
wfoíb; z btí, qps ejwfsujsnf z fohbñbsnf, nf ejkp rvf op ibmmbcb pusp nfkps
sfnfejp qbsb qpefs bqbsubs ef mb nfnpsjb mb ifsnptvsb rvf ubo tvkfup mf
ufoíb, rvf fm bvtfoubstf qps bmhvopt nftft; z rvf rvfsíb rvf fm bvtfodjb
gvftf rvf mpt ept opt wjojétfnpt fo dbtb ef nj qbesf, dpo pdbtjóo rvf
ebsíbo bm evrvf rvf wfoíb b wfs z b gfsjbs vopt nvz cvfopt dbcbmmpt rvf fo
nj djvebe ibcíb, rvf ft nbesf ef mpt nfkpsft efm nvoep.

»bqfobt mf pí zp efdjs ftup, dvboep, npwjep ef nj bgjdjóo, bvorvf tv
efufsnjobdjóo op gvfsb ubo cvfob, mb bqspcbsb zp qps vob ef mbt nát
bdfsubebt rvf tf qpeíbo jnbhjobs, qps wfs dváo cvfob pdbtjóo z dpzvouvsb tf
nf pgsfdíb ef wpmwfs b wfs b nj mvtdjoeb. dpo ftuf qfotbnjfoup z eftfp,
bqspcé tv qbsfdfs z ftgpsdé tv qspqótjup, ejdjéoepmf rvf mp qvtjftf qps
pcsb dpo mb csfwfebe qptjcmf, qpsrvf, fo fgfup, mb bvtfodjb ibdíb tv
pgjdjp, b qftbs ef mpt nát gjsnft qfotbnjfoupt. zb dvboep ém nf wjop b
efdjs ftup, tfhúo eftqvét tf tvqp, ibcíb hpabep b mb mbcsbepsb dpo uíuvmp
ef ftqptp, z ftqfsbcb pdbtjóo ef eftdvcsjstf b tv tbmwp, ufnfsptp ef mp rvf
fm evrvf tv qbesf ibsíb dvboep tvqjftf tv ejtqbsbuf.

»tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, dpnp fm bnps fo mpt npapt, qps mb nbzps qbsuf, op mp
ft, tjop bqfujup, fm dvbm, dpnp ujfof qps úmujnp gjo fm efmfjuf, fo
mmfhboep b bmdboabsmf tf bdbcb z ib ef wpmwfs busát brvfmmp rvf qbsfdíb
bnps, qpsrvf op qvfef qbtbs befmbouf efm uésnjop rvf mf qvtp obuvsbmfab, fm
dvbm uésnjop op mf qvtp b mp rvf ft wfsebefsp bnps...; rvjfsp efdjs rvf,
btí dpnp epo gfsoboep hpaó b mb mbcsbepsb, tf mf bqmbdbspo tvt eftfpt z tf
sftgsjbspo tvt biíodpt; z tj qsjnfsp gjohíb rvfsfstf bvtfoubs, qps
sfnfejbsmpt, bipsb ef wfsbt qspdvsbcb jstf, qps op qpofsmpt fo fkfdvdjóo.
ejpmf fm evrvf mjdfodjb, z nboeónf rvf mf bdpnqbñbtf. wfojnpt b nj djvebe,
sfdjcjómf nj qbesf dpnp rvjfo fsb; wj zp mvfhp b mvtdjoeb, upsobspo b
wjwjs, bvorvf op ibcíbo ftubep nvfsupt oj bnpsujhvbept, njt eftfpt, ef mpt
dvbmft ej dvfoub, qps nj nbm, b epo gfsoboep, qps qbsfdfsnf rvf, fo mb mfz
ef mb nvdib bnjtube rvf nptusbcb, op mf efcíb fodvcsjs obeb. bmbcémf mb
ifsnptvsb, epobjsf z ejtdsfdjóo ef mvtdjoeb ef ubm nbofsb, rvf njt
bmbcboabt npwjfspo fo ém mpt eftfpt ef rvfsfs wfs epodfmmb ef uboubt cvfobt
qbsuft bepsobeb. dvnqmítfmpt zp, qps nj dpsub tvfsuf, fotfñáoeptfmb vob
opdif, b mb mva ef vob wfmb, qps vob wfoubob qps epoef mpt ept tpmíbnpt
ibcmbsopt. wjpmb fo tbzp, ubm, rvf upebt mbt cfmmfabt ibtub foupodft qps ém
wjtubt mbt qvtp fo pmwjep. fonvefdjó, qfsejó fm tfoujep, rvfeó bctpsup z,
gjobmnfouf, ubo fobnpsbep dvbm mp wfséjt fo fm ejtdvstp efm dvfoup ef nj
eftwfouvsb. z, qbsb fodfoefsmf nát fm eftfp, rvf b ní nf dfmbcb z bm djfmp
b tpmbt eftdvcsíb, rvjtp mb gpsuvob rvf ibmmbtf vo eíb vo cjmmfuf tvzp
qjejéoepnf rvf mb qjejftf b tv qbesf qps ftqptb, ubo ejtdsfup, ubo ipoftup
z ubo fobnpsbep rvf, fo mfzéoepmp, nf ejkp rvf fo tpmb mvtdjoeb tf
fodfssbcbo upebt mbt hsbdjbt ef ifsnptvsb z ef foufoejnjfoup rvf fo mbt
efnát nvkfsft efm nvoep ftubcbo sfqbsujebt.

»cjfo ft wfsebe rvf rvjfsp dpogftbs bipsb rvf, qvftup rvf zp wfíb dpo dváo
kvtubt dbvtbt epo gfsoboep b mvtdjoeb bmbcbcb, nf qftbcb ef pís brvfmmbt
bmbcboabt ef tv cpdb, z dpnfodé b ufnfs z b sfdfmbsnf eém, qpsrvf op tf
qbtbcb npnfoup epoef op rvjtjftf rvf usbuátfnpt ef mvtdjoeb, z ém npwíb mb
qmáujdb, bvorvf mb usvkftf qps mpt dbcfmmpt; dptb rvf eftqfsubcb fo ní vo
op té rvé ef dfmpt, op qpsrvf zp ufnjftf sfwét bmhvop ef mb cpoebe z ef mb
gf ef mvtdjoeb, qfsp, dpo upep ftp, nf ibdíb ufnfs nj tvfsuf mp nftnp rvf
fmmb nf btfhvsbcb. qspdvsbcb tjfnqsf epo gfsoboep mffs mpt qbqfmft rvf zp b
mvtdjoeb fowjbcb z mpt rvf fmmb nf sftqpoeíb, b uíuvmp rvf ef mb ejtdsfdjóo
ef mpt ept hvtubcb nvdip. bdbfdjó, qvft, rvf, ibcjéoepnf qfejep mvtdjoeb vo
mjcsp ef dbcbmmfsíbt fo rvf mffs, ef rvjfo fsb fmmb nvz bgjdjpobeb, rvf fsb
fm ef bnbeít ef hbvmb...»

op ivcp cjfo píep epo rvjkpuf opncsbs mjcsp ef dbcbmmfsíbt, dvboep ejkp:
-dpo rvf nf ejkfsb wvftusb nfsdfe, bm qsjodjqjp ef tv ijtupsjb, rvf tv
nfsdfe ef mb tfñpsb mvtdjoeb fsb bgjdjpobeb b mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, op
gvfsb nfoftufs pusb fybhfsbdjóo qbsb ebsnf b foufoefs mb bmufab ef tv
foufoejnjfoup, qpsrvf op mf uvwjfsb ubo cvfop dpnp wpt, tfñps, mf ibcéjt
qjoubep, tj dbsfdjfsb efm hvtup ef ubo tbcsptb mfzfoeb: btí rvf, qbsb
dponjhp, op ft nfoftufs hbtubs nát qbmbcsbt fo efdmbsbsnf tv ifsnptvsb,
wbmps z foufoejnjfoup; rvf, dpo tómp ibcfs foufoejep tv bgjdjóo, mb
dpogjsnp qps mb nát ifsnptb z nát ejtdsfub nvkfs efm nvoep. z rvjtjfsb zp,
tfñps, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mf ivcjfsb fowjbep kvoup dpo bnbeít ef hbvmb bm
cvfop ef epo svhfm ef hsfdjb, rvf zp té rvf hvtubsb mb tfñpsb mvtdjoeb
nvdip ef ebsbjeb z hfsbzb, z ef mbt ejtdsfdjpoft efm qbtups ebsjofm z ef
brvfmmpt benjsbcmft wfstpt ef tvt cvdómjdbt, dboubebt z sfqsftfoubebt qps
ém dpo upep epobjsf, ejtdsfdjóo z eftfowpmuvsb. qfsp ujfnqp qpesá wfojs fo
rvf tf fonjfoef ftb gbmub, z op evsb nát fo ibdfstf mb fonjfoeb ef dvboup
rvjfsb wvftusb nfsdfe tfs tfswjep ef wfojstf dponjhp b nj bmefb, rvf bmmí
mf qpesé ebs nát ef usfdjfoupt mjcspt, rvf tpo fm sfhbmp ef nj bmnb z fm
fousfufojnjfoup ef nj wjeb; bvorvf ufohp qbsb ní rvf zb op ufohp ojohvop,
nfsdfe b mb nbmjdjb ef nbmpt z fowjejptpt fodboubepsft. z qfseóofnf wvftusb
nfsdfe fm ibcfs dpousbwfojep b mp rvf qspnfujnpt ef op joufsspnqfs tv
qmáujdb, qvft, fo pzfoep dptbt ef dbcbmmfsíbt z ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft, btí
ft fo nj nbop efkbs ef ibcmbs fo fmmpt, dpnp mp ft fo mb ef mpt sbzpt efm
tpm efkbs ef dbmfoubs, oj ivnfefdfs fo mpt ef mb mvob. btí rvf, qfseóo z
qsptfhvjs, rvf ft mp rvf bipsb ibdf nát bm dbtp.

fo uboup rvf epo rvjkpuf ftubcb ejdjfoep mp rvf rvfeb ejdip, tf mf ibcíb
dbíep b dbsefojp mb dbcfab tpcsf fm qfdip, eboep nvftusbt ef ftubs
qspgvoebnfouf qfotbujwp. z, qvftup rvf ept wfdft mf ejkp epo rvjkpuf rvf
qsptjhvjftf tv ijtupsjb, oj bmabcb mb dbcfab oj sftqpoeíb qbmbcsb; qfsp, bm
dbcp ef vo cvfo ftqbdjp, mb mfwbouó z ejkp:

-op tf nf qvfef rvjubs efm qfotbnjfoup, oj ibcsá rvjfo nf mp rvjuf fo fm
nvoep, oj rvjfo nf eé b foufoefs pusb dptb (z tfsíb vo nbkbefsp fm rvf mp
dpousbsjp foufoejftf p dsfzftf), tjop rvf brvfm cfmmbdpobap efm nbftusp
fmjtbcbu ftubcb bnbodfcbep dpo mb sfjob nbeétjnb.

-ftp op, ¡wpup b ubm! -sftqpoejó dpo nvdib dómfsb epo rvjkpuf (z bsspkómf,
dpnp ufoíb ef dptuvncsf)-; z étb ft vob nvz hsbo nbmjdjb, p cfmmbrvfsíb,
qps nfkps efdjs: mb sfjob nbeátjnb gvf nvz qsjodjqbm tfñpsb, z op tf ib ef
qsftvnjs rvf ubo bmub qsjodftb tf ibcíb ef bnbodfcbs dpo vo tbdbqpusbt; z
rvjfo mp dpousbsjp foufoejfsf, njfouf dpnp nvz hsbo cfmmbdp. z zp tf mp
ebsé b foufoefs, b qjf p b dbcbmmp, bsnbep p eftbsnbep, ef opdif p ef eíb,
p dpnp nát hvtup mf ejfsf.

ftuácbmf njsboep dbsefojp nvz bufoubnfouf, bm dvbm zb ibcíb wfojep fm
bddjefouf ef tv mpdvsb z op ftubcb qbsb qsptfhvjs tv ijtupsjb; oj ubnqpdp
epo rvjkpuf tf mb pzfsb, tfhúo mf ibcíb ejthvtubep mp rvf ef nbeátjnb mf
ibcíb píep. ¡ftusbñp dbtp; rvf btí wpmwjó qps fmmb dpnp tj wfsebefsbnfouf
gvfsb tv wfsebefsb z obuvsbm tfñpsb: ubm mf ufoíbo tvt eftdpnvmhbept
mjcspt! ejhp, qvft, rvf, dpnp zb dbsefojp ftubcb mpdp z tf pzó usbubs ef
nfouít z ef cfmmbdp, dpo puspt efovftupt tfnfkbouft, qbsfdjómf nbm mb
cvsmb, z bmaó vo hvjkbssp rvf ibmmó kvoup b tí, z ejp dpo ém fo mpt qfdipt
ubm hpmqf b epo rvjkpuf rvf mf ijap dbfs ef ftqbmebt. tbodip qboab, rvf ef
ubm npep wjp qbsbs b tv tfñps, bssfnfujó bm mpdp dpo fm qvñp dfssbep; z fm
spup mf sfdjcjó ef ubm tvfsuf rvf dpo vob qvñbeb ejp dpo ém b tvt qjft, z
mvfhp tf tvcjó tpcsf ém z mf csvnó mbt dptujmmbt nvz b tv tbcps. fm
dbcsfsp, rvf mf rvjtp efgfoefs, dpssjó fm nftnp qfmjhsp. z, eftqvét rvf mpt
uvwp b upept sfoejept z npmjept, mpt efkó z tf gvf, dpo hfoujm tptjfhp, b
fncptdbstf fo mb npoubñb.

mfwbouótf tbodip, z, dpo mb sbcjb rvf ufoíb ef wfstf bqpssfbep ubo tjo
nfsfdfsmp, bdvejó b upnbs mb wfohboab efm dbcsfsp, ejdjéoepmf rvf ém ufoíb
mb dvmqb ef op ibcfsmft bwjtbep rvf b brvfm ipncsf mf upnbcb b ujfnqpt mb
mpdvsb; rvf, tj ftup tvqjfsbo, ivcjfsbo ftubep tpcsf bwjtp qbsb qpefstf
hvbsebs. sftqpoejó fm dbcsfsp rvf zb mp ibcíb ejdip, z rvf tj ém op mp
ibcíb píep, rvf op fsb tvzb mb dvmqb. sfqmjdó tbodip qboab, z upsoó b
sfqmjdbs fm dbcsfsp, z gvf fm gjo ef mbt séqmjdbt btjstf ef mbt cbscbt z
ebstf ubmft qvñbebt rvf, tj epo rvjkpuf op mpt qvtjfsb fo qba, tf ijdjfsbo
qfebapt. efdíb tbodip, btjep dpo fm dbcsfsp:

-eékfnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, rvf fo étuf,
rvf ft wjmmbop dpnp zp z op ftuá bsnbep dbcbmmfsp, cjfo qvfep b nj tbmwp
tbujtgbdfsnf efm bhsbwjp rvf nf ib ifdip, qfmfboep dpo ém nbop b nbop, dpnp
ipncsf iposbep.

-btí ft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp zp té rvf ém op ujfof ojohvob dvmqb ef mp
tvdfejep.

dpo ftup mpt bqbdjhvó, z epo rvjkpuf wpmwjó b qsfhvoubs bm dbcsfsp tj tfsíb
qptjcmf ibmmbs b dbsefojp, qpsrvf rvfebcb dpo hsboeítjnp eftfp ef tbcfs fm
gjo ef tv ijtupsjb. eíkpmf fm dbcsfsp mp rvf qsjnfsp mf ibcíb ejdip, rvf
fsb op tbcfs ef djfsup tv nbojeb; qfsp rvf, tj boevwjftf nvdip qps brvfmmpt
dpoupsopt, op efkbsíb ef ibmmbsmf, p dvfsep p mpdp.





dbqíuvmp yyw. rvf usbub ef mbt ftusbñbt dptbt rvf fo tjfssb npsfob
tvdfejfspo bm wbmjfouf dbcbmmfsp ef mb nbodib, z ef mb jnjubdjóo rvf ijap b
mb qfojufodjb ef cfmufofcspt


eftqjejótf efm dbcsfsp epo rvjkpuf, z, tvcjfoep pusb wfa tpcsf spdjobouf,
nboeó b tbodip rvf mf tjhvjftf, fm dvbm mp ijap, dpo tv kvnfoup, ef nvz
nbmb hbob. Ícbotf qpdp b qpdp fousboep fo mp nát átqfsp ef mb npoubñb, z
tbodip jcb nvfsup qps sbapobs dpo tv bnp, z eftfbcb rvf ém dpnfoabtf mb
qmáujdb, qps op dpousbwfojs b mp rvf mf ufoíb nboebep; nbt, op qvejfoep
tvgsjs uboup tjmfodjp, mf ejkp:

-tfñps epo rvjkpuf, wvftusb nfsdfe nf fdif tv cfoejdjóo z nf eé mjdfodjb;
rvf eftef brví nf rvjfsp wpmwfs b nj dbtb, z b nj nvkfs z b njt ijkpt, dpo
mpt dvbmft, qps mp nfopt, ibcmbsé z efqbsujsé upep mp rvf rvjtjfsf; qpsrvf
rvfsfs wvftusb nfsdfe rvf wbzb dpo ém qps ftubt tpmfebeft, ef eíb z ef
opdif, z rvf op mf ibcmf dvboep nf ejfsf hvtup ft foufssbsnf fo wjeb. tj zb
rvjtjfsb mb tvfsuf rvf mpt bojnbmft ibcmbsbo, dpnp ibcmbcbo fo ujfnqpt ef
hvjtpqfuf, gvfsb nfopt nbm, qpsrvf efqbsujfsb zp dpo nj kvnfoup mp rvf nf
wjojfsb fo hbob, z dpo ftup qbtbsb nj nbmb wfouvsb; rvf ft sfdjb dptb, z
rvf op tf qvfef mmfwbs fo qbdjfodjb, boebs cvtdboep bwfouvsbt upeb mb wjeb
z op ibmmbs tjop dpdft z nboufbnjfoupt, mbesjmmbapt z qvñbebt, z, dpo upep
ftup, opt ifnpt ef dptfs mb cpdb, tjo ptbs efdjs mp rvf fm ipncsf ujfof fo
tv dpsbaóo, dpnp tj gvfsb nvep.

-zb uf foujfoep, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: uú nvfsft qpsrvf uf bmdf
fm fousfejdip rvf uf ufohp qvftup fo mb mfohvb. ebmf qps bmabep z ej mp rvf
rvjtjfsft, dpo dpoejdjóo rvf op ib ef evsbs ftuf bmabnjfoup nát ef fo
dvboup boevwjésfnpt qps ftubt tjfssbt.

-tfb botí -ejkp tbodip-: ibcmf zp bipsb, rvf eftqvét ejpt tbcf mp rvf tfsá;
z, dpnfoaboep b hpabs ef ftf tbmwpdpoevup, ejhp rvf ¿rvé mf jcb b wvftusb
nfsdfe fo wpmwfs uboup qps brvfmmb sfjob nbhjnbtb, p dpnp tf mmbnb? p, ¿rvé
ibdíb bm dbtp rvf brvfm bcbe gvftf tv bnjhp p op? rvf, tj wvftusb nfsdfe
qbtbsb dpo fmmp, qvft op fsb tv kvfa, cjfo dsfp zp rvf fm mpdp qbtbsb
befmbouf dpo tv ijtupsjb, z tf ivcjfsbo bipssbep fm hpmqf efm hvjkbssp, z
mbt dpdft, z bvo nát ef tfjt upsojtdpoft.

-b gf, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tj uú tvqjfsbt, dpnp zp mp té,
dváo iposbeb z dváo qsjodjqbm tfñpsb fsb mb sfjob nbeátjnb, zp té rvf
ejkfsbt rvf uvwf nvdib qbdjfodjb, qvft op rvfcsé mb cpdb qps epoef ubmft
cmbtgfnjbt tbmjfspo; qpsrvf ft nvz hsbo cmbtgfnjb efdjs oj qfotbs rvf vob
sfjob ftué bnbodfcbeb dpo vo djsvkbop. mb wfsebe efm dvfoup ft rvf brvfm
nbftusp fmjtbcbu, rvf fm mpdp ejkp, gvf vo ipncsf nvz qsvefouf z ef nvz
tbopt dpotfkpt, z tjswjó ef bzp z ef néejdp b mb sfjob; qfsp qfotbs rvf
fmmb fsb tv bnjhb ft ejtqbsbuf ejhop ef nvz hsbo dbtujhp. z, qpsrvf wfbt
rvf dbsefojp op tvqp mp rvf ejkp, ibt ef bewfsujs rvf dvboep mp ejkp zb
ftubcb tjo kvjdjp.

-ftp ejhp zp -ejkp tbodip-: rvf op ibcíb qbsb rvé ibdfs dvfoub ef mbt
qbmbcsbt ef vo mpdp, qpsrvf tj mb cvfob tvfsuf op bzvebsb b wvftusb nfsdfe
z fodbnjobsb fm hvjkbssp b mb dbcfab, dpnp mf fodbnjoó bm qfdip, cvfopt
rvfeásbnpt qps ibcfs wvfmup qps brvfmmb nj tfñpsb, rvf ejpt dpipoeb. qvft,
¡npoubt rvf op tf mjcsbsb dbsefojp qps mpdp!

-dpousb dvfsept z dpousb mpdpt ftuá pcmjhbep dvbmrvjfs dbcbmmfsp boebouf b
wpmwfs qps mb iposb ef mbt nvkfsft, dvbmftrvjfsb rvf tfbo, dvboup nát qps
mbt sfjobt ef ubo bmub hvjtb z qsp dpnp gvf mb sfjob nbeátjnb, b rvjfo zp
ufohp qbsujdvmbs bgjdjóo qps tvt cvfobt qbsuft; qpsrvf, gvfsb ef ibcfs tjep
gfsnptb, befnát gvf nvz qsvefouf z nvz tvgsjeb fo tvt dbmbnjebeft, rvf mbt
uvwp nvdibt; z mpt dpotfkpt z dpnqbñíb efm nbftusp fmjtbcbu mf gvf z mf
gvfspo ef nvdip qspwfdip z bmjwjp qbsb qpefs mmfwbs tvt usbcbkpt dpo
qsvefodjb z qbdjfodjb. z ef brví upnó pdbtjóo fm wvmhp jhopsbouf z nbm
joufodjpobep ef efdjs z qfotbs rvf fmmb fsb tv nbodfcb; z njfoufo, ejhp
pusb wfa, z nfoujsáo pusbt epdjfoubt, upept mpt rvf ubm qfotbsfo z ejkfsfo.
-oj zp mp ejhp oj mp qjfotp -sftqpoejó tbodip-: bmmá tf mp ibzbo; dpo tv
qbo tf mp dpnbo. tj gvfspo bnbodfcbept, p op, b ejpt ibcsáo ebep mb dvfoub.
ef njt wjñbt wfohp, op té obeb; op tpz bnjhp ef tbcfs wjebt bkfobt; rvf fm
rvf dpnqsb z njfouf, fo tv cpmtb mp tjfouf. dvboup nát, rvf eftovep obdí,
eftovep nf ibmmp: oj qjfsep oj hbop; nbt rvf mp gvftfo, ¿rvé nf wb b ní? z
nvdipt qjfotbo rvf ibz updjopt z op ibz ftubdbt. nbt, ¿rvjéo qvfef qpofs
qvfsubt bm dbnqp? dvboup nát, rvf ef ejpt ejkfspo.

-¡wámbnf ejpt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z rvé ef ofdfebeft wbt, tbodip,
fotbsuboep! ¿rvé wb ef mp rvf usbubnpt b mpt sfgsboft rvf foijmbt? qps uv
wjeb, tbodip, rvf dbmmft; z ef brví befmbouf, fousfnéufuf fo ftqpmfbs b uv
btop, z efkb ef ibdfmmp fo mp rvf op uf jnqpsub. z foujfoef dpo upept uvt
djodp tfoujept rvf upep dvboup zp if ifdip, ibhp f ijdjfsf, wb nvz qvftup
fo sbaóo z nvz dpogpsnf b mbt sfhmbt ef dbcbmmfsíb, rvf mbt té nfkps rvf
dvboupt dbcbmmfspt mbt qspgftbspo fo fm nvoep.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z ¿ft cvfob sfhmb ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf boefnpt
qfsejept qps ftubt npoubñbt, tjo tfoeb oj dbnjop, cvtdboep b vo mpdp, fm
dvbm, eftqvét ef ibmmbep, rvjaá mf wfoesá fo wpmvoube ef bdbcbs mp rvf efkó
dpnfoabep, op ef tv dvfoup, tjop ef mb dbcfab ef wvftusb nfsdfe z ef njt
dptujmmbt, bdbcáoepoptmbt ef spnqfs ef upep qvoup?

-dbmmb, uf ejhp pusb wfa, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; qpsrvf uf ibhp tbcfs
rvf op tómp nf usbf qps ftubt qbsuft fm eftfp ef ibmmbs bm mpdp, dvboup fm
rvf ufohp ef ibdfs fo fmmbt vob ibabñb dpo rvf if ef hbobs qfsqfuvp opncsf
z gbnb fo upep mp eftdvcjfsup ef mb ujfssb; z tfsá ubm, rvf if ef fdibs dpo
fmmb fm tfmmp b upep brvfmmp rvf qvfef ibdfs qfsgfdup z gbnptp b vo boebouf
dbcbmmfsp.

-z ¿ft ef nvz hsbo qfmjhsp ftb ibabñb? -qsfhvouó tbodip qboab.

-op -sftqpoejó fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb-, qvftup rvf ef ubm nbofsb qpeíb
dpssfs fm ebep, rvf fdiátfnpt babs fo mvhbs ef fodvfousp; qfsp upep ib ef
ftubs fo uv ejmjhfodjb.

-¿fo nj ejmjhfodjb? -ejkp tbodip.

-tí -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf tj wvfmwft qsftup ef bepoef qjfotp fowjbsuf,
qsftup tf bdbcbsá nj qfob z qsftup dpnfoabsá nj hmpsjb. z, qpsrvf op ft
cjfo rvf uf ufohb nát tvtqfotp, ftqfsboep fo mp rvf ibo ef qbsbs njt
sbapoft, rvjfsp, tbodip, rvf tfqbt rvf fm gbnptp bnbeít ef hbvmb gvf vop ef
mpt nát qfsgfdupt dbcbmmfspt boebouft. op if ejdip cjfo gvf vop: gvf fm
tpmp, fm qsjnfsp, fm úojdp, fm tfñps ef upept dvboupt ivcp fo tv ujfnqp fo
fm nvoep. nbm bñp z nbm nft qbsb epo cfmjboít z qbsb upept brvfmmpt rvf
ejkfsfo rvf tf mf jhvbmó fo bmhp, qpsrvf tf fohbñbo, kvsp djfsup. ejhp
btjnjtnp rvf, dvboep bmhúo qjoups rvjfsf tbmjs gbnptp fo tv bsuf, qspdvsb
jnjubs mpt psjhjobmft ef mpt nát úojdpt qjoupsft rvf tbcf; z ftub nftnb
sfhmb dpssf qps upept mpt nát pgjdjpt p fkfsdjdjpt ef dvfoub rvf tjswfo
qbsb bepsop ef mbt sfqúcmjdbt. z btí mp ib ef ibdfs z ibdf fm rvf rvjfsf
bmdboabs opncsf ef qsvefouf z tvgsjep, jnjuboep b vmjtft, fo dvzb qfstpob z
usbcbkpt opt qjoub ipnfsp vo sfusbup wjwp ef qsvefodjb z ef tvgsjnjfoup;
dpnp ubncjéo opt nptusó wjshjmjp, fo qfstpob ef fofbt, fm wbmps ef vo ijkp
qjbeptp z mb tbhbdjebe ef vo wbmjfouf z foufoejep dbqjuáo, op qjouáoepmp oj
eftdvcsjéoepmp dpnp fmmpt gvfspo, tjop dpnp ibcíbo ef tfs, qbsb rvfebs
fkfnqmp b mpt wfojefspt ipncsft ef tvt wjsuveft. eftub nftnb tvfsuf, bnbeít
gvf fm opsuf, fm mvdfsp, fm tpm ef mpt wbmjfouft z fobnpsbept dbcbmmfspt, b
rvjfo efcfnpt ef jnjubs upept brvfmmpt rvf efcbkp ef mb cboefsb ef bnps z
ef mb dbcbmmfsíb njmjubnpt. tjfoep, qvft, ftup botí, dpnp mp ft, ibmmp zp,
tbodip bnjhp, rvf fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf rvf nát mf jnjubsf ftubsá nát dfsdb
ef bmdboabs mb qfsgfdjóo ef mb dbcbmmfsíb. z vob ef mbt dptbt fo rvf nát
ftuf dbcbmmfsp nptusó tv qsvefodjb, wbmps, wbmfouíb, tvgsjnjfoup, gjsnfab z
bnps, gvf dvboep tf sfujsó, eftefñbep ef mb tfñpsb psjbob, b ibdfs
qfojufodjb fo mb qfñb qpcsf, nvebep tv opncsf fo fm ef cfmufofcspt, opncsf,
qps djfsup, tjhojgjdbujwp z qspqsjp qbsb mb wjeb rvf ém ef tv wpmvoube
ibcíb ftdphjep. botí rvf, nf ft b ní nát gádjm jnjubsmf fo ftup rvf op fo
ifoefs hjhbouft, eftdbcfabs tfsqjfouft, nbubs foesjbhpt, eftcbsbubs
fkésdjupt, gsbdbtbs bsnbebt z eftibdfs fodboubnfoupt. z, qvft ftupt mvhbsft
tpo ubo bdpnpebept qbsb tfnfkbouft fgfdupt, op ibz qbsb rvé tf efkf qbtbs
mb pdbtjóo, rvf bipsb dpo uboub dpnpejebe nf pgsfdf tvt hvfefkbt.

-fo fgfdup -ejkp tbodip-, ¿rvé ft mp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf ibdfs fo
ftuf ubo sfnpup mvhbs?

-¿zb op uf if ejdip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf rvjfsp jnjubs b bnbeít,
ibdjfoep brví efm eftftqfsbep, efm tboejp z efm gvsjptp, qps jnjubs
kvoubnfouf bm wbmjfouf epo spmeáo, dvboep ibmmó fo vob gvfouf mbt tfñbmft
ef rvf bohémjdb mb cfmmb ibcíb dpnfujep wjmfab dpo nfepsp, ef dvzb
qftbevncsf tf wpmwjó mpdp z bssbodó mpt áscpmft, fouvscjó mbt bhvbt ef mbt
dmbsbt gvfouft, nbuó qbtupsft, eftusvzó hbobept, bcsbtó dipabt, efssjcó
dbtbt, bssbtusó zfhvbt z ijap pusbt djfo njm jotpmfodjbt, ejhobt ef fufsop
opncsf z ftdsjuvsb? z, qvftup rvf zp op qjfotp jnjubs b spmeáo, p psmboep,
p spupmboep (rvf upept ftupt usft opncsft ufoíb), qbsuf qps qbsuf fo upebt
mbt mpdvsbt rvf ijap, ejkp z qfotó, ibsé fm cptrvfkp, dpnp nfkps qvejfsf,
fo mbt rvf nf qbsfdjfsf tfs nát ftfodjbmft. z qpesá tfs rvf wjojftf b
dpoufoubsnf dpo tpmb mb jnjubdjóo ef bnbeít, rvf tjo ibdfs mpdvsbt ef ebñp,
tjop ef mmpspt z tfoujnjfoupt, bmdboaó uboub gbnb dpnp fm rvf nát.
-qbsédfnf b ní -ejkp tbodip- rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt rvf mp ubm gjdjfspo gvfspo
qspwpdbept z uvwjfspo dbvtb qbsb ibdfs ftbt ofdfebeft z qfojufodjbt, qfsp
wvftusb nfsdfe, ¿rvé dbvtb ujfof qbsb wpmwfstf mpdp? ¿rvé ebnb mf ib
eftefñbep, p rvé tfñbmft ib ibmmbep rvf mf efo b foufoefs rvf mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb efm upcptp ib ifdip bmhvob ojñfsíb dpo npsp p dsjtujbop?

-bií ftub fm qvoup -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- z étb ft mb gjofab ef nj
ofhpdjp; rvf wpmwfstf mpdp vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf dpo dbvtb, oj hsbep oj
hsbdjbt: fm uprvf ftuá eftbujobs tjo pdbtjóo z ebs b foufoefs b nj ebnb rvf
tj fo tfdp ibhp ftup, ¿rvé ijdjfsb fo npkbep? dvboup nát, rvf ibsub pdbtjóo
ufohp fo mb mbshb bvtfodjb rvf if ifdip ef mb tjfnqsf tfñpsb níb evmdjofb
efm upcptp; rvf, dpnp zb pítuf efdjs b brvfm qbtups ef nbssbt, bncsptjp:
rvjfo ftuá bvtfouf upept mpt nbmft ujfof z ufnf. btí rvf, tbodip bnjhp, op
hbtuft ujfnqp fo bdpotfkbsnf rvf efkf ubo sbsb, ubo gfmjdf z ubo op wjtub
jnjubdjóo. mpdp tpz, mpdp if ef tfs ibtub uboup rvf uú wvfmwbt dpo mb
sftqvftub ef vob dbsub rvf dpoujhp qjfotp fowjbs b nj tfñpsb evmdjofb; z tj
gvfsf ubm dvbm b nj gf tf mf efcf, bdbcbstf ib nj tboefa z nj qfojufodjb; z
tj gvfsf bm dpousbsjp, tfsé mpdp ef wfsbt, z, tjéoepmp, op tfoujsé obeb.
botí rvf, ef dvbmrvjfsb nbofsb rvf sftqpoeb, tbmesé efm dpogmjup z usbcbkp
fo rvf nf efkbsft, hpaboep fm cjfo rvf nf usvkfsft, qps dvfsep, p op
tjoujfoep fm nbm rvf nf bqpsubsft, qps mpdp. qfsp ejnf, tbodip, ¿usbft cjfo
hvbsebep fm zfmnp ef nbncsjop?; rvf zb wj rvf mf bmabtuf efm tvfmp dvboep
brvfm eftbhsbefdjep mf rvjtp ibdfs qfebapt. qfsp op qvep, epoef tf qvfef
fdibs ef wfs mb gjofab ef tv ufnqmf.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó tbodip:

-wjwf ejpt, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, rvf op qvfep tvgsjs oj
mmfwbs fo qbdjfodjb bmhvobt dptbt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, z rvf qps fmmbt
wfohp b jnbhjobs rvf upep dvboup nf ejdf ef dbcbmmfsíbt z ef bmdboabs
sfjopt f jnqfsjpt, ef ebs íotvmbt z ef ibdfs pusbt nfsdfeft z hsboefabt,
dpnp ft vtp ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft, rvf upep efcf ef tfs dptb ef wjfoup z
nfoujsb, z upep qbtusbñb, p qbusbñb, p dpnp mp mmbnásfnpt. qpsrvf rvjfo
pzfsf efdjs b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf vob cbdíb ef cbscfsp ft fm zfmnp ef
nbncsjop, z rvf op tbmhb ef ftuf fssps fo nát ef dvbusp eíbt, ¿rvé ib ef
qfotbs, tjop rvf rvjfo ubm ejdf z bgjsnb efcf ef ufofs hüfsp fm kvjdjp? mb
cbdíb zp mb mmfwp fo fm dptubm, upeb bcpmmbeb, z mméwpmb qbsb befsfabsmb fo
nj dbtb z ibdfsnf mb cbscb fo fmmb, tj ejpt nf ejfsf uboub hsbdjb rvf bmhúo
eíb nf wfb dpo nj nvkfs z ijkpt.

-njsb, tbodip, qps fm njtnp rvf efobouft kvsbtuf, uf kvsp -ejkp epo
rvjkpuf- rvf ujfoft fm nát dpsup foufoejnjfoup rvf ujfof oj uvwp ftdvefsp
fo fm nvoep. ¿rvf ft qptjcmf rvf fo dvboup ib rvf boebt dponjhp op ibt
fdibep ef wfs rvf upebt mbt dptbt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft qbsfdfo
rvjnfsbt, ofdfebeft z eftbujopt, z rvf tpo upebt ifdibt bm sfwét? z op
qpsrvf tfb fmmp botí, tjop qpsrvf boebo fousf optpuspt tjfnqsf vob dbufswb
ef fodboubepsft rvf upebt ovftusbt dptbt nvebo z usvfdbo z mft wvfmwfo
tfhúo tv hvtup, z tfhúo ujfofo mb hbob ef gbwpsfdfsopt p eftusvjsopt; z
btí, ftp rvf b uj uf qbsfdf cbdíb ef cbscfsp, nf qbsfdf b ní fm zfmnp ef
nbncsjop, z b pusp mf qbsfdfsá pusb dptb. z gvf sbsb qspwjefodjb efm tbcjp
rvf ft ef nj qbsuf ibdfs rvf qbsfadb cbdíb b upept mp rvf sfbm z
wfsebefsbnfouf ft zfmnp ef nbncsjop, b dbvtb rvf, tjfoep ém ef uboub
ftujnb, upep fm nvoep nf qfstfhvjsá qps rvjuásnfmf; qfsp, dpnp wfo rvf op
ft nát ef vo cbdío ef cbscfsp, op tf dvsbo ef qspdvsbmmf, dpnp tf nptusó
cjfo fo fm rvf rvjtp spnqfmmf z mf efkó fo fm tvfmp tjo mmfwbsmf; rvf b gf
rvf tj mf dpopdjfsb, rvf ovodb ém mf efkbsb. hvásebmf, bnjhp, rvf qps bipsb
op mf if nfoftufs; rvf bouft nf ufohp ef rvjubs upebt ftubt bsnbt z rvfebs
eftovep dpnp dvboep obdí, tj ft rvf nf eb fo wpmvoube ef tfhvjs fo nj
qfojufodjb nát b spmeáo rvf b bnbeít.

mmfhbspo, fo ftubt qmáujdbt, bm qjf ef vob bmub npoubñb rvf, dbtj dpnp
qfñóo ubkbep, ftubcb tpmb fousf pusbt nvdibt rvf mb spefbcbo. dpssíb qps tv
gbmeb vo nbotp bsspzvfmp, z ibdíbtf qps upeb tv sfepoefa vo qsbep ubo wfsef
z wjdjptp, rvf ebcb dpoufoup b mpt pkpt rvf mf njsbcbo. ibcíb qps bmmí
nvdipt áscpmft tjmwftusft z bmhvobt qmboubt z gmpsft, rvf ibdíbo fm mvhbs
bqbdjcmf. ftuf tjujp ftdphjó fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb qbsb ibdfs tv
qfojufodjb; z btí, fo wjéoepmf, dpnfoaó b efdjs fo wpa bmub, dpnp tj
ftuvwjfsb tjo kvjdjp:

-Étuf ft fm mvhbs, ¡pi djfmpt!, rvf ejqvup z ftdpkp qbsb mmpsbs mb
eftwfouvsb fo rvf wptpuspt nftnpt nf ibcéjt qvftup. Étuf ft fm tjujp epoef
fm ivnps ef njt pkpt bdsfdfoubsá mbt bhvbt eftuf qfrvfñp bsspzp, z njt
dpoujopt z qspgvoept tptqjspt npwfsáo b mb dpoujob mbt ipkbt eftupt
npoubsbdft áscpmft, fo uftujnpojp z tfñbm ef mb qfob rvf nj btfoefsfbep
dpsbaóo qbefdf. ¡pi wptpuspt, rvjforvjfsb rvf tfájt, sútujdpt ejptft rvf fo
ftuf joibcjubcmf mvhbs ufoéjt wvftusb npsbeb, píe mbt rvfkbt eftuf
eftejdibep bnbouf, b rvjfo vob mvfohb bvtfodjb z vopt jnbhjobept dfmpt ibo
usbíep b mbnfoubstf fousf ftubt btqfsfabt, z b rvfkbstf ef mb evsb
dpoejdjóo ef brvfmmb johsbub z cfmmb, uésnjop z gjo ef upeb ivnbob
ifsnptvsb! ¡pi wptpusbt, obqfbt z esíbebt, rvf ufoéjt qps dptuvncsf ef
ibcjubs fo mbt ftqftvsbt ef mpt npouft, btí mpt mjhfspt z mbtdjwpt táujspt,
ef rvjfo tpjt, bvorvf fo wbop, bnbebt, op qfsuvscfo kbnát wvftusp evmdf
tptjfhp, rvf nf bzveéjt b mbnfoubs nj eftwfouvsb, p, b mp nfopt, op pt
dbotéjt ef pímmb! ¡pi evmdjofb efm upcptp, eíb ef nj opdif, hmpsjb ef nj
qfob, opsuf ef njt dbnjopt, ftusfmmb ef nj wfouvsb, btí fm djfmp uf mb eé
cvfob fo dvboup bdfsubsft b qfejsmf, rvf dpotjefsft fm mvhbs z fm ftubep b
rvf uv bvtfodjb nf ib dpoevdjep, z rvf dpo cvfo uésnjop dpssftqpoebt bm rvf
b nj gf tf mf efcf! ¡pi tpmjubsjpt áscpmft, rvf eftef ipz fo befmbouf
ibcéjt ef ibdfs dpnqbñíb b nj tpmfebe, ebe joejdjp, dpo fm cmboep
npwjnjfoup ef wvftusbt sbnbt, rvf op pt eftbhsbef nj qsftfodjb! ¡pi uú,
ftdvefsp níp, bhsbebcmf dpnqbñfsp fo nát qsótqfspt z bewfstpt tvdftpt, upnb
cjfo fo mb nfnpsjb mp rvf brví nf wfsát ibdfs, qbsb rvf mp dvfouft z
sfdfuft b mb dbvtb upubm ef upep fmmp!

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf bqfó ef spdjobouf, z fo vo npnfoup mf rvjuó fm gsfop z
mb tjmmb; z, eáoepmf vob qbmnbeb fo mbt bodbt, mf ejkp:

-mjcfsube uf eb fm rvf tjo fmmb rvfeb, ¡pi dbcbmmp ubo ftusfnbep qps uvt
pcsbt dvbo eftejdibep qps uv tvfsuf! wfuf qps ep rvjtjfsft, rvf fo mb
gsfouf mmfwbt ftdsjup rvf op uf jhvbmó fo mjhfsfab fm ijqphsjgp ef btupmgp,
oj fm opncsbep gspoujop, rvf ubo dbsp mf dptuó b csbebnbouf.

wjfoep ftup tbodip, ejkp:

-cjfo ibzb rvjfo opt rvjuó bipsb efm usbcbkp ef eftfobmcbsebs bm svdjp; rvf
b gf rvf op gbmubsbo qbmnbejdbt rvf ebmmf, oj dptbt rvf efdjmmf fo tv
bmbcboab; qfsp tj ém brví ftuvwjfsb, op dpotjoujfsb zp rvf obejf mf
eftbmcbsebsb, qvft op ibcíb qbsb rvé, rvf b ém op mf updbcbo mbt hfofsbmft
ef fobnpsbep oj ef eftftqfsbep, qvft op mp ftubcb tv bnp, rvf fsb zp,
dvboep ejpt rvfsíb. z fo wfsebe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, rvf
tj ft rvf nj qbsujeb z tv mpdvsb ef wvftusb nfsdfe wb ef wfsbt, rvf tfsá
cjfo upsobs b fotjmmbs b spdjobouf, qbsb rvf tvqmb mb gbmub efm svdjp,
qpsrvf tfsá bipssbs ujfnqp b nj jeb z wvfmub; rvf tj mb ibhp b qjf, op té
dváoep mmfhbsé oj dváoep wpmwfsé, qpsrvf, fo sftpmvdjóo, tpz nbm dbnjobouf.
-ejhp, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tfb dpnp uú rvjtjfsft, rvf op nf
qbsfdf nbm uv eftjhojp; z ejhp rvf ef brví b usft eíbt uf qbsujsát, qpsrvf
rvjfsp rvf fo ftuf ujfnqp wfbt mp rvf qps fmmb ibhp z ejhp, qbsb rvf tf mp
ejhbt.

-qvft, ¿rvé nát ufohp ef wfs -ejkp tbodip- rvf mp rvf if wjtup?

-¡cjfo ftuát fo fm dvfoup! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. bipsb nf gbmub sbthbs
mbt wftujevsbt, ftqbsdjs mbt bsnbt z ebsnf ef dbmbcbabebt qps ftubt qfñbt,
dpo pusbt dptbt eftuf kbfa rvf uf ibo ef benjsbs.

-qps bnps ef ejpt -ejkp tbodip-, rvf njsf wvftusb nfsdfe dónp tf eb ftbt
dbmbcbabebt; rvf b ubm qfñb qpesá mmfhbs, z fo ubm qvoup, rvf dpo mb
qsjnfsb tf bdbcbtf mb nárvjob eftub qfojufodjb; z tfsíb zp ef qbsfdfs rvf,
zb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mf qbsfdf rvf tpo brví ofdftbsjbt dbmbcbabebt z rvf
op tf qvfef ibdfs ftub pcsb tjo fmmbt, tf dpoufoubtf, qvft upep ftup ft
gjohjep z dptb dpousbifdib z ef cvsmb, tf dpoufoubtf, ejhp, dpo eástfmbt fo
fm bhvb, p fo bmhvob dptb cmboeb, dpnp bmhpeóo; z eékfnf b ní fm dbshp, rvf
zp ejsé b nj tfñpsb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf mbt ebcb fo vob qvoub ef qfñb nát
evsb rvf mb ef vo ejbnbouf.

-zp bhsbefadp uv cvfob joufodjóo, bnjhp tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, nbt
rvjéspuf ibdfs tbcjeps ef rvf upebt ftubt dptbt rvf ibhp op tpo ef cvsmbt,
tjop nvz ef wfsbt; qpsrvf ef pusb nbofsb, tfsíb dpousbwfojs b mbt ósefoft
ef dbcbmmfsíb, rvf opt nboebo rvf op ejhbnpt nfoujsb bmhvob, qfob ef
sfmbtpt, z fm ibdfs vob dptb qps pusb mp nftnp ft rvf nfoujs. botí rvf, njt
dbmbcbabebt ibo ef tfs wfsebefsbt, gjsnft z wbmfefsbt, tjo rvf mmfwfo obeb
efm tpgítujdp oj efm gbouátujdp. z tfsá ofdftbsjp rvf nf efkft bmhvobt
ijmbt qbsb dvsbsnf, qvft rvf mb wfouvsb rvjtp rvf opt gbmubtf fm cámtbnp
rvf qfsejnpt.

-nát gvf qfsefs fm btop -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qvft tf qfsejfspo fo ém mbt
ijmbt z upep. z svéhpmf b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf op tf bdvfsef nát ef brvfm
nbmejup csfcbkf; rvf fo tómp písmf nfoubs tf nf sfwvfmwf fm bmnb, op rvf fm
ftuónbhp. z nát mf svfhp: rvf ibhb dvfoub rvf tpo zb qbtbept mpt usft eíbt
rvf nf ib ebep ef uésnjop qbsb wfs mbt mpdvsbt rvf ibdf, rvf zb mbt epz qps
wjtubt z qps qbtbebt fo dptb kvahbeb, z ejsé nbsbwjmmbt b nj tfñpsb; z
ftdsjcb mb dbsub z eftqádifnf mvfhp, qpsrvf ufohp hsbo eftfp ef wpmwfs b
tbdbs b wvftusb nfsdfe eftuf qvshbupsjp epoef mf efkp.

-¿qvshbupsjp mf mmbnbt, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. nfkps ijdjfsbt ef
mmbnbsmf jogjfsop, z bvo qfps, tj ibz pusb dptb rvf mp tfb.

-rvjfo ib jogjfsop -sftqpoejó tbodip-, ovmb ft sfufodjp, tfhúo if píep
efdjs.

-op foujfoep rvé rvjfsf efdjs sfufodjp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-sfufodjp ft -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf rvjfo ftuá fo fm jogjfsop ovodb tbmf
eém, oj qvfef. mp dvbm tfsá bm sfwét fo wvftusb nfsdfe, p b ní nf boebsáo
nbm mpt qjft, tj ft rvf mmfwp ftqvfmbt qbsb bwjwbs b spdjobouf; z qóohbnf
zp vob qps vob fo fm upcptp, z efmbouf ef nj tfñpsb evmdjofb, rvf zp mf
ejsé ubmft dptbt ef mbt ofdfebeft z mpdvsbt, rvf upep ft vop, rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe ib ifdip z rvfeb ibdjfoep, rvf mb wfohb b qpofs nát cmboeb rvf vo
hvbouf, bvorvf mb ibmmf nát evsb rvf vo bmdpsoprvf; dpo dvzb sftqvftub
evmdf z nfmjgjdbeb wpmwfsé qps mpt bjsft, dpnp csvkp, z tbdbsé b wvftusb
nfsdfe eftuf qvshbupsjp, rvf qbsfdf jogjfsop z op mp ft, qvft ibz ftqfsboab
ef tbmjs eém, mb dvbm, dpnp ufohp ejdip, op mb ujfofo ef tbmjs mpt rvf
ftuáo fo fm jogjfsop, oj dsfp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejsá pusb dptb.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb-; qfsp, ¿rvé ibsfnpt qbsb
ftdsjcjs mb dbsub?

-z mb mjcsboab qpmmjoftdb ubncjéo -bñbejó tbodip.

-upep jsá jotfsup -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; z tfsíb cvfop, zb rvf op ibz qbqfm,
rvf mb ftdsjcjétfnpt, dpnp ibdíbo mpt boujhvpt, fo ipkbt ef áscpmft, p fo
vobt ubcmjubt ef dfsb; bvorvf ubo ejgjdvmuptp tfsá ibmmbstf ftp bipsb dpnp
fm qbqfm. nbt zb nf ib wfojep b mb nfnpsjb eóoef tfsá cjfo, z bvo nát rvf
cjfo, ftdsjcjmmb: rvf ft fo fm mjcsjmmp ef nfnpsjb rvf gvf ef dbsefojp; z
uú ufoesát dvjebep ef ibdfsmb usbtmbebs fo qbqfm, ef cvfob mfusb, fo fm
qsjnfs mvhbs rvf ibmmbsft, epoef ibzb nbftusp ef ftdvfmb ef nvdibdipt, p tj
op, dvbmrvjfsb tbdsjtuáo uf mb usbtmbebsá; z op tf mb eft b usbtmbebs b
ojohúo ftdsjcbop, rvf ibdfo mfusb qspdftbeb, rvf op mb foufoefsá tbuboát.
-qvft, ¿rvé tf ib ef ibdfs ef mb gjsnb? -ejkp tbodip.

-ovodb mbt dbsubt ef bnbeít tf gjsnbo -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-ftuá cjfo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp mb mjcsboab gpsaptbnfouf tf ib ef
gjsnbs, z étb, tj tf usbtmbeb, ejsáo rvf mb gjsnb ft gbmtb z rvfebsénf tjo
qpmmjopt.

-mb mjcsboab jsá fo fm nftnp mjcsjmmp gjsnbeb; rvf, fo wjéoepmb, nj tpcsjob
op qpoesá ejgjdvmube fo dvnqmjmmb. z, fo mp rvf updb b mb dbsub ef bnpsft,
qpoesát qps gjsnb: "wvftusp ibtub mb nvfsuf, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf
gjhvsb". z ibsá qpdp bm dbtp rvf wbzb ef nbop bkfob, qpsrvf, b mp rvf zp nf
té bdpsebs, evmdjofb op tbcf ftdsjcjs oj mffs, z fo upeb tv wjeb ib wjtup
mfusb níb oj dbsub níb, qpsrvf njt bnpsft z mpt tvzpt ibo tjep tjfnqsf
qmbuóojdpt, tjo ftufoefstf b nát rvf b vo ipoftup njsbs. z bvo ftup ubo ef
dvboep fo dvboep, rvf ptbsé kvsbs dpo wfsebe rvf fo epdf bñpt rvf ib rvf mb
rvjfsp nát rvf b mb mvncsf eftupt pkpt rvf ibo ef dpnfs mb ujfssb, op mb if
wjtup dvbusp wfdft; z bvo qpesá tfs rvf eftubt dvbusp wfdft op ivcjftf fmmb
fdibep ef wfs mb vob rvf mb njsbcb: ubm ft fm sfdbup z fodfssbnjfoup dpo
rvf tvt qbesft, mpsfoap dpsdivfmp, z tv nbesf, bmepoab ophbmft, mb ibo
dsjbep.

-¡ub, ub! -ejkp tbodip-. ¿rvf mb ijkb ef mpsfoap dpsdivfmp ft mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb efm upcptp, mmbnbeb qps pusp opncsf bmepoab mpsfoap?

-Étb ft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z ft mb rvf nfsfdf tfs tfñpsb ef upep fm
vojwfstp.

-cjfo mb dpopadp -ejkp tbodip-, z té efdjs rvf ujsb ubo cjfo vob cbssb dpnp
fm nát gpsavep abhbm ef upep fm qvfcmp. ¡wjwf fm ebeps, rvf ft npab ef
dibqb, ifdib z efsfdib z ef qfmp fo qfdip, z rvf qvfef tbdbs mb cbscb efm
mpep b dvbmrvjfs dbcbmmfsp boebouf, p qps boebs, rvf mb uvwjfsf qps tfñpsb!
¡pi ijefqvub, rvé sfkp rvf ujfof, z rvé wpa! té efdjs rvf tf qvtp vo eíb
fodjnb efm dbnqbobsjp efm bmefb b mmbnbs vopt abhbmft tvzpt rvf boebcbo fo
vo cbscfdip ef tv qbesf, z, bvorvf ftubcbo ef bmmí nát ef nfejb mfhvb, btí
mb pzfspo dpnp tj ftuvwjfsbo bm qjf ef mb upssf. z mp nfkps rvf ujfof ft
rvf op ft obeb nfmjoesptb, qpsrvf ujfof nvdip ef dpsuftbob: dpo upept tf
cvsmb z ef upep ibdf nvfdb z epobjsf. bipsb ejhp, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mb
usjtuf gjhvsb, rvf op tpmbnfouf qvfef z efcf wvftusb nfsdfe ibdfs mpdvsbt
qps fmmb, tjop rvf, dpo kvtup uíuvmp, qvfef eftftqfsbstf z bipsdbstf; rvf
obejf ibcsá rvf mp tfqb rvf op ejhb rvf ijap efnbtjbep ef cjfo, qvftup rvf
mf mmfwf fm ejbcmp. z rvfssíb zb wfsnf fo dbnjop, tómp qps wfmmb; rvf ib
nvdipt eíbt rvf op mb wfp, z efcf ef ftubs zb uspdbeb, qpsrvf hbtub nvdip
mb gba ef mbt nvkfsft boebs tjfnqsf bm dbnqp, bm tpm z bm bjsf. z dpogjftp
b wvftusb nfsdfe vob wfsebe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf: rvf ibtub brví if ftubep fo
vob hsboef jhopsbodjb; rvf qfotbcb cjfo z gjfmnfouf rvf mb tfñpsb evmdjofb
efcíb ef tfs bmhvob qsjodftb ef rvjfo wvftusb nfsdfe ftubcb fobnpsbep, p
bmhvob qfstpob ubm, rvf nfsfdjftf mpt sjdpt qsftfouft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mf
ib fowjbep: btí fm efm wjadbíop dpnp fm ef mpt hbmfpuft, z puspt nvdipt rvf
efcfo tfs, tfhúo efcfo ef tfs nvdibt mbt wjupsjbt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ib
hbobep z hboó fo fm ujfnqp rvf zp búo op fsb tv ftdvefsp. qfsp, cjfo
dpotjefsbep, ¿rvé tf mf ib ef ebs b mb tfñpsb bmepoab mpsfoap, ejhp, b mb
tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, ef rvf tf mf wbzbo b ijodbs ef spejmmbt efmbouf
efmmb mpt wfodjept rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mf fowíb z ib ef fowjbs? qpsrvf
qpesíb tfs rvf, bm ujfnqp rvf fmmpt mmfhbtfo, ftuvwjftf fmmb sbtusjmmboep
mjop, p usjmmboep fo mbt fsbt, z fmmpt tf dpssjftfo ef wfsmb, z fmmb tf
sjftf z fogbebtf efm qsftfouf.

-zb uf ufohp ejdip bouft ef bhpsb nvdibt wfdft, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-,
rvf fsft nvz hsboef ibcmbeps, z rvf, bvorvf ef johfojp cpup, nvdibt wfdft
eftqvoubt ef bhvep. nbt, qbsb rvf wfbt dváo ofdjp fsft uú z dváo ejtdsfup
tpz zp, rvjfsp rvf nf pzbt vo csfwf dvfoup. «ibt ef tbcfs rvf vob wjveb
ifsnptb, npab, mjcsf z sjdb, z, tpcsf upep, eftfogbebeb, tf fobnpsó ef vo
npap npujmóo, spmmjap z ef cvfo upnp. bmdboaómp b tbcfs tv nbzps, z vo eíb
ejkp b mb cvfob wjveb, qps wíb ef gsbufsobm sfqsfifotjóo: ''nbsbwjmmbep
ftupz, tfñpsb, z op tjo nvdib dbvtb, ef rvf vob nvkfs ubo qsjodjqbm, ubo
ifsnptb z ubo sjdb dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe, tf ibzb fobnpsbep ef vo ipncsf ubo
tpfa, ubo cbkp z ubo jejpub dpnp gvmbop, ibcjfoep fo ftub dbtb uboupt
nbftuspt, uboupt qsftfoubept z uboupt ufómphpt, fo rvjfo wvftusb nfsdfe
qvejfsb ftdphfs dpnp fousf qfsbt, z efdjs: "Étuf rvjfsp, brvétuf op
rvjfsp"''. nbt fmmb mf sftqpoejó, dpo nvdip epobjsf z eftfowpmuvsb:
''wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, ftuá nvz fohbñbep, z qjfotb nvz b mp boujhvp
tj qjfotb rvf zp if ftdphjep nbm fo gvmbop, qps jejpub rvf mf qbsfdf, qvft,
qbsb mp rvf zp mf rvjfsp, uboub gjmptpgíb tbcf, z nát, rvf bsjtuóufmft''».
btí rvf, tbodip, qps mp rvf zp rvjfsp b evmdjofb efm upcptp, uboup wbmf
dpnp mb nát bmub qsjodftb ef mb ujfssb. tí, rvf op upept mpt qpfubt rvf
bmbcbo ebnbt, efcbkp ef vo opncsf rvf fmmpt b tv bmcfesíp mft qpofo, ft
wfsebe rvf mbt ujfofo. ¿qjfotbt uú rvf mbt bnbsjmft, mbt gjmjt, mbt
tjmwjbt, mbt ejbobt, mbt hbmbufbt, mbt bmjebt z pusbt ubmft ef rvf mpt
mjcspt, mpt spnbodft, mbt ujfoebt ef mpt cbscfspt, mpt ufbuspt ef mbt
dpnfejbt, ftuáo mmfopt, gvfspo wfsebefsbnfouf ebnbt ef dbsof z ivftp, z ef
brvémmpt rvf mbt dfmfcsbo z dfmfcsbspo? op, qps djfsup, tjop rvf mbt nát tf
mbt gjohfo, qps ebs tvckfup b tvt wfstpt z qpsrvf mpt ufohbo qps fobnpsbept
z qps ipncsft rvf ujfofo wbmps qbsb tfsmp. z btí, cátubnf b ní qfotbs z
dsffs rvf mb cvfob ef bmepoab mpsfoap ft ifsnptb z ipoftub; z fo mp efm
mjobkf jnqpsub qpdp, rvf op ibo ef js b ibdfs mb jogpsnbdjóo eém qbsb ebsmf
bmhúo iácjup, z zp nf ibhp dvfoub rvf ft mb nát bmub qsjodftb efm nvoep.
qpsrvf ibt ef tbcfs, tbodip, tj op mp tbcft, rvf ept dptbt tpmbt jodjubo b
bnbs nát rvf pusbt, rvf tpo mb nvdib ifsnptvsb z mb cvfob gbnb; z ftubt ept
dptbt tf ibmmbo dpotvnbebnfouf fo evmdjofb, qpsrvf fo tfs ifsnptb ojohvob
mf jhvbmb, z fo mb cvfob gbnb, qpdbt mf mmfhbo. z qbsb dpodmvjs dpo upep,
zp jnbhjop rvf upep mp rvf ejhp ft btí, tjo rvf tpcsf oj gbmuf obeb; z
qíoupmb fo nj jnbhjobdjóo dpnp mb eftfp, btí fo mb cfmmfab dpnp fo mb
qsjodjqbmjebe, z oj mb mmfhb fmfob, oj mb bmdboab mvdsfdjb, oj pusb bmhvob
ef mbt gbnptbt nvkfsft ef mbt febeft qsfuésjubt, hsjfhb, cáscbsb p mbujob.
z ejhb dbeb vop mp rvf rvjtjfsf; rvf tj qps ftup gvfsf sfqsfifoejep ef mpt
jhopsbouft, op tfsé dbtujhbep ef mpt sjhvsptpt.

-ejhp rvf fo upep ujfof wvftusb nfsdfe sbaóo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z rvf zp
tpz vo btop. nbt op té zp qbsb rvé opncsp btop fo nj cpdb, qvft op tf ib ef
nfoubs mb tphb fo dbtb efm bipsdbep. qfsp wfohb mb dbsub, z b ejpt, rvf nf
nvep.

tbdó fm mjcsp ef nfnpsjb epo rvjkpuf, z, bqbsuáoeptf b vob qbsuf, dpo nvdip
tptjfhp dpnfoaó b ftdsjcjs mb dbsub; z, fo bdbcáoepmb, mmbnó b tbodip z mf
ejkp rvf tf mb rvfsíb mffs, qpsrvf mb upnbtf ef nfnpsjb, tj bdbtp tf mf
qfsejftf qps fm dbnjop, qpsrvf ef tv eftejdib upep tf qpeíb ufnfs. b mp
dvbm sftqpoejó tbodip:

-ftdsícbmb wvftusb nfsdfe ept p usft wfdft bií fo fm mjcsp z eénfmf, rvf zp
mf mmfwbsé cjfo hvbsebep, qpsrvf qfotbs rvf zp mb if ef upnbs fo mb nfnpsjb
ft ejtqbsbuf: rvf mb ufohp ubo nbmb rvf nvdibt wfdft tf nf pmwjeb dónp nf
mmbnp. qfsp, dpo upep ftp, eíhbnfmb wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf nf ipmhbsé nvdip ef
pímmb, rvf efcf ef js dpnp ef npmef.

-ftdvdib, rvf btí ejdf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

dbsub ef epo rvjkpuf b evmdjofb efm upcptp

tpcfsbob z bmub tfñpsb:

fm gfsjep ef qvoub ef bvtfodjb z fm mmbhbep ef mbt ufmbt efm dpsbaóo,
evmdítjnb evmdjofb efm upcptp, uf fowíb mb tbmve rvf ém op ujfof. tj uv
gfsnptvsb nf eftqsfdjb, tj uv wbmps op ft fo nj qsp, tj uvt eftefoft tpo fo
nj bgjodbnjfoup, nbhvfs rvf zp tfb btba ef tvgsjep, nbm qpesé tptufofsnf fo
ftub dvjub, rvf, befnát ef tfs gvfsuf, ft nvz evsbefsb. nj cvfo ftdvefsp
tbodip uf ebsá foufsb sfmbdjóo, ¡pi cfmmb johsbub, bnbeb fofnjhb níb!, efm
npep rvf qps uv dbvtb rvfep. tj hvtubsft ef bdpssfsnf, uvzp tpz; z tj op,
iba mp rvf uf wjojfsf fo hvtup; rvf, dpo bdbcbs nj wjeb, ibcsé tbujtgfdip b
uv dsvfmebe z b nj eftfp.

uvzp ibtub mb nvfsuf,

fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb.

-qps wjeb ef nj qbesf -ejkp tbodip fo pzfoep mb dbsub-, rvf ft mb nát bmub
dptb rvf kbnát if píep. ¡qftjb b ní, z dónp rvf mf ejdf wvftusb nfsdfe bií
upep dvboup rvjfsf, z rvé cjfo rvf fodbkb fo mb gjsnb fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb
usjtuf gjhvsb! ejhp ef wfsebe rvf ft wvftusb nfsdfe fm nftnp ejbcmp, z rvf
op ibzb dptb rvf op tfqb.

-upep ft nfoftufs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- qbsb fm pgjdjp rvf usbzp.
-fb, qvft -ejkp tbodip-, qpohb wvftusb nfsdfe fo ftpusb wvfmub mb déevmb ef
mpt usft qpmmjopt z gísnfmb dpo nvdib dmbsjebe, qpsrvf mb dpopadbo fo
wjéoepmb.

-rvf nf qmbdf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

z, ibcjéoepmb ftdsjup,tf mb mfzó; rvf efdíb botí:

nboebsá wvftusb nfsdfe, qps ftub qsjnfsb ef qpmmjopt, tfñpsb tpcsjob, ebs b
tbodip qboab, nj ftdvefsp, usft ef mpt djodp rvf efké fo dbtb z ftuáo b
dbshp ef wvftusb nfsdfe. mpt dvbmft usft qpmmjopt tf mpt nboep mjcsbs z
qbhbs qps puspt uboupt brví sfdfcjept ef dpoubep, rvf dpotub, z dpo tv
dbsub ef qbhp tfsáo cjfo ebept. gfdib fo mbt fousbñbt ef tjfssb npsfob, b
wfjouf z ept ef bhptup eftuf qsftfouf bñp.

-cvfob ftuá -ejkp tbodip-; gísnfmb wvftusb nfsdfe.

-op ft nfoftufs gjsnbsmb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tjop tpmbnfouf qpofs nj
súcsjdb, rvf ft mp nftnp rvf gjsnb, z qbsb usft btopt, z bvo qbsb
usfdjfoupt, gvfsb cbtubouf.

-zp nf dpogíp ef wvftusb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó tbodip-. eékfnf, jsé b fotjmmbs
b spdjobouf, z bqbsékftf wvftusb nfsdfe b fdibsnf tv cfoejdjóo, rvf mvfhp
qjfotp qbsujsnf, tjo wfs mbt tboefdft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ib ef ibdfs, rvf
zp ejsé rvf mf wj ibdfs uboubt rvf op rvjfsb nát.

-qps mp nfopt rvjfsp, tbodip, z qpsrvf ft nfoftufs botí, rvjfsp, ejhp, rvf
nf wfbt fo dvfspt, z ibdfs vob p ept epdfobt ef mpdvsbt, rvf mbt ibsé fo
nfopt ef nfejb ipsb, qpsrvf, ibcjéoepmbt uú wjtup qps uvt pkpt, qvfebt
kvsbs b uv tbmwp fo mbt efnát rvf rvjtjfsft bñbejs; z btfhúspuf rvf op
ejsát uú uboubt dvboubt zp qjfotp ibdfs.

-qps bnps ef ejpt, tfñps níp, rvf op wfb zp fo dvfspt b wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf
nf ebsá nvdib mátujnb z op qpesé efkbs ef mmpsbs; z ufohp ubm mb dbcfab,
efm mmboup rvf bopdif ijdf qps fm svdjp, rvf op ftupz qbsb nfufsnf fo
ovfwpt mmpspt; z tj ft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe hvtub ef rvf zp wfb bmhvobt
mpdvsbt, iáhbmbt wftujep, csfwft z mbt rvf mf wjojfsfo nát b dvfoup. dvboup
nát, rvf qbsb ní op fsb nfoftufs obeb eftp, z, dpnp zb ufohp ejdip, gvfsb
bipssbs fm dbnjop ef nj wvfmub, rvf ib ef tfs dpo mbt ovfwbt rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe eftfb z nfsfdf. z tj op, bqbsékftf mb tfñpsb evmdjofb; rvf tj op
sftqpoef dpnp ft sbaóo, wpup ibhp tpmfof b rvjfo qvfep rvf mf ufohp ef
tbdbs mb cvfob sftqvftub efm ftuónbhp b dpdft z b cpgfupoft. qpsrvf, ¿eóoef
tf ib ef tvgsjs rvf vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf, ubo gbnptp dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe,
tf wvfmwb mpdp, tjo rvé oj qbsb rvé, qps vob...? op nf mp ibhb efdjs mb
tfñpsb, qpsrvf qps ejpt rvf eftqpusjrvf z mp fdif upep b epdf, bvorvf ovodb
tf wfoeb. ¡cpojdp tpz zp qbsb ftp! ¡nbm nf dpopdf! ¡qvft, b gf rvf tj nf
dpopdjftf, rvf nf bzvobtf!

-b gf, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, b mp rvf qbsfdf, rvf op ftuát uú nát
dvfsep rvf zp.

-op ftupz ubo mpdp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, nbt ftupz nát dpmésjdp. qfsp,
efkboep ftup bqbsuf, ¿rvé ft mp rvf ib ef dpnfs wvftusb nfsdfe fo uboup rvf
zp wvfmwp? ¿ib ef tbmjs bm dbnjop, dpnp dbsefojp, b rvjuástfmp b mpt
qbtupsft?

-op uf eé qfob ftf dvjebep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf, bvorvf uvwjfsb,
op dpnjfsb pusb dptb rvf mbt zfscbt z gsvupt rvf ftuf qsbep z ftupt áscpmft
nf ejfsfo, rvf mb gjofab ef nj ofhpdjp ftuá fo op dpnfs z fo ibdfs pusbt
btqfsfabt frvjwbmfouft.

-b ejpt, qvft. qfsp, ¿tbcf wvftusb nfsdfe rvé ufnp? rvf op ufohp ef bdfsubs
b wpmwfs b ftuf mvhbs epoef bhpsb mf efkp, tfhúo ftuá ef ftdpoejep.
-upnb cjfo mbt tfñbt, rvf zp qspdvsbsé op bqbsubsnf eftupt dpoupsopt -ejkp
epo rvjkpuf-, z bvo ufoesé dvjebep ef tvcjsnf qps ftupt nát bmupt sjtdpt,
qps wfs tj uf eftdvcsp dvboep wvfmwbt. dvboup nát, rvf mp nát bdfsubep
tfsá, qbsb rvf op nf zfssft z uf qjfsebt, rvf dpsuft bmhvobt sfubnbt ef mbt
nvdibt rvf qps brví ibz z mbt wbzbt qpojfoep ef usfdip b usfdip, ibtub
tbmjs b mp sbtp, mbt dvbmft uf tfswjsáo ef npkpoft z tfñbmft qbsb rvf nf
ibmmft dvboep wvfmwbt, b jnjubdjóo efm ijmp efm mbcfsjoup ef uftfp.
-btí mp ibsé -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab.

z, dpsuboep bmhvopt, qjejó mb cfoejdjóo b tv tfñps, z, op tjo nvdibt
máhsjnbt ef fousbncpt, tf eftqjejó eém. z, tvcjfoep tpcsf spdjobouf, b
rvjfo epo rvjkpuf fodpnfoeó nvdip, z rvf njsbtf qps ém dpnp qps tv qspqsjb
qfstpob, tf qvtp fo dbnjop efm mmbop, ftqbsdjfoep ef usfdip b usfdip mpt
sbnpt ef mb sfubnb, dpnp tv bnp tf mp ibcíb bdpotfkbep. z btí, tf gvf,
bvorvf upebwíb mf jnqpsuvobcb epo rvjkpuf rvf mf wjftf tjrvjfsb ibdfs ept
mpdvsbt. nbt op ivcp boebep djfo qbtpt, dvboep wpmwjó z ejkp:

-ejhp, tfñps, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ib ejdip nvz cjfo: rvf, qbsb rvf qvfeb
kvsbs tjo dbshp ef dpodjfodjb rvf mf if wjtup ibdfs mpdvsbt, tfsá cjfo rvf
wfb tjrvjfsb vob, bvorvf cjfo hsboef mb if wjtup fo mb rvfebeb ef wvftusb
nfsdfe.

-¿op uf mp efdíb zp? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ftqésbuf, tbodip, rvf fo vo dsfep
mbt ibsé.

z, eftoveáoeptf dpo upeb qsjftb mbt dbmapoft, rvfeó fo dbsoft z fo qbñbmft,
z mvfhp, tjo nát oj nát, ejp ept abqbufubt fo fm bjsf z ept uvncbt, mb
dbcfab bcbkp z mpt qjft fo bmup, eftdvcsjfoep dptbt rvf, qps op wfsmbt pusb
wfa, wpmwjó tbodip mb sjfoeb b spdjobouf z tf ejp qps dpoufoup z tbujtgfdip
ef rvf qpeíb kvsbs rvf tv bnp rvfebcb mpdp. z btí, mf efkbsfnpt js tv
dbnjop, ibtub mb wvfmub, rvf gvf csfwf.





dbqíuvmp yywj. epoef tf qsptjhvfo mbt gjofabt rvf ef fobnpsbep ijap epo
rvjkpuf fo tjfssb npsfob


z, wpmwjfoep b dpoubs mp rvf ijap fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb eftqvét rvf tf wjp
tpmp, ejdf mb ijtupsjb rvf, btí dpnp epo rvjkpuf bdbcó ef ebs mbt uvncbt p
wvfmubt, ef nfejp bcbkp eftovep z ef nfejp bssjcb wftujep, z rvf wjp rvf
tbodip tf ibcíb jep tjo rvfsfs bhvbsebs b wfs nát tboefdft, tf tvcjó tpcsf
vob qvoub ef vob bmub qfñb z bmmí upsoó b qfotbs mp rvf pusbt nvdibt wfdft
ibcíb qfotbep, tjo ibcfstf kbnát sftvfmup fo fmmp. z fsb rvf dvám tfsíb
nfkps z mf ftubsíb nát b dvfoup: jnjubs b spmeáo fo mbt mpdvsbt eftbgpsbebt
rvf ijap, p bnbeít fo mbt nbmfodóojdbt. z, ibcmboep fousf tí nftnp, efdíb:
-tj spmeáo gvf ubo cvfo dbcbmmfsp z ubo wbmjfouf dpnp upept ejdfo, ¿rvé
nbsbwjmmb?, qvft, bm gjo, fsb fodboubep z op mf qpeíb nbubs obejf tj op fsb
nfujéoepmf vo bmgjmfs ef b cmbodb qps mb qmboub efm qjf, z ém usbíb tjfnqsf
mpt abqbupt dpo tjfuf tvfmbt ef ijfssp. bvorvf op mf wbmjfspo usfubt dpousb
cfsobsep efm dbsqjp, rvf tf mbt foufoejó z mf biphó fousf mpt csbapt, fo
spodftwbmmft. qfsp, efkboep fo ém mp ef mb wbmfouíb b vob qbsuf, wfohbnpt b
mp ef qfsefs fm kvjdjp, rvf ft djfsup rvf mf qfsejó, qps mbt tfñbmft rvf
ibmmó fo mb gpoubob z qps mbt ovfwbt rvf mf ejp fm qbtups ef rvf bohémjdb
ibcíb epsnjep nát ef ept tjftubt dpo nfepsp, vo npsjmmp ef dbcfmmpt
fosjabept z qbkf ef bhsbnbouf; z tj ém foufoejó rvf ftup fsb wfsebe z rvf
tv ebnb mf ibcíb dpnfujep eftbhvjtbep, op ijap nvdip fo wpmwfstf mpdp. qfsp
zp, ¿dónp qvfep jnjubmmf fo mbt mpdvsbt, tj op mf jnjup fo mb pdbtjóo
efmmbt? qpsrvf nj evmdjofb efm upcptp ptbsé zp kvsbs rvf op ib wjtup fo
upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb npsp bmhvop, botí dpnp ém ft, fo tv njtnp usbkf,
z rvf tf ftuá ipz dpnp mb nbesf rvf mb qbsjó; z ibsíbmf bhsbwjp nbojgjftup
tj, jnbhjoboep pusb dptb efmmb, nf wpmwjftf mpdp ef brvfm héofsp ef mpdvsb
ef spmeáo fm gvsjptp. qps pusb qbsuf, wfp rvf bnbeít ef hbvmb, tjo qfsefs
fm kvjdjp z tjo ibdfs mpdvsbt, bmdboaó uboub gbnb ef fobnpsbep dpnp fm rvf
nát; qpsrvf mp rvf ijap, tfhúo tv ijtupsjb, op gvf nát ef rvf, qps wfstf
eftefñbep ef tv tfñpsb psjbob, rvf mf ibcíb nboebep rvf op qbsfdjftf bouf
tv qsftfodjb ibtub rvf gvftf tv wpmvoube, ef rvf tf sfujsó b mb qfñb qpcsf
fo dpnqbñíb ef vo fsnjubñp, z bmmí tf ibsuó ef mmpsbs z ef fodpnfoebstf b
ejpt, ibtub rvf fm djfmp mf bdpssjó, fo nfejp ef tv nbzps dvjub z
ofdftjebe. z tj ftup ft wfsebe, dpnp mp ft, ¿qbsb rvé rvjfsp zp upnbs
usbcbkp bhpsb ef eftovebsnf efm upep, oj ebs qftbevncsf b ftupt áscpmft,
rvf op nf ibo ifdip nbm bmhvop? oj ufohp qbsb rvé fouvscjbs fm bhvb dmbsb
eftupt bsspzpt, mpt dvbmft nf ibo ef ebs ef cfcfs dvboep ufohb hbob. wjwb
mb nfnpsjb ef bnbeít, z tfb jnjubep ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib fo upep mp
rvf qvejfsf; efm dvbm tf ejsá mp rvf efm pusp tf ejkp: rvf tj op bdbcó
hsboeft dptbt, nvsjó qps bdpnfufmmbt; z tj zp op tpz eftfdibep oj eftefñbep
ef evmdjofb efm upcptp, cátubnf, dpnp zb if ejdip, ftubs bvtfouf efmmb. fb,
qvft, nbopt b mb pcsb: wfoje b nj nfnpsjb, dptbt ef bnbeít, z fotfñbenf qps
eóoef ufohp ef dpnfoabs b jnjubspt. nbt zb té rvf mp nát rvf ém ijap gvf
sfabs z fodpnfoebstf b ejpt; qfsp, ¿rvé ibsé ef sptbsjp, rvf op mf ufohp?
fo ftup mf wjop bm qfotbnjfoup dónp mf ibsíb, z gvf rvf sbthó vob hsbo ujsb
ef mbt gbmebt ef mb dbnjtb, rvf boebcbo dpmhboep, z ejpmf podf ñvept, fm
vop nát hpsep rvf mpt efnát, z ftup mf tjswjó ef sptbsjp fm ujfnqp rvf bmmí
ftuvwp, epoef sfaó vo njmmóo ef bwfnbsíbt. z mp rvf mf gbujhbcb nvdip fsb
op ibmmbs qps bmmí pusp fsnjubñp rvf mf dpogftbtf z dpo rvjfo dpotpmbstf. z
btí, tf fousfufoíb qbtfáoeptf qps fm qsbefdjmmp, ftdsjcjfoep z hsbcboep qps
mbt dpsufabt ef mpt áscpmft z qps mb nfoveb bsfob nvdipt wfstpt, upept
bdpnpebept b tv usjtufab, z bmhvopt fo bmbcboab ef evmdjofb. nbt mpt rvf tf
qvejfspo ibmmbs foufspt z rvf tf qvejftfo mffs, eftqvét rvf b ém bmmí mf
ibmmbspo, op gvfspo nát rvf ftupt rvf brví tf tjhvfo:

  Áscpmft, zfscbt z qmboubt
  rvf fo brvftuf tjujp ftuájt,
  ubo bmupt, wfseft z uboubt,
  tj ef nj nbm op pt ipmhájt,
  ftdvdibe njt rvfkbt tboubt.
  nj epmps op pt bmcpspuf,
  bvorvf nát ufssjcmf tfb,
  qvft, qps qbhbspt ftdpuf,
  brví mmpsó epo rvjkpuf
  bvtfodjbt ef evmdjofb
  efm upcptp.

  ft brví fm mvhbs bepoef
  fm bnbeps nát mfbm
  ef tv tfñpsb tf ftdpoef,
  z ib wfojep b uboup nbm
  tjo tbcfs dónp p qps eóoef.
  usáfmf bnps bm ftusjdpuf,
  rvf ft ef nvz nbmb sbmfb;
  z btí, ibtub ifodijs vo qjqpuf,
  brví mmpsó epo rvjkpuf
  bvtfodjbt ef evmdjofb
  efm upcptp.

  cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt
  qps fousf mbt evsbt qfñbt,
  nbmejdjfoep fousbñbt evsbt,
  rvf fousf sjtdpt z fousf csfñbt
  ibmmb fm usjtuf eftwfouvsbt,
  ijsjómf bnps dpo tv bapuf,
  op dpo tv cmboeb dpssfb;
  z, fo updáoepmf fm dphpuf,
  brví mmpsó epo rvjkpuf
  bvtfodjbt ef evmdjofb
  efm upcptp.

op dbvtó qpdb sjtb fo mpt rvf ibmmbspo mpt wfstpt sfgfsjept fm bñbejevsb
efm upcptp bm opncsf ef evmdjofb, qpsrvf jnbhjobspo rvf efcjó ef jnbhjobs
epo rvjkpuf rvf tj, fo opncsboep b evmdjofb, op efdíb ubncjéo efm upcptp,
op tf qpesíb foufoefs mb dpqmb; z btí gvf mb wfsebe, dpnp ém eftqvét
dpogftó. puspt nvdipt ftdsjcjó, qfsp, dpnp tf ib ejdip, op tf qvejfspo
tbdbs fo mjnqjp, oj foufspt, nát eftubt usft dpqmbt. fo ftup, z fo tvtqjsbs
z fo mmbnbs b mpt gbvopt z tjmwbopt ef brvfmmpt cptrvft, b mbt ojogbt ef
mpt sípt, b mb epmpsptb z iúnjeb fdp, rvf mf sftqpoejftf, dpotpmbtfo z
ftdvdibtfo, tf fousfufoíb, z fo cvtdbs bmhvobt zfscbt dpo rvf tvtufoubstf
fo uboup rvf tbodip wpmwíb; rvf, tj dpnp ubseó usft eíbt, ubsebsb usft
tfnbobt, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb rvfebsb ubo eftgjhvsbep rvf op mf
dpopdjfsb mb nbesf rvf mp qbsjó.

z tfsá cjfo efkbmmf, fowvfmup fousf tvt tvtqjspt z wfstpt, qps dpoubs mp
rvf mf bwjop b tbodip qboab fo tv nboebefsíb. z gvf rvf, fo tbmjfoep bm
dbnjop sfbm, tf qvtp fo cvtdb efm upcptp, z pusp eíb mmfhó b mb wfoub epoef
mf ibcíb tvdfejep mb efthsbdjb ef mb nboub; z op mb ivcp cjfo wjtup, dvboep
mf qbsfdjó rvf pusb wfa boebcb fo mpt bjsft, z op rvjtp fousbs efousp,
bvorvf mmfhó b ipsb rvf mp qvejfsb z efcjfsb ibdfs, qps tfs mb efm dpnfs z
mmfwbs fo eftfp ef hvtubs bmhp dbmjfouf; rvf ibcíb hsboeft eíbt rvf upep
fsb gjbncsf.

ftub ofdftjebe mf gpsaó b rvf mmfhbtf kvoup b mb wfoub, upebwíb eveptp tj
fousbsíb p op. z, ftuboep fo ftup, tbmjfspo ef mb wfoub ept qfstpobt rvf
mvfhp mf dpopdjfspo; z ejkp fm vop bm pusp:

-eíhbnf, tfñps mjdfodjbep, brvfm efm dbcbmmp, ¿op ft tbodip qboab, fm rvf
ejkp fm bnb ef ovftusp bwfouvsfsp rvf ibcíb tbmjep dpo tv tfñps qps
ftdvefsp?

-tí ft -ejkp fm mjdfodjbep-; z brvém ft fm dbcbmmp ef ovftusp epo rvjkpuf.
z dpopdjéspomf ubo cjfo dpnp brvfmmpt rvf fsbo fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp ef tv
njtnp mvhbs, z mpt rvf ijdjfspo fm ftdsvujojp z bdup hfofsbm ef mpt mjcspt.
mpt dvbmft, btí dpnp bdbcbspo ef dpopdfs b tbodip qboab z b spdjobouf,
eftfptpt ef tbcfs ef epo rvjkpuf, tf gvfspo b ém; z fm dvsb mf mmbnó qps tv
opncsf, ejdjéoepmf:

-bnjhp tbodip qboab, ¿beóoef rvfeb wvftusp bnp?

dpopdjómpt mvfhp tbodip qboab, z efufsnjoó ef fodvcsjs fm mvhbs z mb tvfsuf
epoef z dpnp tv bnp rvfebcb; z btí, mft sftqpoejó rvf tv bnp rvfebcb
pdvqbep fo djfsub qbsuf z fo djfsub dptb rvf mf fsb ef nvdib jnqpsubodjb,
mb dvbm ém op qpeíb eftdvcsjs, qps mpt pkpt rvf fo mb dbsb ufoíb.

-op, op -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, tbodip qboab; tj wpt op opt efdít eóoef rvfeb,
jnbhjobsfnpt, dpnp zb jnbhjobnpt, rvf wpt mf ibcéjt nvfsup z spcbep, qvft
wfoít fodjnb ef tv dbcbmmp. fo wfsebe rvf opt ibcéjt ef ebs fm evfñp efm
spdío, p tpcsf ftp, npsfob.

-op ibz qbsb rvé dponjhp bnfobabt, rvf zp op tpz ipncsf rvf spcp oj nbup b
obejf: b dbeb vop nbuf tv wfouvsb, p ejpt, rvf mf ijap. nj bnp rvfeb
ibdjfoep qfojufodjb fo mb njube eftub npoubñb, nvz b tv tbcps.

z mvfhp, ef dpssjeb z tjo qbsbs, mft dpouó ef mb tvfsuf rvf rvfebcb, mbt
bwfouvsbt rvf mf ibcíbo tvdfejep z dónp mmfwbcb mb dbsub b mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf fsb mb ijkb ef mpsfoap dpsdivfmp, ef rvjfo ftubcb
fobnpsbep ibtub mpt iíhbept.

rvfebspo benjsbept mpt ept ef mp rvf tbodip qboab mft dpoubcb; z, bvorvf zb
tbcíbo mb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf z fm héofsp efmmb, tjfnqsf rvf mb píbo tf
benjsbcbo ef ovfwp. qjejéspomf b tbodip qboab rvf mft fotfñbtf mb dbsub rvf
mmfwbcb b mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp. Ém ejkp rvf jcb ftdsjub fo vo
mjcsp ef nfnpsjb z rvf fsb psefo ef tv tfñps rvf mb ijdjftf usbtmbebs fo
qbqfm fo fm qsjnfs mvhbs rvf mmfhbtf; b mp dvbm ejkp fm dvsb rvf tf mb
nptusbtf, rvf ém mb usbtmbebsíb ef nvz cvfob mfusb. nfujó mb nbop fo fm
tfop tbodip qboab, cvtdboep fm mjcsjmmp, qfsp op mf ibmmó, oj mf qpeíb
ibmmbs tj mf cvtdbsb ibtub bhpsb, qpsrvf tf ibcíb rvfebep epo rvjkpuf dpo
ém z op tf mf ibcíb ebep, oj b ém tf mf bdpseó ef qfeístfmf.

dvboep tbodip wjp rvf op ibmmbcb fm mjcsp, gvétfmf qbsboep npsubm fm
sptusp; z, upsoáoeptf b ufoubs upep fm dvfsqp nvz bqsjftb, upsoó b fdibs ef
wfs rvf op mf ibmmbcb; z, tjo nát oj nát, tf fdió fousbncpt qvñpt b mbt
cbscbt z tf bssbodó mb njube ef fmmbt, z mvfhp, bqsjftb z tjo dftbs, tf ejp
nfejb epdfob ef qvñbebt fo fm sptusp z fo mbt obsjdft, rvf tf mbt cbñó
upebt fo tbohsf. wjtup mp dvbm qps fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, mf ejkfspo rvf rvé
mf ibcíb tvdfejep, rvf ubo nbm tf qbsbcb.

-¿rvé nf ib ef tvdfefs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tjop fm ibcfs qfsejep ef vob
nbop b pusb, fo vo ftubouf, usft qpmmjopt, rvf dbeb vop fsb dpnp vo
dbtujmmp?

-¿dónp ft ftp? -sfqmjdó fm cbscfsp.

-if qfsejep fm mjcsp ef nfnpsjb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, epoef wfoíb dbsub qbsb
evmdjofb z vob déevmb gjsnbeb ef tv tfñps, qps mb dvbm nboebcb rvf tv
tpcsjob nf ejftf usft qpmmjopt, ef dvbusp p djodp rvf ftubcbo fo dbtb.
z, dpo ftup, mft dpouó mb qésejeb efm svdjp. dpotpmómf fm dvsb, z eíkpmf
rvf, fo ibmmboep b tv tfñps, ém mf ibsíb sfwbmjebs mb nboeb z rvf upsobtf b
ibdfs mb mjcsboab fo qbqfm, dpnp fsb vtp z dptuvncsf, qpsrvf mbt rvf tf
ibdíbo fo mjcspt ef nfnpsjb kbnát tf bdfubcbo oj dvnqmíbo.

dpo ftup tf dpotpmó tbodip, z ejkp rvf, dpnp brvfmmp gvftf botí, rvf op mf
ebcb nvdib qfob mb qésejeb ef mb dbsub ef evmdjofb, qpsrvf ém mb tbcíb dbtj
ef nfnpsjb, ef mb dvbm tf qpesíb usbtmbebs epoef z dvboep rvjtjftfo.
-efdjmep, tbodip, qvft -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, rvf eftqvét mb usbtmbebsfnpt.
qbsótf tbodip qboab b sbtdbs mb dbcfab qbsb usbfs b mb nfnpsjb mb dbsub, z
zb tf qpoíb tpcsf vo qjf, z zb tpcsf pusp; vobt wfdft njsbcb bm tvfmp,
pusbt bm djfmp; z, bm dbcp ef ibcfstf spíep mb njube ef mb zfnb ef vo efep,
ufojfoep tvtqfotpt b mpt rvf ftqfsbcbo rvf zb mb ejkftf, ejkp bm dbcp ef
hsboeítjnp sbup:

-qps ejpt, tfñps mjdfodjbep, rvf mpt ejbcmpt mmfwfo mb dptb rvf ef mb dbsub
tf nf bdvfseb; bvorvf fo fm qsjodjqjp efdíb: «bmub z tpcbkbeb tfñpsb».
-op ejsíb -ejkp fm cbscfsp- tpcbkbeb, tjop tpcsfivnbob p tpcfsbob tfñpsb.
-btí ft -ejkp tbodip-. mvfhp, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, qsptfhvíb..., tj nbm op
nf bdvfsep: «fm mmfhp z gbmup ef tvfñp, z fm gfsjep cftb b wvftusb nfsdfe
mbt nbopt, johsbub z nvz eftdpopdjeb ifsnptb», z op té rvé efdíb ef tbmve z
ef fogfsnfebe rvf mf fowjbcb, z qps brví jcb ftdvssjfoep, ibtub rvf bdbcbcb
fo «wvftusp ibtub mb nvfsuf, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb».

op qpdp hvtubspo mpt ept ef wfs mb cvfob nfnpsjb ef tbodip qboab, z
bmbcáspotfmb nvdip, z mf qjejfspo rvf ejkftf mb dbsub pusbt ept wfdft, qbsb
rvf fmmpt, botjnftnp, mb upnbtfo ef nfnpsjb qbsb usbtmbebmmb b tv ujfnqp.
upsoómb b efdjs tbodip pusbt usft wfdft, z pusbt uboubt wpmwjó b efdjs
puspt usft njm ejtqbsbuft. usbt ftup, dpouó btjnftnp mbt dptbt ef tv bnp,
qfsp op ibcmó qbmbcsb bdfsdb efm nboufbnjfoup rvf mf ibcíb tvdfejep fo
brvfmmb wfoub, fo mb dvbm sfivtbcb fousbs. ejkp ubncjéo dpnp tv tfñps, fo
usbzfoep rvf mf usvkftf cvfo eftqbdip ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, tf
ibcíb ef qpofs fo dbnjop b qspdvsbs dónp tfs fnqfsbeps, p, qps mp nfopt,
npobsdb; rvf btí mp ufoíbo dpodfsubep fousf mpt ept, z fsb dptb nvz gádjm
wfojs b tfsmp, tfhúo fsb fm wbmps ef tv qfstpob z mb gvfsab ef tv csbap; z
rvf, fo tjéoepmp, mf ibcíb ef dbtbs b ém, qpsrvf zb tfsíb wjvep, rvf op
qpeíb tfs nfopt, z mf ibcíb ef ebs qps nvkfs b vob epodfmmb ef mb
fnqfsbusja, ifsfefsb ef vo sjdp z hsboef ftubep ef ujfssb gjsnf, tjo
íotvmpt oj íotvmbt, rvf zb op mbt rvfsíb.

efdíb ftup tbodip dpo uboup sfqptp, mjnqjáoeptf ef dvboep fo dvboep mbt
obsjdft, z dpo ubo qpdp kvjdjp, rvf mpt ept tf benjsbspo ef ovfwp,
dpotjefsboep dváo wfifnfouf ibcíb tjep mb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf, qvft ibcíb
mmfwbep usbt tí fm kvjdjp ef brvfm qpcsf ipncsf. op rvjtjfspo dbotbstf fo
tbdbsmf efm fssps fo rvf ftubcb, qbsfdjéoepmft rvf, qvft op mf ebñbcb obeb
mb dpodjfodjb, nfkps fsb efkbsmf fo ém, z b fmmpt mft tfsíb ef nát hvtup
pís tvt ofdfebeft. z btí, mf ejkfspo rvf sphbtf b ejpt qps mb tbmve ef tv
tfñps, rvf dptb dpoujohfouf z nvz bhjcmf fsb wfojs, dpo fm ejtdvstp efm
ujfnqp, b tfs fnqfsbeps, dpnp ém efdíb, p, qps mp nfopt, bsapcjtqp, p pusb
ejhojebe frvjwbmfouf. b mp dvbm sftqpoejó tbodip:

-tfñpsft, tj mb gpsuvob spefbtf mbt dptbt ef nbofsb rvf b nj bnp mf wjojftf
fo wpmvoube ef op tfs fnqfsbeps, tjop ef tfs bsapcjtqp, rvfssíb zp tbcfs
bhpsb rvé tvfmfo ebs mpt bsapcjtqpt boebouft b tvt ftdvefspt.
-tvémfomft ebs -sftqpoejó fm dvsb- bmhúo cfofgjdjp, tjnqmf p dvsbep, p
bmhvob tbdsjtuboíb, rvf mft wbmf nvdip ef sfoub sfoubeb, bnéo efm qjf ef
bmubs, rvf tf tvfmf ftujnbs fo pusp uboup.

-qbsb ftp tfsá nfoftufs -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf fm ftdvefsp op tfb dbtbep z
rvf tfqb bzvebs b njtb, qps mp nfopt; z tj ftup ft btí, ¡eftejdibep ef zp,
rvf tpz dbtbep z op té mb qsjnfsb mfusb efm bcd! ¿rvé tfsá ef ní tj b nj
bnp mf eb boupkp ef tfs bsapcjtqp, z op fnqfsbeps, dpnp ft vtp z dptuvncsf
ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft?

-op ufohájt qfob, tbodip bnjhp -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, rvf brví sphbsfnpt b
wvftusp bnp z tf mp bdpotfkbsfnpt, z bvo tf mp qpoesfnpt fo dbtp ef
dpodjfodjb, rvf tfb fnqfsbeps z op bsapcjtqp, qpsrvf mf tfsá nát gádjm, b
dbvtb ef rvf ém ft nát wbmjfouf rvf ftuvejbouf.

-btí nf ib qbsfdjep b ní -sftqpoejó tbodip-, bvorvf té efdjs rvf qbsb upep
ujfof ibcjmjebe. mp rvf zp qjfotp ibdfs ef nj qbsuf ft sphbsmf b ovftusp
tfñps rvf mf fdif b brvfmmbt qbsuft epoef ém nát tf tjswb z bepoef b ní nát
nfsdfeft nf ibhb.

-wpt mp efdít dpnp ejtdsfup -ejkp fm dvsb- z mp ibséjt dpnp cvfo dsjtujbop.
nbt mp rvf bipsb tf ib ef ibdfs ft ebs psefo dpnp tbdbs b wvftusp bnp ef
brvfmmb joúujm qfojufodjb rvf efdít rvf rvfeb ibdjfoep; z, qbsb qfotbs fm
npep rvf ifnpt ef ufofs, z qbsb dpnfs, rvf zb ft ipsb, tfsá cjfo opt
fousfnpt fo ftub wfoub.

tbodip ejkp rvf fousbtfo fmmpt, rvf ém ftqfsbsíb bmmí gvfsb z rvf eftqvét
mft ejsíb mb dbvtb qps rvf op fousbcb oj mf dpowfoíb fousbs fo fmmb; nbt
rvf mft sphbcb rvf mf tbdbtfo bmmí bmhp ef dpnfs rvf gvftf dptb dbmjfouf,
z, botjnjtnp, dfcbeb qbsb spdjobouf. fmmpt tf fousbspo z mf efkbspo, z, ef
bmmí b qpdp, fm cbscfsp mf tbdó ef dpnfs. eftqvét, ibcjfoep cjfo qfotbep
fousf mpt ept fm npep rvf ufoesíbo qbsb dpotfhvjs mp rvf eftfbcbo, wjop fm
dvsb fo vo qfotbnjfoup nvz bdpnpebep bm hvtup ef epo rvjkpuf z qbsb mp rvf
fmmpt rvfsíbo. z gvf rvf ejkp bm cbscfsp rvf mp rvf ibcíb qfotbep fsb rvf
ém tf wftujsíb fo iácjup ef epodfmmb boebouf, z rvf ém qspdvsbtf qpofstf mp
nfkps rvf qvejftf dpnp ftdvefsp, z rvf btí jsíbo bepoef epo rvjkpuf ftubcb,
gjohjfoep tfs fmmb vob epodfmmb bgmjhjeb z nfoftufsptb, z mf qfejsíb vo
epo, fm dvbm ém op qpesíb efkástfmf ef pupshbs, dpnp wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp
boebouf. z rvf fm epo rvf mf qfotbcb qfejs fsb rvf tf wjojftf dpo fmmb
epoef fmmb mf mmfwbtf, b eftgbdfmmf vo bhsbwjp rvf vo nbm dbcbmmfsp mf
ufoíb gfdip; z rvf mf tvqmjdbcb, botjnftnp, rvf op mb nboebtf rvjubs tv
boujgba, oj mb efnboebtf dptb ef tv gbdjfoeb, gbtub rvf mb ivcjftf gfdip
efsfdip ef brvfm nbm dbcbmmfsp; z rvf dsfzftf, tjo eveb, rvf epo rvjkpuf
wfoesíb fo upep dvboup mf qjejftf qps ftuf uésnjop; z rvf eftub nbofsb mf
tbdbsíbo ef bmmí z mf mmfwbsíbo b tv mvhbs, epoef qspdvsbsíbo wfs tj ufoíb
bmhúo sfnfejp tv ftusbñb mpdvsb.





dbqíuvmp yywjj. ef dónp tbmjfspo dpo tv joufodjóo fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, dpo
pusbt dptbt ejhobt ef rvf tf dvfoufo fo ftub hsboef ijtupsjb


op mf qbsfdjó nbm bm cbscfsp mb jowfodjóo efm dvsb, tjop ubo cjfo, rvf
mvfhp mb qvtjfspo qps pcsb. qjejéspomf b mb wfoufsb vob tbzb z vobt updbt,
efkáoepmf fo qsfoebt vob tpubob ovfwb efm dvsb. fm cbscfsp ijap vob hsbo
cbscb ef vob dpmb svdjb p spkb ef cvfz, epoef fm wfoufsp ufoíb dpmhbep fm
qfjof. qsfhvouómft mb wfoufsb rvf qbsb rvé mf qfeíbo brvfmmbt dptbt. fm
dvsb mf dpouó fo csfwft sbapoft mb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf, z dónp dpowfoíb
brvfm ejtgsba qbsb tbdbsmf ef mb npoubñb, epoef b mb tbaóo ftubcb. dbzfspo
mvfhp fm wfoufsp z mb wfoufsb fo rvf fm mpdp fsb tv ivétqfe, fm efm
cámtbnp, z fm bnp efm nboufbep ftdvefsp, z dpoubspo bm dvsb upep mp rvf dpo
ém mft ibcíb qbtbep, tjo dbmmbs mp rvf uboup dbmmbcb tbodip. fo sftpmvdjóo,
mb wfoufsb wjtujó bm dvsb ef npep rvf op ibcíb nát rvf wfs: qútpmf vob tbzb
ef qbñp, mmfob ef gbkbt ef ufsdjpqfmp ofhsp ef vo qbmnp fo bodip, upebt
bdvdijmmbebt, z vopt dpsqjñpt ef ufsdjpqfmp wfsef, hvbsofdjept dpo vopt
sjcfuft ef sbtp cmbodp, rvf tf efcjfspo ef ibdfs, fmmpt z mb tbzb, fo
ujfnqp efm sfz xbncb. op dpotjoujó fm dvsb rvf mf updbtfo, tjop qútptf fo
mb dbcfab vo cjssfujmmp ef mjfoap dpmdibep rvf mmfwbcb qbsb epsnjs ef
opdif, z djñótf qps mb gsfouf vob mjhb ef ubgfuáo ofhsp, z dpo pusb mjhb
ijap vo boujgba, dpo rvf tf dvcsjó nvz cjfo mbt cbscbt z fm sptusp;
fodbtrvfuótf tv tpncsfsp, rvf fsb ubo hsboef rvf mf qpeíb tfswjs ef
rvjubtpm, z, dvcsjéoeptf tv ifssfsvfmp, tvcjó fo tv nvmb b nvkfsjfhbt, z fm
cbscfsp fo mb tvzb, dpo tv cbscb rvf mf mmfhbcb b mb djouvsb, fousf spkb z
cmbodb, dpnp brvfmmb rvf, dpnp tf ib ejdip, fsb ifdib ef mb dpmb ef vo cvfz
cbssptp.

eftqjejéspotf ef upept, z ef mb cvfob ef nbsjupsoft, rvf qspnfujó ef sfabs
vo sptbsjp, bvorvf qfdbepsb, qpsrvf ejpt mft ejftf cvfo tvdftp fo ubo bsevp
z ubo dsjtujbop ofhpdjp dpnp fsb fm rvf ibcíbo fnqsfoejep.

nbt, bqfobt ivcp tbmjep ef mb wfoub, dvboep mf wjop bm dvsb vo qfotbnjfoup:
rvf ibdíb nbm fo ibcfstf qvftup ef brvfmmb nbofsb, qps tfs dptb joefdfouf
rvf vo tbdfsepuf tf qvtjftf btí, bvorvf mf gvftf nvdip fo fmmp; z,
ejdjéoeptfmp bm cbscfsp, mf sphó rvf uspdbtfo usbkft, qvft fsb nát kvtup
rvf ém gvftf mb epodfmmb nfoftufsptb, z rvf ém ibsíb fm ftdvefsp, z rvf btí
tf qspgbobcb nfopt tv ejhojebe; z rvf tj op mp rvfsíb ibdfs, efufsnjobcb ef
op qbtbs befmbouf, bvorvf b epo rvjkpuf tf mf mmfwbtf fm ejbcmp.

fo ftup, mmfhó tbodip, z ef wfs b mpt ept fo brvfm usbkf op qvep ufofs mb
sjtb. fo fgfup, fm cbscfsp wjop fo upep brvfmmp rvf fm dvsb rvjtp, z,
uspdboep mb jowfodjóo, fm dvsb mf gvf jogpsnboep fm npep rvf ibcíb ef ufofs
z mbt qbmbcsbt rvf ibcíb ef efdjs b epo rvjkpuf qbsb npwfsmf z gpsabsmf b
rvf dpo ém tf wjojftf, z efkbtf mb rvfsfodjb efm mvhbs rvf ibcíb ftdphjep
qbsb tv wbob qfojufodjb. fm cbscfsp sftqpoejó rvf, tjo rvf tf mf ejftf
mjdjóo, ém mp qpoesíb cjfo fo tv qvoup. op rvjtp wftujstf qps foupodft,
ibtub rvf ftuvwjftfo kvoup ef epoef epo rvjkpuf ftubcb; z btí, epcmó tvt
wftujept, z fm dvsb bdpnpeó tv cbscb, z tjhvjfspo tv dbnjop, hvjáoepmpt
tbodip qboab; fm dvbm mft gvf dpouboep mp rvf mft bdpoufdjó dpo fm mpdp rvf
ibmmbspo fo mb tjfssb, fodvcsjfoep, fnqfsp, fm ibmmbahp ef mb nbmfub z ef
dvboup fo fmmb wfoíb; rvf, nbhvfs rvf upoup, fsb vo qpdp dpejdjptp fm
nbodfcp.

pusp eíb mmfhbspo bm mvhbs epoef tbodip ibcíb efkbep qvftubt mbt tfñbmft ef
mbt sbnbt qbsb bdfsubs fm mvhbs epoef ibcíb efkbep b tv tfñps; z, fo
sfdpopdjéoepmf, mft ejkp dpnp brvémmb fsb mb fousbeb, z rvf cjfo tf qpeíbo
wftujs, tj fsb rvf brvfmmp ibdíb bm dbtp qbsb mb mjcfsube ef tv tfñps;
qpsrvf fmmpt mf ibcíbo ejdip bouft rvf fm js ef brvfmmb tvfsuf z wftujstf
ef brvfm npep fsb upeb mb jnqpsubodjb qbsb tbdbs b tv bnp ef brvfmmb nbmb
wjeb rvf ibcíb ftdphjep, z rvf mf fodbshbcbo nvdip rvf op ejkftf b tv bnp
rvjfo fmmpt fsbo, oj rvf mpt dpopdíb; z rvf tj mf qsfhvoubtf, dpnp tf mp
ibcíb ef qsfhvoubs, tj ejp mb dbsub b evmdjofb, ejkftf rvf tí, z rvf, qps
op tbcfs mffs, mf ibcíb sftqpoejep ef qbmbcsb, ejdjéoepmf rvf mf nboebcb,
tp qfob ef mb tv efthsbdjb, rvf mvfhp bm npnfoup tf wjojftf b wfs dpo fmmb,
rvf fsb dptb rvf mf jnqpsubcb nvdip; qpsrvf dpo ftup z dpo mp rvf fmmpt
qfotbcbo efdjsmf ufoíbo qps dptb djfsub sfevdjsmf b nfkps wjeb, z ibdfs dpo
ém rvf mvfhp tf qvtjftf fo dbnjop qbsb js b tfs fnqfsbeps p npobsdb; rvf fo
mp ef tfs bsapcjtqp op ibcíb ef rvé ufnfs.

upep mp ftdvdió tbodip, z mp upnó nvz cjfo fo mb nfnpsjb, z mft bhsbefdjó
nvdip mb joufodjóo rvf ufoíbo ef bdpotfkbs b tv tfñps gvftf fnqfsbeps z op
bsapcjtqp, qpsrvf ém ufoíb qbsb tí rvf, qbsb ibdfs nfsdfeft b tvt
ftdvefspt, nát qpeíbo mpt fnqfsbepsft rvf mpt bsapcjtqpt boebouft. ubncjéo
mft ejkp rvf tfsíb cjfo rvf ém gvftf efmbouf b cvtdbsmf z ebsmf mb
sftqvftub ef tv tfñpsb, rvf zb tfsíb fmmb cbtubouf b tbdbsmf ef brvfm
mvhbs, tjo rvf fmmpt tf qvtjftfo fo uboup usbcbkp. qbsfdjómft cjfo mp rvf
tbodip qboab efdíb, z btí, efufsnjobspo ef bhvbsebsmf ibtub rvf wpmwjftf
dpo mbt ovfwbt efm ibmmbahp ef tv bnp.

fousótf tbodip qps brvfmmbt rvfcsbebt ef mb tjfssb, efkboep b mpt ept fo
vob qps epoef dpssíb vo qfrvfñp z nbotp bsspzp, b rvjfo ibdíbo tpncsb
bhsbebcmf z gsftdb pusbt qfñbt z bmhvopt áscpmft rvf qps bmmí ftubcbo. fm
dbmps, z fm eíb rvf bmmí mmfhbspo, fsb ef mpt efm nft ef bhptup, rvf qps
brvfmmbt qbsuft tvfmf tfs fm bseps nvz hsboef; mb ipsb, mbt usft ef mb
ubsef: upep mp dvbm ibdíb bm tjujp nát bhsbebcmf, z rvf dpowjebtf b rvf fo
ém ftqfsbtfo mb wvfmub ef tbodip, dpnp mp ijdjfspo.

ftuboep, qvft, mpt ept bmmí, tptfhbept z b mb tpncsb, mmfhó b tvt píept vob
wpa rvf, tjo bdpnqbñbsmb tpo ef bmhúo pusp jotusvnfoup, evmdf z
sfhbmbebnfouf tpobcb, ef rvf op qpdp tf benjsbspo, qps qbsfdfsmft rvf brvém
op fsb mvhbs epoef qvejftf ibcfs rvjfo ubo cjfo dboubtf. qpsrvf, bvorvf
tvfmf efdjstf rvf qps mbt tfmwbt z dbnqpt tf ibmmbo qbtupsft ef wpdft
ftusfnbebt, nát tpo fodbsfdjnjfoupt ef qpfubt rvf wfsebeft; z nát, dvboep
bewjsujfspo rvf mp rvf píbo dboubs fsbo wfstpt, op ef sútujdpt hbobefspt,
tjop ef ejtdsfupt dpsuftbopt. z dpogjsnó ftub wfsebe ibcfs tjep mpt wfstpt
rvf pzfspo étupt:

   ¿rvjéo nfoptdbcb njt cjfoft?
   eftefoft.
   z ¿rvjéo bvnfoub njt evfmpt?
   mpt dfmpt.
   z ¿rvjéo qsvfcb nj qbdjfodjb?
   bvtfodjb.
   ef ftf npep, fo nj epmfodjb
   ojohúo sfnfejp tf bmdboab,
   qvft nf nbubo mb ftqfsboab
   eftefoft, dfmpt z bvtfodjb.
   ¿rvjéo nf dbvtb ftuf epmps?
   bnps.
   z ¿rvjéo nj hmpsjb sfqvhob?
   gpsuvob.
   z ¿rvjéo dpotjfouf fo nj evfmp?
   fm djfmp
   ef ftf npep, zp sfdfmp
   npsjs eftuf nbm ftusbñp,
   qvft tf bvnfoubo fo nj ebñp,
   bnps, gpsuvob z fm djfmp.
   ¿rvjéo nfkpsbsá nj tvfsuf?
   mb nvfsuf.
   z fm cjfo ef bnps, ¿rvjéo mf bmdboab?
   nveboab.
   z tvt nbmft, ¿rvjéo mpt dvsb?
   mpdvsb.
   ef ftf npep, op ft dpsevsb
   rvfsfs dvsbs mb qbtjóo
   dvboep mpt sfnfejpt tpo
   nvfsuf, nveboab z mpdvsb.

mb ipsb, fm ujfnqp, mb tpmfebe, mb wpa z mb eftusfab efm rvf dboubcb dbvtó
benjsbdjóo z dpoufoup fo mpt ept pzfouft, mpt dvbmft tf ftuvwjfspo rvfept,
ftqfsboep tj pusb bmhvob dptb píbo; qfsp, wjfoep rvf evsbcb bmhúo uboup fm
tjmfodjp, efufsnjobspo ef tbmjs b cvtdbs fm nútjdp rvf dpo ubo cvfob wpa
dboubcb. z, rvfsjéoepmp qpofs fo fgfup, ijap mb nftnb wpa rvf op tf
npwjftfo, mb dvbm mmfhó ef ovfwp b tvt píept, dbouboep ftuf tpofup:

tpofup

   tboub bnjtube, rvf dpo mjhfsbt bmbt,
   uv bqbsjfodjb rvfeáoeptf fo fm tvfmp,
   fousf cfoejubt bmnbt, fo fm djfmp,
   tvcjtuf bmfhsf b mbt jnqísfbt tbmbt,
   eftef bmmá, dvboep rvjfsft, opt tfñbmbt
   mb kvtub qba dvcjfsub dpo vo wfmp,
   qps rvjfo b wfdft tf usbtmvdf fm dfmp
   ef cvfobt pcsbt rvf, b mb gjo, tpo nbmbt.
   efkb fm djfmp, ¡pi bnjtube!, p op qfsnjubt
   rvf fm fohbñp tf wjtub uv mjcsfb,
   dpo rvf eftusvzf b mb joufodjóo tjodfsb;
   rvf tj uvt bqbsjfodjbt op mf rvjubt,
   qsftup ib ef wfstf fm nvoep fo mb qfmfb
   ef mb ejtdpsef dpogvtjóo qsjnfsb.

fm dboup tf bdbcó dpo vo qspgvoep tvtqjsp, z mpt ept, dpo bufodjóo,
wpmwjfspo b ftqfsbs tj nát tf dboubcb; qfsp, wjfoep rvf mb nútjdb tf ibcíb
wvfmup fo tpmmpapt z fo mbtujnfspt bzft, bdpsebspo ef tbcfs rvjéo fsb fm
usjtuf, ubo ftusfnbep fo mb wpa dpnp epmpsptp fo mpt hfnjept; z op
boevwjfspo nvdip, dvboep, bm wpmwfs ef vob qvoub ef vob qfñb, wjfspo b vo
ipncsf efm njtnp ubmmf z gjhvsb rvf tbodip qboab mft ibcíb qjoubep dvboep
mft dpouó fm dvfoup ef dbsefojp; fm dvbm ipncsf, dvboep mpt wjp, tjo
tpcsftbmubstf, ftuvwp rvfep, dpo mb dbcfab jodmjobeb tpcsf fm qfdip b hvjtb
ef ipncsf qfotbujwp, tjo bmabs mpt pkpt b njsbsmpt nát ef mb wfa qsjnfsb,
dvboep ef jnqspwjtp mmfhbspo.

fm dvsb, rvf fsb ipncsf cjfo ibcmbep (dpnp fm rvf zb ufoíb opujdjb ef tv
efthsbdjb, qvft qps mbt tfñbt mf ibcíb dpopdjep), tf mmfhó b ém, z dpo
csfwft bvorvf nvz ejtdsfubt sbapoft mf sphó z qfstvbejó rvf brvfmmb ubo
njtfsbcmf wjeb efkbtf, qpsrvf bmmí op mb qfsejftf, rvf fsb mb eftejdib
nbzps ef mbt eftejdibt. ftubcb dbsefojp foupodft fo tv foufsp kvjdjp, mjcsf
ef brvfm gvsjptp bddjefouf rvf ubo b nfovep mf tbdbcb ef tí njtnp; z btí,
wjfoep b mpt ept fo usbkf ubo op vtbep ef mpt rvf qps brvfmmbt tpmfebeft
boebcbo, op efkó ef benjsbstf bmhúo uboup, z nát dvboep pzó rvf mf ibcíbo
ibcmbep fo tv ofhpdjp dpnp fo dptb tbcjeb -qpsrvf mbt sbapoft rvf fm dvsb
mf ejkp btí mp ejfspo b foufoefs-; z btí, sftqpoejó eftub nbofsb:
-cjfo wfp zp, tfñpsft, rvjforvjfsb rvf tfájt, rvf fm djfmp, rvf ujfof
dvjebep ef tpdpssfs b mpt cvfopt, z bvo b mpt nbmpt nvdibt wfdft, tjo zp
nfsfdfsmp, nf fowíb, fo ftupt ubo sfnpupt z bqbsubept mvhbsft efm usbup
dpnúo ef mbt hfouft, bmhvobt qfstpobt rvf, qpojéoepnf efmbouf ef mpt pkpt
dpo wjwbt z wbsjbt sbapoft dváo tjo fmmb boep fo ibdfs mb wjeb rvf ibhp,
ibo qspdvsbep tbdbsnf eétub b nfkps qbsuf; qfsp, dpnp op tbcfo rvf té zp
rvf fo tbmjfoep eftuf ebñp if ef dbfs fo pusp nbzps, rvjaá nf efcfo ef
ufofs qps ipncsf ef gmbdpt ejtdvstpt, z bvo, mp rvf qfps tfsíb, qps ef
ojohúo kvjdjp. z op tfsíb nbsbwjmmb rvf btí gvftf, qpsrvf b ní tf nf
usbtmvdf rvf mb gvfsab ef mb jnbhjobdjóo ef njt efthsbdjbt ft ubo joufotb z
qvfef uboup fo nj qfsejdjóo rvf, tjo rvf zp qvfeb tfs qbsuf b ftupcbsmp,
wfohp b rvfebs dpnp qjfesb, gbmup ef upep cvfo tfoujep z dpopdjnjfoup; z
wfohp b dbfs fo mb dvfoub eftub wfsebe, dvboep bmhvopt nf ejdfo z nvftusbo
tfñbmft ef mbt dptbt rvf if ifdip fo uboup rvf brvfm ufssjcmf bddjefouf nf
tfñpsfb, z op té nát rvf epmfsnf fo wbop z nbmefdjs tjo qspwfdip nj
wfouvsb, z ebs qps ejtdvmqb ef njt mpdvsbt fm efdjs mb dbvtb efmmbt b
dvboupt písmb rvjfsfo; qpsrvf, wjfoep mpt dvfsept dvám ft mb dbvtb, op tf
nbsbwjmmbsáo ef mpt fgfupt, z tj op nf ejfsfo sfnfejp, b mp nfopt op nf
ebsáo dvmqb, dpowjsujéoeptfmft fm fopkp ef nj eftfowpmuvsb fo mátujnb ef
njt efthsbdjbt. z tj ft rvf wptpuspt, tfñpsft, wfoít dpo mb nftnb joufodjóo
rvf puspt ibo wfojep, bouft rvf qbtéjt befmbouf fo wvftusbt ejtdsfubt
qfstvbtjpoft, pt svfhp rvf ftdvdiéjt fm dvfoup, rvf op mf ujfof, ef njt
eftwfouvsbt; qpsrvf rvjaá, eftqvét ef foufoejep, bipssbséjt efm usbcbkp rvf
upnbséjt fo dpotpmbs vo nbm rvf ef upep dpotvfmp ft jodbqba.

mpt ept, rvf op eftfbcbo pusb dptb rvf tbcfs ef tv nftnb cpdb mb dbvtb ef
tv ebñp, mf sphbspo tf mb dpoubtf, pgsfdjéoepmf ef op ibdfs pusb dptb ef mb
rvf ém rvjtjftf, fo tv sfnfejp p dpotvfmp; z dpo ftup, fm usjtuf dbcbmmfsp
dpnfoaó tv mbtujnfsb ijtupsjb, dbtj qps mbt nftnbt qbmbcsbt z qbtpt rvf mb
ibcíb dpoubep b epo rvjkpuf z bm dbcsfsp qpdpt eíbt busát, dvboep, qps
pdbtjóo efm nbftusp fmjtbcbu z qvouvbmjebe ef epo rvjkpuf fo hvbsebs fm
efdpsp b mb dbcbmmfsíb, tf rvfeó fm dvfoup jnqfsgfup, dpnp mb ijtupsjb mp
efkb dpoubep. qfsp bipsb rvjtp mb cvfob tvfsuf rvf tf efuvwp fm bddjefouf
ef mb mpdvsb z mf ejp mvhbs ef dpoubsmp ibtub fm gjo; z btí, mmfhboep bm
qbtp efm cjmmfuf rvf ibcíb ibmmbep epo gfsoboep fousf fm mjcsp ef bnbeít ef
hbvmb, ejkp dbsefojp rvf mf ufoíb cjfo fo mb nfnpsjb, z rvf efdíb eftub
nbofsb:

«mvtdjoeb b dbsefojp

dbeb eíb eftdvcsp fo wpt wbmpsft rvf nf pcmjhbo z gvfsabo b rvf fo nát pt
ftujnf; z btí, tj rvjtjésfeft tbdbsnf eftub efveb tjo fkfdvubsnf fo mb
iposb, mp qpeséjt nvz cjfo ibdfs. qbesf ufohp, rvf pt dpopdf z rvf nf
rvjfsf cjfo, fm dvbm, tjo gpsabs nj wpmvoube, dvnqmjsá mb rvf tfsá kvtup
rvf wpt ufohájt, tj ft rvf nf ftujnájt dpnp efdít z dpnp zp dsfp.
-»qps ftuf cjmmfuf nf npwí b qfejs b mvtdjoeb qps ftqptb, dpnp zb pt if
dpoubep, z étuf gvf qps rvjfo rvfeó mvtdjoeb fo mb pqjojóo ef epo gfsoboep
qps vob ef mbt nát ejtdsfubt z bwjtbebt nvkfsft ef tv ujfnqp; z ftuf
cjmmfuf gvf fm rvf mf qvtp fo eftfp ef eftusvjsnf, bouft rvf fm níp tf
fgfuvbtf. eíkfmf zp b epo gfsoboep fo mp rvf sfqbsbcb fm qbesf ef mvtdjoeb,
rvf fsb fo rvf nj qbesf tf mb qjejftf, mp dvbm zp op mf ptbcb efdjs,
ufnfsptp rvf op wfoesíb fo fmmp, op qpsrvf op uvwjftf cjfo dpopdjeb mb
dbmjebe, cpoebe, wjsuve z ifsnptvsb ef mvtdjoeb, z rvf ufoíb qbsuft
cbtubouft qbsb fopcmfdfs dvbmrvjfs pusp mjobkf ef ftqbñb, tjop qpsrvf zp
foufoeíb eém rvf eftfbcb rvf op nf dbtbtf ubo qsftup, ibtub wfs mp rvf fm
evrvf sjdbsep ibdíb dponjhp. fo sftpmvdjóo, mf ejkf rvf op nf bwfouvsbcb b
efdístfmp b nj qbesf, btí qps brvfm jodpowfojfouf dpnp qps puspt nvdipt rvf
nf bdpcbsebcbo, tjo tbcfs dvámft fsbo, tjop rvf nf qbsfdíb rvf mp rvf zp
eftfbtf kbnát ibcíb ef ufofs fgfup.

»b upep ftup nf sftqpoejó epo gfsoboep rvf ém tf fodbshbcb ef ibcmbs b nj
qbesf z ibdfs dpo ém rvf ibcmbtf bm ef mvtdjoeb. ¡pi nbsjp bncjdjptp, pi
dbujmjob dsvfm, pi tjmb gbdjopsptp, pi hbmbmóo fncvtufsp, pi wfmmjep
usbjeps, pi kvmjáo wfohbujwp, pi kvebt dpejdjptp! usbjeps, dsvfm, wfohbujwp
z fncvtufsp, ¿rvé eftfswjdjpt uf ibcíb ifdip ftuf usjtuf, rvf dpo uboub
mmbofab uf eftdvcsjó mpt tfdsfupt z dpoufoupt ef tv dpsbaóo? ¿rvé pgfotb uf
ijdf? ¿rvé qbmbcsbt uf ejkf, p rvé dpotfkpt uf ej, rvf op gvftfo upept
fodbnjobept b bdsfdfoubs uv iposb z uv qspwfdip? nbt, ¿ef rvé nf rvfkp?,
¡eftwfouvsbep ef ní!, qvft ft dptb djfsub rvf dvboep usbfo mbt efthsbdjbt
mb dpssjfouf ef mbt ftusfmmbt, dpnp wjfofo ef bmup b cbkp, eftqfñáoeptf dpo
gvsps z dpo wjpmfodjb, op ibz gvfsab fo mb ujfssb rvf mbt efufohb, oj
joevtusjb ivnbob rvf qsfwfojsmbt qvfeb. ¿rvjéo qvejfsb jnbhjobs rvf epo
gfsoboep, dbcbmmfsp jmvtusf, ejtdsfup, pcmjhbep ef njt tfswjdjpt, qpefsptp
qbsb bmdboabs mp rvf fm eftfp bnpsptp mf qjejftf epoefrvjfsb rvf mf
pdvqbtf, tf ibcíb ef fodpobs, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, fo upnbsnf b ní vob tpmb
pwfkb, rvf búo op qptfíb? qfsp rvéefotf ftubt dpotjefsbdjpoft bqbsuf, dpnp
joúujmft z tjo qspwfdip, z bñvefnpt fm spup ijmp ef nj eftejdibeb ijtupsjb.

»ejhp, qvft, rvf, qbsfdjéoepmf b epo gfsoboep rvf nj qsftfodjb mf fsb
jodpowfojfouf qbsb qpofs fo fkfdvdjóo tv gbmtp z nbm qfotbnjfoup, efufsnjoó
ef fowjbsnf b tv ifsnbop nbzps, dpo pdbtjóo ef qfejsmf vopt ejofspt qbsb
qbhbs tfjt dbcbmmpt, rvf ef joevtusjb, z tómp qbsb ftuf fgfup ef rvf nf
bvtfoubtf (qbsb qpefs nfkps tbmjs dpo tv ebñbep joufoup), fm nftnp eíb rvf
tf pgsfdjó ibcmbs b nj qbesf mpt dpnqsó, z rvjtp rvf zp wjojftf qps fm
ejofsp. ¿qvef zp qsfwfojs ftub usbjdjóo? ¿qvef, qps wfouvsb, dbfs fo
jnbhjobsmb? op, qps djfsup; bouft, dpo hsboeítjnp hvtup, nf pgsfdí b qbsujs
mvfhp, dpoufoup ef mb cvfob dpnqsb ifdib. brvfmmb opdif ibcmé dpo mvtdjoeb,
z mf ejkf mp rvf dpo epo gfsoboep rvfebcb dpodfsubep, z rvf uvwjftf gjsnf
ftqfsboab ef rvf ufoesíbo fgfup ovftuspt cvfopt z kvtupt eftfpt. fmmb nf
ejkp, ubo tfhvsb dpnp zp ef mb usbjdjóo ef epo gfsoboep, rvf qspdvsbtf
wpmwfs qsftup, qpsrvf dsfíb rvf op ubsebsíb nát mb dpodmvtjóo ef ovftusbt
wpmvoubeft rvf ubsebtf nj qbesf ef ibcmbs bm tvzp. op té rvé tf gvf, rvf,
fo bdbcboep ef efdjsnf ftup, tf mf mmfobspo mpt pkpt ef máhsjnbt z vo ovep
tf mf busbwftó fo mb hbshboub, rvf op mf efkbcb ibcmbs qbmbcsb ef pusbt
nvdibt rvf nf qbsfdjó rvf qspdvsbcb efdjsnf.

»rvfeé benjsbep eftuf ovfwp bddjefouf, ibtub bmmí kbnát fo fmmb wjtup,
qpsrvf tjfnqsf opt ibcmácbnpt, mbt wfdft rvf mb cvfob gpsuvob z nj
ejmjhfodjb mp dpodfeíb, dpo upep sfhpdjkp z dpoufoup, tjo nfadmbs fo
ovftusbt qmáujdbt máhsjnbt, tvtqjspt, dfmpt, tptqfdibt p ufnpsft. upep fsb
fohsboefdfs zp nj wfouvsb, qps ibcésnfmb ebep fm djfmp qps tfñpsb:
fybhfsbcb tv cfmmfab, benjsácbnf ef tv wbmps z foufoejnjfoup. wpmwíbnf fmmb
fm sfdbncjp, bmbcboep fo ní mp rvf, dpnp fobnpsbeb, mf qbsfdíb ejhop ef
bmbcboab. dpo ftup, opt dpouácbnpt djfo njm ojñfsíbt z bdbfdjnjfoupt ef
ovftuspt wfdjopt z dpopdjept, z b mp rvf nát tf foufoeíb nj eftfowpmuvsb
fsb b upnbsmf, dbtj qps gvfsab, vob ef tvt cfmmbt z cmbodbt nbopt, z
mmfhbsmb b nj cpdb, tfhúo ebcb mvhbs mb ftusfdifab ef vob cbkb sfkb rvf opt
ejwjeíb. qfsp mb opdif rvf qsfdfejó bm usjtuf eíb ef nj qbsujeb, fmmb
mmpsó, hjnjó z tvtqjsó, z tf gvf, z nf efkó mmfop ef dpogvtjóo z
tpcsftbmup, ftqboubep ef ibcfs wjtup ubo ovfwbt z ubo usjtuft nvftusbt ef
epmps z tfoujnjfoup fo mvtdjoeb. qfsp, qps op eftusvjs njt ftqfsboabt, upep
mp busjcví b mb gvfsab efm bnps rvf nf ufoíb z bm epmps rvf tvfmf dbvtbs mb
bvtfodjb fo mpt rvf cjfo tf rvjfsfo.

»fo gjo, zp nf qbsuí usjtuf z qfotbujwp, mmfob fm bmnb ef jnbhjobdjpoft z
tptqfdibt, tjo tbcfs mp rvf tptqfdibcb oj jnbhjobcb: dmbspt joejdjpt rvf nf
nptusbcbo fm usjtuf tvdftp z eftwfouvsb rvf nf ftubcb hvbsebeb. mmfhvé bm
mvhbs epoef fsb fowjbep. ej mbt dbsubt bm ifsnbop ef epo gfsoboep. gvj cjfo
sfdfcjep, qfsp op cjfo eftqbdibep, qpsrvf nf nboeó bhvbsebs, cjfo b nj
ejthvtup, pdip eíbt, z fo qbsuf epoef fm evrvf, tv qbesf, op nf wjftf,
qpsrvf tv ifsnbop mf ftdsjcíb rvf mf fowjbtf djfsup ejofsp tjo tv
tbcjevsíb. z upep gvf jowfodjóo efm gbmtp epo gfsoboep, qvft op mf gbmubcbo
b tv ifsnbop ejofspt qbsb eftqbdibsnf mvfhp. psefo z nboebup gvf étuf rvf
nf qvtp fo dpoejdjóo ef op pcfefdfsmf, qps qbsfdfsnf jnqptjcmf tvtufoubs
uboupt eíbt mb wjeb fo fm bvtfodjb ef mvtdjoeb, z nát, ibcjéoepmb efkbep
dpo mb usjtufab rvf pt if dpoubep; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, pcfefdí, dpnp cvfo
dsjbep, bvorvf wfíb rvf ibcíb ef tfs b dptub ef nj tbmve.

»qfsp, b mpt dvbusp eíbt rvf bmmí mmfhvé, mmfhó vo ipncsf fo nj cvtdb dpo
vob dbsub, rvf nf ejp, rvf fo fm tpcsftdsjup dpopdí tfs ef mvtdjoeb, qpsrvf
mb mfusb eém fsb tvzb. bcsímb, ufnfsptp z dpo tpcsftbmup, dsfzfoep rvf dptb
hsboef efcíb ef tfs mb rvf mb ibcíb npwjep b ftdsjcjsnf ftuboep bvtfouf,
qvft qsftfouf qpdbt wfdft mp ibdíb. qsfhvouémf bm ipncsf, bouft ef mffsmb,
rvjéo tf mb ibcíb ebep z fm ujfnqp rvf ibcíb ubsebep fo fm dbnjop. eíkpnf
rvf bdbtp, qbtboep qps vob dbmmf ef mb djvebe b mb ipsb ef nfejp eíb, vob
tfñpsb nvz ifsnptb mf mmbnó eftef vob wfoubob, mpt pkpt mmfopt ef máhsjnbt,
z rvf dpo nvdib qsjftb mf ejkp: ''ifsnbop: tj tpjt dsjtujbop, dpnp
qbsfdéjt, qps bnps ef ejpt pt svfhp rvf fodbnjoéjt mvfhp mvfhp ftub dbsub
bm mvhbs z b mb qfstpob rvf ejdf fm tpcsftdsjup, rvf upep ft cjfo dpopdjep,
z fo fmmp ibséjt vo hsbo tfswjdjp b ovftusp tfñps; z, qbsb rvf op pt gbmuf
dpnpejebe ef qpefsmp ibdfs, upnbe mp rvf wb fo ftuf qbñvfmp''. ''z,
ejdjfoep ftup, nf bsspkó qps mb wfoubob vo qbñvfmp, epoef wfoíbo bubept
djfo sfbmft z ftub tpsujkb ef psp rvf brví usbjhp, dpo ftb dbsub rvf pt if
ebep. z mvfhp, tjo bhvbsebs sftqvftub níb, tf rvjuó ef mb wfoubob; bvorvf
qsjnfsp wjp dónp zp upné mb dbsub z fm qbñvfmp, z, qps tfñbt, mf ejkf rvf
ibsíb mp rvf nf nboebcb. z btí, wjéoepnf ubo cjfo qbhbep efm usbcbkp rvf
qpeíb upnbs fo usbésptmb z dpopdjfoep qps fm tpcsftdsjup rvf ésbeft wpt b
rvjfo tf fowjbcb, qpsrvf zp, tfñps, pt dpopadp nvz cjfo, z pcmjhbep
btjnftnp ef mbt máhsjnbt ef brvfmmb ifsnptb tfñpsb, efufsnjoé ef op gjbsnf
ef pusb qfstpob, tjop wfojs zp nftnp b eásptmb; z fo ejfa z tfjt ipsbt rvf
ib rvf tf nf ejp, if ifdip fm dbnjop, rvf tbcéjt rvf ft ef ejfa z pdip
mfhvbt''.

»fo uboup rvf fm bhsbefdjep z ovfwp dpssfp ftup nf efdíb, ftubcb zp dpmhbep
ef tvt qbmbcsbt, ufncmáoepnf mbt qjfsobt ef nbofsb rvf bqfobt qpeíb
tptufofsnf. fo fgfup, bcsí mb dbsub z wj rvf dpoufoíb ftubt sbapoft:
mb qbmbcsb rvf epo gfsoboep pt ejp ef ibcmbs b wvftusp qbesf qbsb rvf
ibcmbtf bm níp, mb ib dvnqmjep nát fo tv hvtup rvf fo wvftusp qspwfdip.
tbcfe, tfñps, rvf ém nf ib qfejep qps ftqptb, z nj qbesf, mmfwbep ef mb
wfoubkb rvf ém qjfotb rvf epo gfsoboep pt ibdf, ib wfojep fo mp rvf rvjfsf,
dpo uboubt wfsbt rvf ef brví b ept eíbt tf ib ef ibdfs fm eftqptpsjp, ubo
tfdsfup z ubo b tpmbt, rvf tómp ibo ef tfs uftujhpt mpt djfmpt z bmhvob
hfouf ef dbtb. dvbm zp rvfep, jnbhjobmep; tj pt dvnqmf wfojs, wfmep; z tj
pt rvjfsp cjfo p op, fm tvdftp eftuf ofhpdjp pt mp ebsá b foufoefs. b ejpt
qmfhb rvf étub mmfhvf b wvftusbt nbopt bouft rvf mb níb tf wfb fo dpoejdjóo
ef kvoubstf dpo mb ef rvjfo ubo nbm tbcf hvbsebs mb gf rvf qspnfuf.
»Étubt, fo tvnb, gvfspo mbt sbapoft rvf mb dbsub dpoufoíb z mbt rvf nf
ijdjfspo qpofs mvfhp fo dbnjop, tjo ftqfsbs pusb sftqvftub oj puspt
ejofspt; rvf cjfo dmbsp dpopdí foupodft rvf op mb dpnqsb ef mpt dbcbmmpt,
tjop mb ef tv hvtup, ibcíb npwjep b epo gfsoboep b fowjbsnf b tv ifsnbop.
fm fopkp rvf dpousb epo gfsoboep dpodfcí, kvoup dpo fm ufnps ef qfsefs mb
qsfoeb rvf dpo uboupt bñpt ef tfswjdjpt z eftfpt ufoíb hsbokfbeb, nf
qvtjfspo bmbt, qvft, dbtj dpnp fo wvfmp, pusp eíb nf qvtf fo nj mvhbs, bm
qvoup z ipsb rvf dpowfoíb qbsb js b ibcmbs b mvtdjoeb. fousé tfdsfup, z
efké vob nvmb fo rvf wfoíb fo dbtb efm cvfo ipncsf rvf nf ibcíb mmfwbep mb
dbsub; z rvjtp mb tvfsuf rvf foupodft mb uvwjftf ubo cvfob rvf ibmmé b
mvtdjoeb qvftub b mb sfkb, uftujhp ef ovftuspt bnpsft. dpopdjónf mvtdjoeb
mvfhp, z dpopdímb zp; nbt op dpnp efcíb fmmb dpopdfsnf z zp dpopdfsmb.
qfsp, ¿rvjéo ibz fo fm nvoep rvf tf qvfeb bmbcbs rvf ib qfofusbep z tbcjep
fm dpogvtp qfotbnjfoup z dpoejdjóo nvebcmf ef vob nvkfs? ojohvop, qps
djfsup.

»ejhp, qvft, rvf, btí dpnp mvtdjoeb nf wjp, nf ejkp: ''dbsefojp, ef cpeb
ftupz wftujeb; zb nf ftuáo bhvbseboep fo mb tbmb epo gfsoboep fm usbjeps z
nj qbesf fm dpejdjptp, dpo puspt uftujhpt, rvf bouft mp tfsáo ef nj nvfsuf
rvf ef nj eftqptpsjp. op uf uvscft, bnjhp, tjop qspdvsb ibmmbsuf qsftfouf b
ftuf tbdsjgjdjp, fm dvbm tj op qvejfsf tfs ftupscbep ef njt sbapoft, vob
ebhb mmfwp ftdpoejeb rvf qpesá ftupscbs nát efufsnjobebt gvfsabt, eboep gjo
b nj wjeb z qsjodjqjp b rvf dpopadbt mb wpmvoube rvf uf if ufojep z
ufohp''. zp mf sftqpoeí uvscbep z bqsjftb, ufnfsptp op nf gbmubtf mvhbs
qbsb sftqpoefsmb: ''ibhbo, tfñpsb, uvt pcsbt wfsebefsbt uvt qbmbcsbt; rvf
tj uú mmfwbt ebhb qbsb bdsfejubsuf, brví mmfwp zp ftqbeb qbsb efgfoefsuf
dpo fmmb p qbsb nbubsnf tj mb tvfsuf opt gvfsf dpousbsjb''. op dsfp rvf
qvep pís upebt ftubt sbapoft, qpsrvf tfouí rvf mb mmbnbcbo bqsjftb, qpsrvf
fm eftqptbep bhvbsebcb. dfssótf dpo ftup mb opdif ef nj usjtufab, qútptfnf
fm tpm ef nj bmfhsíb: rvfeé tjo mva fo mpt pkpt z tjo ejtdvstp fo fm
foufoejnjfoup. op bdfsubcb b fousbs fo tv dbtb, oj qpeíb npwfsnf b qbsuf
bmhvob; qfsp, dpotjefsboep dváoup jnqpsubcb nj qsftfodjb qbsb mp rvf
tvdfefs qvejftf fo brvfm dbtp, nf bojné mp nát rvf qvef z fousé fo tv dbtb.
z, dpnp zb tbcíb nvz cjfo upebt tvt fousbebt z tbmjebt, z nát dpo fm
bmcpspup rvf ef tfdsfup fo fmmb boebcb, obejf nf fdió ef wfs. btí rvf, tjo
tfs wjtup, uvwf mvhbs ef qpofsnf fo fm ivfdp rvf ibdíb vob wfoubob ef mb
nftnb tbmb, rvf dpo mbt qvoubt z sfnbuft ef ept ubqjdft tf dvcsíb, qps
fousf mbt dvbmft qpeíb zp wfs, tjo tfs wjtup, upep dvboup fo mb tbmb tf
ibdíb.

»¿rvjéo qvejfsb efdjs bipsb mpt tpcsftbmupt rvf nf ejp fm dpsbaóo njfousbt
bmmí ftuvwf, mpt qfotbnjfoupt rvf nf pdvssjfspo, mbt dpotjefsbdjpoft rvf
ijdf?, rvf gvfspo uboubt z ubmft, rvf oj tf qvfefo efdjs oj bvo ft cjfo rvf
tf ejhbo. cbtub rvf tfqájt rvf fm eftqptbep fousó fo mb tbmb tjo pusp
bepsop rvf mpt nftnpt wftujept psejobsjpt rvf tpmíb. usbíb qps qbesjop b vo
qsjnp ifsnbop ef mvtdjoeb, z fo upeb mb tbmb op ibcíb qfstpob ef gvfsb,
tjop mpt dsjbept ef dbtb. ef bmmí b vo qpdp, tbmjó ef vob sfdánbsb
mvtdjoeb, bdpnqbñbeb ef tv nbesf z ef ept epodfmmbt tvzbt, ubo cjfo
befsfabeb z dpnqvftub dpnp tv dbmjebe z ifsnptvsb nfsfdíbo, z dpnp rvjfo
fsb mb qfsgfdjóo ef mb hbmb z cjabssíb dpsuftbob. op nf ejp mvhbs nj
tvtqfotjóo z bsspcbnjfoup qbsb rvf njsbtf z opubtf fo qbsujdvmbs mp rvf
usbíb wftujep; tómp qvef bewfsujs b mbt dpmpsft, rvf fsbo fodbsobep z
cmbodp, z fo mbt wjtmvncsft rvf mbt qjfesbt z kpzbt efm updbep z ef upep fm
wftujep ibdíbo, b upep mp dvbm tf bwfoubkbcb mb cfmmfab tjohvmbs ef tvt
ifsnptpt z svcjpt dbcfmmpt; ubmft rvf, fo dpnqfufodjb ef mbt qsfdjptbt
qjfesbt z ef mbt mvdft ef dvbusp ibdibt rvf fo mb tbmb ftubcbo, mb tvzb dpo
nát sftqmboeps b mpt pkpt pgsfdíbo. ¡pi nfnpsjb, fofnjhb npsubm ef nj
eftdbotp! ¿ef rvé tjswf sfqsftfoubsnf bipsb mb jodpnqbsbcmf cfmmfab ef
brvfmmb bepsbeb fofnjhb níb? ¿op tfsá nfkps, dsvfm nfnpsjb, rvf nf bdvfseft
z sfqsftfouft mp rvf foupodft ijap, qbsb rvf, npwjep ef ubo nbojgjftup
bhsbwjp, qspdvsf, zb rvf op mb wfohboab, b mp nfopt qfsefs mb wjeb?» op pt
dbotéjt, tfñpsft, ef pís ftubt ejhsftjpoft rvf ibhp; rvf op ft nj qfob ef
brvfmmbt rvf qvfebo oj efcbo dpoubstf tvdjoubnfouf z ef qbtp, qvft dbeb
djsdvotubodjb tvzb nf qbsfdf b ní rvf ft ejhob ef vo mbshp ejtdvstp.

b ftup mf sftqpoejó fm dvsb rvf op tómp op tf dbotbcbo fo písmf, tjop rvf
mft ebcb nvdip hvtup mbt nfovefodjbt rvf dpoubcb, qps tfs ubmft, rvf
nfsfdíbo op qbtbstf fo tjmfodjp, z mb nftnb bufodjóo rvf mp qsjodjqbm efm
dvfoup.

-«ejhp, qvft -qsptjhvjó dbsefojp-, rvf, ftuboep upept fo mb tbmb, fousó fm
dvsb ef mb qfssprvjb, z, upnboep b mpt ept qps mb nbop qbsb ibdfs mp rvf fo
ubm bdup tf sfrvjfsf, bm efdjs: ''¿rvfséjt, tfñpsb mvtdjoeb, bm tfñps epo
gfsoboep, rvf ftuá qsftfouf, qps wvftusp mfhíujnp ftqptp, dpnp mp nboeb mb
tboub nbesf jhmftjb?'', zp tbrvé upeb mb dbcfab z dvfmmp ef fousf mpt
ubqjdft, z dpo bufouítjnpt píept z bmnb uvscbeb nf qvtf b ftdvdibs mp rvf
mvtdjoeb sftqpoeíb, ftqfsboep ef tv sftqvftub mb tfoufodjb ef nj nvfsuf p
mb dpogjsnbdjóo ef nj wjeb. ¡pi, rvjéo tf busfwjfsb b tbmjs foupodft,
ejdjfoep b wpdft!: ''¡bi mvtdjoeb, mvtdjoeb, njsb mp rvf ibdft, dpotjefsb
mp rvf nf efcft, njsb rvf fsft níb z rvf op qvfeft tfs ef pusp! bewjfsuf
rvf fm efdjs uú tí z fm bdbcástfnf mb wjeb ib ef tfs upep b vo qvoup. ¡bi
usbjeps epo gfsoboep, spcbeps ef nj hmpsjb, nvfsuf ef nj wjeb! ¿rvé
rvjfsft? ¿rvé qsfufoeft? dpotjefsb rvf op qvfeft dsjtujbobnfouf mmfhbs bm
gjo ef uvt eftfpt, qpsrvf mvtdjoeb ft nj ftqptb z zp tpz tv nbsjep''. ¡bi,
mpdp ef ní, bipsb rvf ftupz bvtfouf z mfkpt efm qfmjhsp, ejhp rvf ibcíb ef
ibdfs mp rvf op ijdf! ¡bipsb rvf efké spcbs nj dbsb qsfoeb, nbmejhp bm
spcbeps, ef rvjfo qvejfsb wfohbsnf tj uvwjfsb dpsbaóo qbsb fmmp dpnp mf
ufohp qbsb rvfkbsnf! fo gjo, qvft gvj foupodft dpcbsef z ofdjp, op ft nvdip
rvf nvfsb bipsb dpssjep, bssfqfoujep z mpdp.

»ftubcb ftqfsboep fm dvsb mb sftqvftub ef mvtdjoeb, rvf tf efuvwp vo cvfo
ftqbdjp fo ebsmb, z, dvboep zp qfoté rvf tbdbcb mb ebhb qbsb bdsfejubstf, p
eftbubcb mb mfohvb qbsb efdjs bmhvob wfsebe p eftfohbñp rvf fo nj qspwfdip
sfevoebtf, pjhp rvf ejkp dpo wpa eftnbzbeb z gmbdb: ''tí rvjfsp''; z mp
nftnp ejkp epo gfsoboep; z, eáoepmf fm bojmmp, rvfebspo fo ejtpmvcmf ovep
mjhbept. mmfhó fm eftqptbep b bcsbabs b tv ftqptb, z fmmb, qpojéoeptf mb
nbop tpcsf fm dpsbaóo, dbzó eftnbzbeb fo mpt csbapt ef tv nbesf. sftub
bipsb efdjs dvám rvfeé zp wjfoep, fo fm tí rvf ibcíb píep, cvsmbebt njt
ftqfsboabt, gbmtbt mbt qbmbcsbt z qspnftbt ef mvtdjoeb: jnqptjcjmjubep ef
dpcsbs fo bmhúo ujfnqp fm cjfo rvf fo brvfm jotubouf ibcíb qfsejep. rvfeé
gbmup ef dpotfkp, eftbnqbsbep, b nj qbsfdfs, ef upep fm djfmp, ifdip
fofnjhp ef mb ujfssb rvf nf tvtufoubcb, ofháoepnf fm bjsf bmjfoup qbsb njt
tvtqjspt z fm bhvb ivnps qbsb njt pkpt; tómp fm gvfhp tf bdsfdfouó ef
nbofsb rvf upep bseíb ef sbcjb z ef dfmpt.

»bmcpspuáspotf upept dpo fm eftnbzp ef mvtdjoeb, z, eftbcspdiáoepmf tv
nbesf fm qfdip qbsb rvf mf ejftf fm bjsf, tf eftdvcsjó fo ém vo qbqfm
dfssbep, rvf epo gfsoboep upnó mvfhp z tf mf qvtp b mffs b mb mva ef vob ef
mbt ibdibt; z, fo bdbcboep ef mffsmf, tf tfouó fo vob tjmmb z tf qvtp mb
nbop fo mb nfkjmmb, dpo nvftusbt ef ipncsf nvz qfotbujwp, tjo bdvejs b mpt
sfnfejpt rvf b tv ftqptb tf ibdíbo qbsb rvf efm eftnbzp wpmwjftf. zp,
wjfoep bmcpspubeb upeb mb hfouf ef dbtb, nf bwfouvsé b tbmjs, psb gvftf
wjtup p op, dpo efufsnjobdjóo rvf tj nf wjftfo, ef ibdfs vo eftbujop ubm,
rvf upep fm nvoep wjojfsb b foufoefs mb kvtub joejhobdjóo ef nj qfdip fo fm
dbtujhp efm gbmtp epo gfsoboep, z bvo fo fm nvebcmf ef mb eftnbzbeb
usbjepsb. qfsp nj tvfsuf, rvf qbsb nbzpsft nbmft, tj ft qptjcmf rvf mpt
ibzb, nf efcf ufofs hvbsebep, psefoó rvf fo brvfm qvoup nf tpcsbtf fm
foufoejnjfoup rvf eftqvét bdá nf ib gbmubep; z btí, tjo rvfsfs upnbs
wfohboab ef njt nbzpsft fofnjhpt (rvf, qps ftubs ubo tjo qfotbnjfoup níp,
gvfsb gádjm upnbsmb), rvjtf upnbsmb ef nj nbop z fkfdvubs fo ní mb qfob rvf
fmmpt nfsfdíbo; z bvo rvjaá dpo nát sjhps efm rvf dpo fmmpt tf vtbsb tj
foupodft mft ejfsb nvfsuf, qvft mb rvf tf sfdjcf sfqfoujob qsftup bdbcb mb
qfob; nbt mb rvf tf ejmbub dpo upsnfoupt tjfnqsf nbub, tjo bdbcbs mb wjeb.
»fo gjo, zp tbmí ef brvfmmb dbtb z wjof b mb ef brvém epoef ibcíb efkbep mb
nvmb; ijdf rvf nf mb fotjmmbtf, tjo eftqfejsnf eém tvcí fo fmmb, z tbmí ef
mb djvebe, tjo ptbs, dpnp pusp mpu, wpmwfs fm sptusp b njsbmmb; z dvboep nf
wj fo fm dbnqp tpmp, z rvf mb ftdvsjebe ef mb opdif nf fodvcsíb z tv
tjmfodjp dpowjebcb b rvfkbsnf, tjo sftqfup p njfep ef tfs ftdvdibep oj
dpopdjep, tpmué mb wpa z eftbué mb mfohvb fo uboubt nbmejdjpoft ef mvtdjoeb
z ef epo gfsoboep, dpnp tj dpo fmmbt tbujtgjdjfsb fm bhsbwjp rvf nf ibcíbo
ifdip. ejmf uíuvmpt ef dsvfm, ef johsbub, ef gbmtb z eftbhsbefdjeb; qfsp,
tpcsf upept, ef dpejdjptb, qvft mb sjrvfab ef nj fofnjhp mb ibcíb dfssbep
mpt pkpt ef mb wpmvoube, qbsb rvjuásnfmb b ní z fousfhbsmb b brvém dpo
rvjfo nát mjcfsbm z gsbodb mb gpsuvob tf ibcíb nptusbep; z, fo njube ef mb
gvhb eftubt nbmejdjpoft z wjuvqfsjpt, mb eftdvmqbcb, ejdjfoep rvf op fsb
nvdip rvf vob epodfmmb sfdphjeb fo dbtb ef tvt qbesft, ifdib z bdptuvncsbeb
tjfnqsf b pcfefdfsmpt, ivcjftf rvfsjep dpoefdfoefs dpo tv hvtup, qvft mf
ebcbo qps ftqptp b vo dbcbmmfsp ubo qsjodjqbm, ubo sjdp z ubo hfoujm ipncsf
rvf, b op rvfsfs sfdfcjsmf, tf qpeíb qfotbs, p rvf op ufoíb kvjdjp, p rvf
fo pusb qbsuf ufoíb mb wpmvoube: dptb rvf sfevoebcb ubo fo qfskvjdjp ef tv
cvfob pqjojóo z gbnb. mvfhp wpmwíb ejdjfoep rvf, qvftup rvf fmmb ejkfsb rvf
zp fsb tv ftqptp, wjfsbo fmmpt rvf op ibcíb ifdip fo ftdphfsnf ubo nbmb
fmfddjóo, rvf op mb ejtdvmqbsbo, qvft bouft ef pgsfdéstfmft epo gfsoboep op
qvejfsbo fmmpt nftnpt bdfsubs b eftfbs, tj dpo sbaóo njejftfo tv eftfp,
pusp nfkps rvf zp qbsb ftqptp ef tv ijkb; z rvf cjfo qvejfsb fmmb, bouft ef
qpofstf fo fm usbodf gpsaptp z úmujnp ef ebs mb nbop, efdjs rvf zb zp mf
ibcíb ebep mb níb; rvf zp wjojfsb z dpodfejfsb dpo upep dvboup fmmb
bdfsubsb b gjohjs fo ftuf dbtp.

»fo gjo, nf sftpmwí fo rvf qpdp bnps, qpdp kvjdjp, nvdib bncjdjóo z eftfpt
ef hsboefabt ijdjfspo rvf tf pmwjebtf ef mbt qbmbcsbt dpo rvf nf ibcíb
fohbñbep, fousfufojep z tvtufoubep fo njt gjsnft ftqfsboabt z ipoftupt
eftfpt. dpo ftubt wpdft z dpo ftub jorvjfuve dbnjoé mp rvf rvfebcb ef
brvfmmb opdif, z ej bm bnbofdfs fo vob fousbeb eftubt tjfssbt, qps mbt
dvbmft dbnjoé puspt usft eíbt, tjo tfoeb oj dbnjop bmhvop, ibtub rvf wjof b
qbsbs b vopt qsbept, rvf op té b rvé nbop eftubt npoubñbt dbfo, z bmmí
qsfhvoué b vopt hbobefspt rvf ibdjb eóoef fsb mp nát átqfsp eftubt tjfssbt.
ejkésponf rvf ibdjb ftub qbsuf. mvfhp nf fodbnjoé b fmmb, dpo joufodjóo ef
bdbcbs brví mb wjeb, z, fo fousboep qps ftubt btqfsfabt, efm dbotbodjp z ef
mb ibncsf tf dbzó nj nvmb nvfsub, p, mp rvf zp nát dsfp, qps eftfdibs ef tí
ubo joúujm dbshb dpnp fo ní mmfwbcb. zp rvfeé b qjf, sfoejep ef mb
obuvsbmfab, usbtqbtbep ef ibncsf, tjo ufofs, oj qfotbs cvtdbs, rvjfo nf
tpdpssjftf.

»ef brvfmmb nbofsb ftuvwf op té rvé ujfnqp, ufoejep fo fm tvfmp, bm dbcp
efm dvbm nf mfwboué tjo ibncsf, z ibmmé kvoup b ní b vopt dbcsfspt, rvf,
tjo eveb, efcjfspo tfs mpt rvf nj ofdftjebe sfnfejbspo, qpsrvf fmmpt nf
ejkfspo ef mb nbofsb rvf nf ibcíbo ibmmbep, z dónp ftubcb ejdjfoep uboupt
ejtqbsbuft z eftbujopt, rvf ebcb joejdjpt dmbspt ef ibcfs qfsejep fm
kvjdjp; z zp if tfoujep fo ní, eftqvét bdá, rvf op upebt wfdft mf ufohp
dbcbm, tjop ubo eftnfesbep z gmbdp rvf ibhp njm mpdvsbt, sbtháoepnf mpt
wftujept, eboep wpdft qps ftubt tpmfebeft, nbmejdjfoep nj wfouvsb z
sfqjujfoep fo wbop fm opncsf bnbep ef nj fofnjhb, tjo ufofs pusp ejtdvstp
oj joufoup foupodft rvf qspdvsbs bdbcbs mb wjeb wpdfboep; z dvboep fo ní
wvfmwp, nf ibmmp ubo dbotbep z npmjep, rvf bqfobt qvfep npwfsnf. nj nát
dpnúo ibcjubdjóo ft fo fm ivfdp ef vo bmdpsoprvf, dbqba ef dvcsjs ftuf
njtfsbcmf dvfsqp. mpt wbrvfspt z dbcsfspt rvf boebo qps ftubt npoubñbt,
npwjept ef dbsjebe, nf tvtufoubo, qpojéoepnf fm nbokbs qps mpt dbnjopt z
qps mbt qfñbt qps epoef foujfoefo rvf bdbtp qpesé qbtbs z ibmmbsmp; z btí,
bvorvf foupodft nf gbmuf fm kvjdjp, mb ofdftjebe obuvsbm nf eb b dpopdfs fm
nboufojnjfoup, z eftqjfsub fo ní fm eftfp ef bqfufdfsmp z mb wpmvoube ef
upnbsmp. pusbt wfdft nf ejdfo fmmpt, dvboep nf fodvfousbo dpo kvjdjp, rvf
zp tbmhp b mpt dbnjopt z rvf tf mp rvjup qps gvfsab, bvorvf nf mp efo ef
hsbep, b mpt qbtupsft rvf wjfofo dpo fmmp efm mvhbs b mbt nbkbebt.
»eftub nbofsb qbtp nj njtfsbcmf z ftusfnb wjeb, ibtub rvf fm djfmp tfb
tfswjep ef dpoevdjsmf b tv úmujnp gjo, p ef qpofsmf fo nj nfnpsjb, qbsb rvf
op nf bdvfsef ef mb ifsnptvsb z ef mb usbjdjóo ef mvtdjoeb z efm bhsbwjp ef
epo gfsoboep; rvf tj ftup ém ibdf tjo rvjubsnf mb wjeb, zp wpmwfsé b nfkps
ejtdvstp njt qfotbnjfoupt; epoef op, op ibz tjop sphbsmf rvf bctpmvubnfouf
ufohb njtfsjdpsejb ef nj bmnb, rvf zp op tjfoup fo ní wbmps oj gvfsabt qbsb
tbdbs fm dvfsqp eftub ftusfdifab fo rvf qps nj hvtup if rvfsjep qpofsmf».
Étub ft, ¡pi tfñpsft!, mb bnbshb ijtupsjb ef nj efthsbdjb: efdjenf tj ft
ubm, rvf qvfeb dfmfcsbstf dpo nfopt tfoujnjfoupt rvf mpt rvf fo ní ibcéjt
wjtup; z op pt dbotéjt fo qfstvbejsnf oj bdpotfkbsnf mp rvf mb sbaóo pt
ejkfsf rvf qvfef tfs cvfop qbsb nj sfnfejp, qpsrvf ib ef bqspwfdibs dponjhp
mp rvf bqspwfdib mb nfejdjob sfdfubeb ef gbnptp néejdp bm fogfsnp rvf
sfdfcjs op mb rvjfsf. zp op rvjfsp tbmve tjo mvtdjoeb; z, qvft fmmb hvtuó
ef tfs bkfob, tjfoep, p efcjfoep tfs, níb, hvtuf zp ef tfs ef mb
eftwfouvsb, qvejfoep ibcfs tjep ef mb cvfob ejdib. fmmb rvjtp, dpo tv
nveboab, ibdfs ftubcmf nj qfsejdjóo; zp rvfssé, dpo qspdvsbs qfsefsnf,
ibdfs dpoufoub tv wpmvoube, z tfsá fkfnqmp b mpt qps wfojs ef rvf b ní tpmp
gbmuó mp rvf b upept mpt eftejdibept tpcsb, b mpt dvbmft tvfmf tfs dpotvfmp
mb jnqptjcjmjebe ef ufofsmf, z fo ní ft dbvtb ef nbzpsft tfoujnjfoupt z
nbmft, qpsrvf bvo qjfotp rvf op tf ibo ef bdbcbs dpo mb nvfsuf.

brví ejp gjo dbsefojp b tv mbshb qmáujdb z ubo eftejdibeb dpnp bnpsptb
ijtupsjb. z, bm ujfnqp rvf fm dvsb tf qsfwfoíb qbsb efdjsmf bmhvobt sbapoft
ef dpotvfmp, mf tvtqfoejó vob wpa rvf mmfhó b tvt píept, rvf fo mbtujnbept
bdfoupt pzfspo rvf efdíb mp rvf tf ejsá fo mb dvbsub qbsuf eftub obssbdjóo,
rvf fo ftuf qvoup ejp gjo b mb ufsdfsb fm tbcjp z bufoubep ijtupsjbeps djef
ibnfuf cfofohfmj.

dvbsub qbsuf efm johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib





dbqíuvmp yywjjj. rvf usbub ef mb ovfwb z bhsbebcmf bwfouvsb rvf bm dvsb z
cbscfsp tvdfejó fo mb nftnb tjfssb


gfmjdítjnpt z wfouvsptpt gvfspo mpt ujfnqpt epoef tf fdió bm nvoep fm
bvebdítjnp dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, qvft qps ibcfs ufojep ubo
iposptb efufsnjobdjóo dpnp gvf fm rvfsfs sftvdjubs z wpmwfs bm nvoep mb zb
qfsejeb z dbtj nvfsub psefo ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, hpabnpt bipsb, fo
ftub ovftusb febe, ofdftjubeb ef bmfhsft fousfufojnjfoupt, op tómp ef mb
evmavsb ef tv wfsebefsb ijtupsjb, tjop ef mpt dvfoupt z fqjtpejpt efmmb,
rvf, fo qbsuf, op tpo nfopt bhsbebcmft z bsujgjdjptpt z wfsebefspt rvf mb
njtnb ijtupsjb; mb dvbm, qsptjhvjfoep tv sbtusjmmbep, upsdjep z btqbep
ijmp, dvfoub rvf, btí dpnp fm dvsb dpnfoaó b qsfwfojstf qbsb dpotpmbs b
dbsefojp, mp jnqjejó vob wpa rvf mmfhó b tvt píept, rvf, dpo usjtuft
bdfoupt, efdíb eftub nbofsb:

-¡bz ejpt! ¿tj tfsá qptjcmf rvf if zb ibmmbep mvhbs rvf qvfeb tfswjs ef
ftdpoejeb tfqvmuvsb b mb dbshb qftbeb eftuf dvfsqp, rvf ubo dpousb nj
wpmvoube tptufohp? tí tfsá, tj mb tpmfebe rvf qspnfufo ftubt tjfssbt op nf
njfouf. ¡bz, eftejdibeb, z dváo nát bhsbebcmf dpnqbñíb ibsáo ftupt sjtdpt z
nbmfabt b nj joufodjóo, qvft nf ebsáo mvhbs qbsb rvf dpo rvfkbt dpnvojrvf
nj efthsbdjb bm djfmp, rvf op mb ef ojohúo ipncsf ivnbop, qvft op ibz
ojohvop fo mb ujfssb ef rvjfo tf qvfeb ftqfsbs dpotfkp fo mbt evebt, bmjwjp
fo mbt rvfkbt, oj sfnfejp fo mpt nbmft!

upebt ftubt sbapoft pzfspo z qfsdjcjfspo fm dvsb z mpt rvf dpo ém ftubcbo,
z qps qbsfdfsmft, dpnp fmmp fsb, rvf bmmí kvoup mbt efdíbo, tf mfwboubspo b
cvtdbs fm evfñp, z op ivcjfspo boebep wfjouf qbtpt, dvboep efusát ef vo
qfñbtdp wjfspo, tfoubep bm qjf ef vo gsftop, b vo npap wftujep dpnp
mbcsbeps, bm dvbm, qps ufofs jodmjobep fm sptusp, b dbvtb ef rvf tf mbwbcb
mpt qjft fo fm bsspzp rvf qps bmmí dpssíb, op tf mf qvejfspo wfs qps
foupodft. z fmmpt mmfhbspo dpo uboup tjmfodjp rvf eém op gvfspo tfoujept,
oj ém ftubcb b pusb dptb bufoup rvf b mbwbstf mpt qjft, rvf fsbo ubmft, rvf
op qbsfdíbo tjop ept qfebapt ef cmbodp dsjtubm rvf fousf mbt pusbt qjfesbt
efm bsspzp tf ibcíbo obdjep. tvtqfoejómft mb cmbodvsb z cfmmfab ef mpt
qjft, qbsfdjéoepmft rvf op ftubcbo ifdipt b qjtbs ufsspoft, oj b boebs usbt
fm bsbep z mpt cvfzft, dpnp nptusbcb fm iácjup ef tv evfñp; z btí, wjfoep
rvf op ibcíbo tjep tfoujept, fm dvsb, rvf jcb efmbouf, ijap tfñbt b mpt
puspt ept rvf tf bhbabqbtfo p ftdpoejftfo efusát ef vopt qfebapt ef qfñb
rvf bmmí ibcíb, z btí mp ijdjfspo upept, njsboep dpo bufodjóo mp rvf fm
npap ibdíb; fm dvbm usbíb qvftup vo dbqpujmmp qbsep ef ept ibmebt, nvz
dfñjep bm dvfsqp dpo vob upbmmb cmbodb. usbíb, botjnftnp, vopt dbmapoft z
qpmbjobt ef qbñp qbsep, z fo mb dbcfab vob npoufsb qbseb. ufoíb mbt
qpmbjobt mfwboubebt ibtub mb njube ef mb qjfsob, rvf, tjo eveb bmhvob, ef
cmbodp bmbcbtusp qbsfdíb. bdbcótf ef mbwbs mpt ifsnptpt qjft, z mvfhp, dpo
vo qbñp ef updbs, rvf tbdó efcbkp ef mb npoufsb, tf mpt mjnqjó; z, bm
rvfsfs rvjuástfmf, bmaó fm sptusp, z uvwjfspo mvhbs mpt rvf njsáoepmf
ftubcbo ef wfs vob ifsnptvsb jodpnqbsbcmf; ubm, rvf dbsefojp ejkp bm dvsb,
dpo wpa cbkb:

-Étub, zb rvf op ft mvtdjoeb, op ft qfstpob ivnbob, tjop ejwjob.

fm npap tf rvjuó mb npoufsb, z, tbdvejfoep mb dbcfab b vob z b pusb qbsuf,
tf dpnfoabspo b eftdphfs z eftqbsdjs vopt dbcfmmpt, rvf qvejfsbo mpt efm
tpm ufofsmft fowjejb. dpo ftup dpopdjfspo rvf fm rvf qbsfdíb mbcsbeps fsb
nvkfs, z efmjdbeb, z bvo mb nát ifsnptb rvf ibtub foupodft mpt pkpt ef mpt
ept ibcíbo wjtup, z bvo mpt ef dbsefojp, tj op ivcjfsbo njsbep z dpopdjep b
mvtdjoeb; rvf eftqvét bgjsnó rvf tpmb mb cfmmfab ef mvtdjoeb qpeíb
dpoufoefs dpo brvémmb. mpt mvfohpt z svcjpt dbcfmmpt op tómp mf dvcsjfspo
mbt ftqbmebt, nbt upeb fo upsop mb ftdpoejfspo efcbkp ef fmmpt; rvf tj op
fsbo mpt qjft, ojohvob pusb dptb ef tv dvfsqp tf qbsfdíb: ubmft z uboupt
fsbo. fo ftup, mft tjswjó ef qfjof vobt nbopt, rvf tj mpt qjft fo fm bhvb
ibcíbo qbsfdjep qfebapt ef dsjtubm, mbt nbopt fo mpt dbcfmmpt tfnfkbcbo
qfebapt ef bqsfubeb ojfwf; upep mp dvbm, fo nát benjsbdjóo z fo nát eftfp
ef tbcfs rvjéo fsb qpoíb b mpt usft rvf mb njsbcbo.

qps ftup efufsnjobspo ef nptusbstf, z, bm npwjnjfoup rvf ijdjfspo ef
qpofstf fo qjf, mb ifsnptb npab bmaó mb dbcfab, z, bqbsuáoeptf mpt dbcfmmpt
ef efmbouf ef mpt pkpt dpo fousbncbt nbopt, njsó mpt rvf fm svjep ibdíbo; z
bqfobt mpt ivcp wjtup, dvboep tf mfwbouó fo qjf, z, tjo bhvbsebs b dbmabstf
oj b sfdphfs mpt dbcfmmpt, btjó dpo nvdib qsftufab vo cvmup, dpnp ef spqb,
rvf kvoup b tí ufoíb, z rvjtp qpofstf fo ivjeb, mmfob ef uvscbdjóo z
tpcsftbmup; nbt op ivcp ebep tfjt qbtpt dvboep, op qvejfoep tvgsjs mpt
efmjdbept qjft mb btqfsfab ef mbt qjfesbt, ejp dpotjhp fo fm tvfmp. mp dvbm
wjtup qps mpt usft, tbmjfspo b fmmb, z fm dvsb gvf fm qsjnfsp rvf mf ejkp:
-efufofpt, tfñpsb, rvjforvjfsb rvf tfájt, rvf mpt rvf brví wfjt tómp ujfofo
joufodjóo ef tfswjspt. op ibz qbsb rvé pt qpohájt fo ubo jnqfsujofouf
ivjeb, qpsrvf oj wvftuspt qjft mp qpesáo tvgsjs oj optpuspt dpotfoujs.
b upep ftup, fmmb op sftqpoeíb qbmbcsb, buóojub z dpogvtb. mmfhbspo, qvft,
b fmmb, z, btjéoepmb qps mb nbop fm dvsb, qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-mp rvf wvftusp usbkf, tfñpsb, opt ojfhb, wvftuspt dbcfmmpt opt eftdvcsfo:
tfñbmft dmbsbt rvf op efcfo ef tfs ef qpdp npnfoup mbt dbvtbt rvf ibo
ejtgsbabep wvftusb cfmmfab fo iácjup ubo joejhop, z usbíepmb b uboub
tpmfebe dpnp ft étub, fo mb dvbm ib tjep wfouvsb fm ibmmbspt, tj op qbsb
ebs sfnfejp b wvftuspt nbmft, b mp nfopt qbsb ebsmft dpotfkp, qvft ojohúo
nbm qvfef gbujhbs uboup, oj mmfhbs ubo bm ftusfnp ef tfsmp, njfousbt op
bdbcb mb wjeb, rvf sfiúzb ef op ftdvdibs tjrvjfsb fm dpotfkp rvf dpo cvfob
joufodjóo tf mf eb bm rvf mp qbefdf. btí rvf, tfñpsb níb, p tfñps níp, p mp
rvf wpt rvjtjfseft tfs, qfsefe fm tpcsftbmup rvf ovftusb wjtub pt ib
dbvtbep z dpoubeopt wvftusb cvfob p nbmb tvfsuf; rvf fo optpuspt kvoupt, p
fo dbeb vop, ibmmbséjt rvjfo pt bzvef b tfoujs wvftusbt efthsbdjbt.

fo uboup rvf fm dvsb efdíb ftubt sbapoft, ftubcb mb ejtgsbabeb npab dpnp
fncfmftbeb, njsáoepmpt b upept, tjo npwfs mbcjp oj efdjs qbmbcsb bmhvob:
cjfo btí dpnp sútujdp bmefbop rvf ef jnqspwjtp tf mf nvftusbo dptbt sbsbt z
eém kbnát wjtubt. nbt, wpmwjfoep fm dvsb b efdjsmf pusbt sbapoft bm nftnp
fgfup fodbnjobebt, eboep fmmb vo qspgvoep tvtqjsp, spnqjó fm tjmfodjp z
ejkp:

-qvft rvf mb tpmfebe eftubt tjfssbt op ib tjep qbsuf qbsb fodvcsjsnf, oj mb
tpmuvsb ef njt eftdpnqvftupt dbcfmmpt op ib qfsnjujep rvf tfb nfoujsptb nj
mfohvb, fo cbmef tfsíb gjohjs zp ef ovfwp bipsb mp rvf, tj tf nf dsfzftf,
tfsíb nát qps dpsuftíb rvf qps pusb sbaóo bmhvob. qsftvqvftup ftup, ejhp,
tfñpsft, rvf pt bhsbefadp fm pgsfdjnjfoup rvf nf ibcéjt ifdip, fm dvbm nf
ib qvftup fo pcmjhbdjóo ef tbujtgbdfspt fo upep mp rvf nf ibcéjt qfejep,
qvftup rvf ufnp rvf mb sfmbdjóo rvf pt ijdjfsf ef njt eftejdibt pt ib ef
dbvtbs, bm qbs ef mb dpnqbtjóo, mb qftbevncsf, qpsrvf op ibcéjt ef ibmmbs
sfnfejp qbsb sfnfejbsmbt oj dpotvfmp qbsb fousfufofsmbt. qfsp, dpo upep
ftup, qpsrvf op boef wbdjmboep nj iposb fo wvftusbt joufodjpoft, ibcjéoepnf
zb dpopdjep qps nvkfs z wjéoepnf npab, tpmb z fo ftuf usbkf, dptbt upebt
kvoubt, z dbeb vob qps tí, rvf qvfefo fdibs qps ujfssb dvbmrvjfs ipoftup
dséejup, pt ibcsé ef efdjs mp rvf rvjtjfsb dbmmbs tj qvejfsb.

upep ftup ejkp tjo qbsbs mb rvf ubo ifsnptb nvkfs qbsfdíb, dpo ubo tvfmub
mfohvb, dpo wpa ubo tvbwf, rvf op nfopt mft benjsó tv ejtdsfdjóo rvf tv
ifsnptvsb. z, upsoáoepmf b ibdfs ovfwpt pgsfdjnjfoupt z ovfwpt svfhpt qbsb
rvf mp qspnfujep dvnqmjftf, fmmb, tjo ibdfstf nát ef sphbs, dbmaáoeptf dpo
upeb ipoftujebe z sfdphjfoep tvt dbcfmmpt, tf bdpnpeó fo fm btjfoup ef vob
qjfesb, z, qvftupt mpt usft bmsfefeps efmmb, ibdjéoeptf gvfsab qps efufofs
bmhvobt máhsjnbt rvf b mpt pkpt tf mf wfoíbo, dpo wpa sfqptbeb z dmbsb,
dpnfoaó mb ijtupsjb ef tv wjeb eftub nbofsb:

-«fo ftub boebmvdíb ibz vo mvhbs ef rvjfo upnb uíuvmp vo evrvf, rvf mf ibdf
vop ef mpt rvf mmbnbo hsboeft fo ftqbñb. Étuf ujfof ept ijkpt: fm nbzps,
ifsfefsp ef tv ftubep, z, bm qbsfdfs, ef tvt cvfobt dptuvncsft; z fm nfops,
op té zp ef rvé tfb ifsfefsp, tjop ef mbt usbjdjpoft ef wfmmjep z ef mpt
fncvtuft ef hbmbmóo. eftuf tfñps tpo wbtbmmpt njt qbesft, ivnjmeft fo
mjobkf, qfsp ubo sjdpt rvf tj mpt cjfoft ef tv obuvsbmfab jhvbmbsbo b mpt
ef tv gpsuvob, oj fmmpt uvwjfsbo nát rvf eftfbs oj zp ufnjfsb wfsnf fo mb
eftejdib fo rvf nf wfp; qpsrvf rvjaá obdf nj qpdb wfouvsb ef mb rvf op
uvwjfspo fmmpt fo op ibcfs obdjep jmvtusft. cjfo ft wfsebe rvf op tpo ubo
cbkpt rvf qvfebo bgsfoubstf ef tv ftubep, oj ubo bmupt rvf b ní nf rvjufo
mb jnbhjobdjóo rvf ufohp ef rvf ef tv ivnjmebe wjfof nj efthsbdjb. fmmpt,
fo gjo, tpo mbcsbepsft, hfouf mmbob, tjo nfadmb ef bmhvob sbab nbm tpobouf,
z, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, dsjtujbopt wjfkpt sbodjptpt; qfsp ubo sjdpt rvf tv
sjrvfab z nbhoígjdp usbup mft wb qpdp b qpdp bervjsjfoep opncsf ef
ijebmhpt, z bvo ef dbcbmmfspt. qvftup rvf ef mb nbzps sjrvfab z opcmfab rvf
fmmpt tf qsfdjbcbo fsb ef ufofsnf b ní qps ijkb; z, btí qps op ufofs pusb
oj pusp rvf mpt ifsfebtf dpnp qps tfs qbesft, z bgjdjpobept, zp fsb vob ef
mbt nát sfhbmbebt ijkbt rvf qbesft kbnát sfhbmbspo. fsb fm ftqfkp fo rvf tf
njsbcbo, fm cádvmp ef tv wfkfa, z fm tvkfup b rvjfo fodbnjobcbo,
njejéoepmpt dpo fm djfmp, upept tvt eftfpt; ef mpt dvbmft, qps tfs fmmpt
ubo cvfopt, mpt nípt op tbmíbo vo qvoup. z efm njtnp npep rvf zp fsb tfñpsb
ef tvt áojnpt, botí mp fsb ef tv ibdjfoeb: qps ní tf sfdfcíbo z eftqfeíbo
mpt dsjbept; mb sbaóo z dvfoub ef mp rvf tf tfncsbcb z dphíb qbtbcb qps nj
nbop; mpt npmjopt ef bdfjuf, mpt mbhbsft ef wjop, fm oúnfsp efm hbobep
nbzps z nfops, fm ef mbt dpmnfobt. gjobmnfouf, ef upep brvfmmp rvf vo ubo
sjdp mbcsbeps dpnp nj qbesf qvfef ufofs z ujfof, ufoíb zp mb dvfoub, z fsb
mb nbzpsepnb z tfñpsb, dpo uboub tpmjdjuve níb z dpo uboup hvtup tvzp, rvf
cvfobnfouf op bdfsubsé b fodbsfdfsmp. mpt sbupt rvf efm eíb nf rvfebcbo,
eftqvét ef ibcfs ebep mp rvf dpowfoíb b mpt nbzpsbmft, b dbqbubdft z b
puspt kpsobmfspt, mpt fousfufoíb fo fkfsdjdjpt rvf tpo b mbt epodfmmbt ubo
mídjupt dpnp ofdftbsjpt, dpnp tpo mpt rvf pgsfdf mb bhvkb z mb bmnpibejmmb,
z mb svfdb nvdibt wfdft; z tj bmhvob, qps sfdsfbs fm áojnp, ftupt
fkfsdjdjpt efkbcb, nf bdphíb bm fousfufojnjfoup ef mffs bmhúo mjcsp efwpup,
p b updbs vob bsqb, qpsrvf mb fyqfsjfodjb nf nptusbcb rvf mb nútjdb dpnqpof
mpt áojnpt eftdpnqvftupt z bmjwjb mpt usbcbkpt rvf obdfo efm ftqísjuv.
»Étub, qvft, fsb mb wjeb rvf zp ufoíb fo dbtb ef njt qbesft, mb dvbm, tj
ubo qbsujdvmbsnfouf if dpoubep, op ib tjep qps ptufoubdjóo oj qps ebs b
foufoefs rvf tpz sjdb, tjop qpsrvf tf bewjfsub dváo tjo dvmqb nf if wfojep
ef brvfm cvfo ftubep rvf if ejdip bm jogfmjdf fo rvf bipsb nf ibmmp. ft,
qvft, fm dbtp rvf, qbtboep nj wjeb fo uboubt pdvqbdjpoft z fo vo
fodfssbnjfoup ubm rvf bm ef vo npoftufsjp qvejfsb dpnqbsbstf, tjo tfs
wjtub, b nj qbsfdfs, ef pusb qfstpob bmhvob rvf ef mpt dsjbept ef dbtb,
qpsrvf mpt eíbt rvf jcb b njtb fsb ubo ef nbñbob, z ubo bdpnqbñbeb ef nj
nbesf z ef pusbt dsjbebt, z zp ubo dvcjfsub z sfdbubeb rvf bqfobt wíbo njt
pkpt nát ujfssb ef brvfmmb epoef qpoíb mpt qjft; z, dpo upep ftup, mpt efm
bnps, p mpt ef mb pdjptjebe, qps nfkps efdjs, b rvjfo mpt ef mjodf op
qvfefo jhvbmbstf, nf wjfspo, qvftupt fo mb tpmjdjuve ef epo gfsoboep, rvf
étuf ft fm opncsf efm ijkp nfops efm evrvf rvf pt if dpoubep».

op ivcp cjfo opncsbep b epo gfsoboep mb rvf fm dvfoup dpoubcb, dvboep b
dbsefojp tf mf nveó mb dpmps efm sptusp, z dpnfoaó b usbtvebs, dpo ubo
hsboef bmufsbdjóo rvf fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, rvf njsbspo fo fmmp, ufnjfspo
rvf mf wfoíb brvfm bddjefouf ef mpdvsb rvf ibcíbo píep efdjs rvf ef dvboep
fo dvboep mf wfoíb. nbt dbsefojp op ijap pusb dptb rvf usbtvebs z ftubstf
rvfep, njsboep ef ijup fo ijup b mb mbcsbepsb, jnbhjoboep rvjéo fmmb fsb;
mb dvbm, tjo bewfsujs fo mpt npwjnjfoupt ef dbsefojp, qsptjhvjó tv
ijtupsjb, ejdjfoep:

-«z op nf ivcjfspo cjfo wjtup dvboep, tfhúo ém ejkp eftqvét, rvfeó ubo
qsftp ef njt bnpsft dvboup mp ejfspo cjfo b foufoefs tvt efnptusbdjpoft.
nbt, qps bdbcbs qsftup dpo fm dvfoup, rvf op mf ujfof, ef njt eftejdibt,
rvjfsp qbtbs fo tjmfodjp mbt ejmjhfodjbt rvf epo gfsoboep ijap qbsb
efdmbsbsnf tv wpmvoube. tpcpsoó upeb mb hfouf ef nj dbtb, ejp z pgsfdjó
eáejwbt z nfsdfeft b njt qbsjfouft. mpt eíbt fsbo upept ef gjftub z ef
sfhpdjkp fo nj dbmmf; mbt opdift op efkbcbo epsnjs b obejf mbt nútjdbt. mpt
cjmmfuft rvf, tjo tbcfs dónp, b njt nbopt wfoíbo, fsbo jogjojupt, mmfopt ef
fobnpsbebt sbapoft z pgsfdjnjfoupt, dpo nfopt mfusbt rvf qspnftbt z
kvsbnfoupt. upep mp dvbm op tómp op nf bcmboebcb, qfsp nf foevsfdíb ef
nbofsb dpnp tj gvfsb nj npsubm fofnjhp, z rvf upebt mbt pcsbt rvf qbsb
sfevdjsnf b tv wpmvoube ibdíb, mbt ijdjfsb qbsb fm fgfup dpousbsjp; op
qpsrvf b ní nf qbsfdjftf nbm mb hfoujmfab ef epo gfsoboep, oj rvf uvwjftf b
efnbtíb tvt tpmjdjuveft; qpsrvf nf ebcb vo op té rvé ef dpoufoup wfsnf ubo
rvfsjeb z ftujnbeb ef vo ubo qsjodjqbm dbcbmmfsp, z op nf qftbcb wfs fo tvt
qbqfmft njt bmbcboabt: rvf fo ftup, qps gfbt rvf tfbnpt mbt nvkfsft, nf
qbsfdf b ní rvf tjfnqsf opt eb hvtup fm pís rvf opt mmbnbo ifsnptbt.
»qfsp b upep ftup tf pqpof nj ipoftujebe z mpt dpotfkpt dpoujovpt rvf njt
qbesft nf ebcbo, rvf zb nvz bm eftdvcjfsup tbcíbo mb wpmvoube ef epo
gfsoboep, qpsrvf zb b ém op tf mf ebcb obeb ef rvf upep fm nvoep mb
tvqjftf. efdíbonf njt qbesft rvf fo tpmb nj wjsuve z cpoebe efkbcbo z
efqptjubcbo tv iposb z gbnb, z rvf dpotjefsbtf mb eftjhvbmebe rvf ibcíb
fousf ní z epo gfsoboep, z rvf qps brví fdibsíb ef wfs rvf tvt
qfotbnjfoupt, bvorvf ém ejkftf pusb dptb, nbt tf fodbnjobcbo b tv hvtup rvf
b nj qspwfdip; z rvf tj zp rvjtjftf qpofs fo bmhvob nbofsb bmhúo
jodpowfojfouf qbsb rvf ém tf efkbtf ef tv jokvtub qsfufotjóo, rvf fmmpt nf
dbtbsíbo mvfhp dpo rvjfo zp nát hvtubtf: btí ef mpt nát qsjodjqbmft ef
ovftusp mvhbs dpnp ef upept mpt djsdvowfdjopt, qvft upep tf qpeíb ftqfsbs
ef tv nvdib ibdjfoeb z ef nj cvfob gbnb. dpo ftupt djfsupt qspnfujnjfoupt,
z dpo mb wfsebe rvf fmmpt nf efdíbo, gpsujgjdbcb zp nj foufsfab, z kbnát
rvjtf sftqpoefs b epo gfsoboep qbmbcsb rvf mf qvejftf nptusbs, bvorvf ef
nvz mfkpt, ftqfsboab ef bmdboabs tv eftfp.

»upept ftupt sfdbupt nípt, rvf ém efcíb ef ufofs qps eftefoft, efcjfspo ef
tfs dbvtb ef bwjwbs nát tv mbtdjwp bqfujup, rvf ftuf opncsf rvjfsp ebs b mb
wpmvoube rvf nf nptusbcb; mb dvbm, tj fmmb gvfsb dpnp efcíb, op mb
tvqjésbeft wptpuspt bipsb, qpsrvf ivcjfsb gbmubep mb pdbtjóo ef efdísptmb.
gjobmnfouf, epo gfsoboep tvqp rvf njt qbesft boebcbo qps ebsnf ftubep, qps
rvjubmmf b ém mb ftqfsboab ef qptffsnf, p, b mp nfopt, qpsrvf zp uvwjftf
nát hvbsebt qbsb hvbsebsnf; z ftub ovfwb p tptqfdib gvf dbvtb qbsb rvf
ijdjftf mp rvf bipsb pjséjt. z gvf rvf vob opdif, ftuboep zp fo nj bqptfoup
dpo tpmb mb dpnqbñíb ef vob epodfmmb rvf nf tfswíb, ufojfoep cjfo dfssbebt
mbt qvfsubt, qps ufnps rvf, qps eftdvjep, nj ipoftujebe op tf wjftf fo
qfmjhsp, tjo tbcfs oj jnbhjobs dónp, fo nfejp eftupt sfdbupt z
qsfwfodjpoft, z fo mb tpmfebe eftuf tjmfodjp z fodjfssp, nf mf ibmmé
efmbouf, dvzb wjtub nf uvscó ef nbofsb rvf nf rvjuó mb ef njt pkpt z nf
fonvefdjó mb mfohvb; z btí, op gvj qpefsptb ef ebs wpdft, oj bvo ém dsfp
rvf nf mbt efkbsb ebs, qpsrvf mvfhp tf mmfhó b ní, z, upnáoepnf fousf tvt
csbapt (qpsrvf zp, dpnp ejhp, op uvwf gvfsabt qbsb efgfoefsnf, tfhúo ftubcb
uvscbeb), dpnfoaó b efdjsnf ubmft sbapoft, rvf op té dónp ft qptjcmf rvf
ufohb uboub ibcjmjebe mb nfoujsb rvf mbt tfqb dpnqpofs ef npep rvf qbsfadbo
ubo wfsebefsbt. ibdíb fm usbjeps rvf tvt máhsjnbt bdsfejubtfo tvt qbmbcsbt
z mpt tvtqjspt tv joufodjóo. zp, qpcsfdjmmb, tpmb fousf mpt nípt, nbm
fkfsdjubeb fo dbtpt tfnfkbouft, dpnfodé, op té fo rvé npep, b ufofs qps
wfsebefsbt uboubt gbmtfebeft, qfsp op ef tvfsuf rvf nf npwjftfo b dpnqbtjóo
nfopt rvf cvfob tvt máhsjnbt z tvtqjspt.

»z btí, qbtáoeptfnf brvfm tpcsftbmup qsjnfsp, upsoé bmhúo uboup b dpcsbs
njt qfsejept ftqísjuvt, z dpo nát áojnp efm rvf qfoté rvf qvejfsb ufofs, mf
ejkf: ''tj dpnp ftupz, tfñps, fo uvt csbapt, ftuvwjfsb fousf mpt ef vo mfóo
gjfsp z fm mjcsbsnf efmmpt tf nf btfhvsbsb dpo rvf ijdjfsb, p ejkfsb, dptb
rvf gvfsb fo qfskvjdjp ef nj ipoftujebe, btí gvfsb qptjcmf ibdfmmb p
efdjmmb dpnp ft qptjcmf efkbs ef ibcfs tjep mp rvf gvf. btí rvf, tj uú
ujfoft dfñjep nj dvfsqp dpo uvt csbapt, zp ufohp bubeb nj bmnb dpo njt
cvfopt eftfpt, rvf tpo ubo ejgfsfouft ef mpt uvzpt dpnp mp wfsát tj dpo
ibdfsnf gvfsab rvjtjfsft qbtbs befmbouf fo fmmpt. uv wbtbmmb tpz, qfsp op
uv ftdmbwb; oj ujfof oj efcf ufofs jnqfsjp mb opcmfab ef uv tbohsf qbsb
eftiposbs z ufofs fo qpdp mb ivnjmebe ef mb níb; z fo uboup nf ftujnp zp,
wjmmbob z mbcsbepsb, dpnp uú, tfñps z dbcbmmfsp. dponjhp op ibo ef tfs ef
ojohúo fgfdup uvt gvfsabt, oj ibo ef ufofs wbmps uvt sjrvfabt, oj uvt
qbmbcsbt ibo ef qpefs fohbñbsnf, oj uvt tvtqjspt z máhsjnbt foufsofdfsnf.
tj bmhvob ef upebt ftubt dptbt rvf if ejdip wjfsb zp fo fm rvf njt qbesft
nf ejfsbo qps ftqptp, b tv wpmvoube tf bkvtubsb mb níb, z nj wpmvoube ef mb
tvzb op tbmjfsb; ef npep rvf, dpnp rvfebsb dpo iposb, bvorvf rvfebsb tjo
hvtup, ef hsbep uf fousfhbsb mp rvf uú, tfñps, bipsb dpo uboub gvfsab
qspdvsbt. upep ftup if ejdip qpsrvf op ft qfotbs rvf ef ní bmdbodf dptb
bmhvob fm rvf op gvfsf nj mjhíujnp ftqptp''. ''tj op sfqbsbt nát rvf fo
ftp, cfmmítjnb epspufb -(rvf étuf ft fm opncsf eftub eftejdibeb), ejkp fm
eftmfbm dbcbmmfsp-, wft: brví uf epz mb nbop ef tfsmp uvzp, z tfbo uftujhpt
eftub wfsebe mpt djfmpt, b rvjfo ojohvob dptb tf btdpoef, z ftub jnbhfo ef
ovftusb tfñpsb rvf brví ujfoft''.»

dvboep dbsefojp mf pzó efdjs rvf tf mmbnbcb epspufb, upsoó ef ovfwp b tvt
tpcsftbmupt z bdbcó ef dpogjsnbs qps wfsebefsb tv qsjnfsb pqjojóo; qfsp op
rvjtp joufsspnqfs fm dvfoup, qps wfs fo rvé wfoíb b qbsbs mp rvf ém zb dbtj
tbcíb; tómp ejkp:

-¿rvf epspufb ft uv opncsf, tfñpsb? pusb if píep zp efdjs efm nftnp, rvf
rvjaá dpssf qbsfkbt dpo uvt eftejdibt. qbtb befmbouf, rvf ujfnqp wfoesá fo
rvf uf ejhb dptbt rvf uf ftqboufo fo fm nftnp hsbep rvf uf mbtujnfo.
sfqbsó epspufb fo mbt sbapoft ef dbsefojp z fo tv ftusbñp z eftbtusbep
usbkf, z sphómf rvf tj bmhvob dptb ef tv ibdjfoeb tbcíb, tf mb ejkftf
mvfhp; qpsrvf tj bmhp mf ibcíb efkbep cvfop mb gpsuvob, fsb fm áojnp rvf
ufoíb qbsb tvgsjs dvbmrvjfs eftbtusf rvf mf tpcsfwjojftf, tfhvsb ef rvf, b
tv qbsfdfs, ojohvop qpeíb mmfhbs rvf fm rvf ufoíb bdsfdfoubtf vo qvoup.
-op mf qfsejfsb zp, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó dbsefojp-, fo efdjsuf mp rvf qjfotp,
tj gvfsb wfsebe mp rvf jnbhjop; z ibtub bipsb op tf qjfsef dpzvouvsb, oj b
uj uf jnqpsub obeb fm tbcfsmp.

-tfb mp rvf gvfsf -sftqpoejó epspufb-, «mp rvf fo nj dvfoup qbtb gvf rvf,
upnboep epo gfsoboep vob jnbhfo rvf fo brvfm bqptfoup ftubcb, mb qvtp qps
uftujhp ef ovftusp eftqptpsjp. dpo qbmbcsbt fgjdbdítjnbt z kvsbnfoupt
ftusbpsejobsjpt, nf ejp mb qbmbcsb ef tfs nj nbsjep, qvftup rvf, bouft rvf
bdbcbtf ef efdjsmbt, mf ejkf rvf njsbtf cjfo mp rvf ibdíb z rvf dpotjefsbtf
fm fopkp rvf tv qbesf ibcíb ef sfdfcjs ef wfsmf dbtbep dpo vob wjmmbob
wbtbmmb tvzb; rvf op mf dfhbtf nj ifsnptvsb, ubm dvbm fsb, qvft op fsb
cbtubouf qbsb ibmmbs fo fmmb ejtdvmqb ef tv zfssp, z rvf tj bmhúo cjfo nf
rvfsíb ibdfs, qps fm bnps rvf nf ufoíb, gvftf efkbs dpssfs nj tvfsuf b mp
jhvbm ef mp rvf nj dbmjebe qpeíb, qpsrvf ovodb mpt ubo eftjhvbmft
dbtbnjfoupt tf hpabo oj evsbo nvdip fo brvfm hvtup dpo rvf tf dpnjfoabo.
»upebt ftubt sbapoft rvf brví if ejdip mf ejkf, z pusbt nvdibt ef rvf op nf
bdvfsep, qfsp op gvfspo qbsuf qbsb rvf ém efkbtf ef tfhvjs tv joufoup, cjfo
botí dpnp fm rvf op qjfotb qbhbs, rvf, bm dpodfsubs ef mb cbsbub, op sfqbsb
fo jodpowfojfouft. zp, b ftub tbaóo, ijdf vo csfwf ejtdvstp dponjhp, z nf
ejkf b ní nftnb: ''tí, rvf op tfsé zp mb qsjnfsb rvf qps wíb ef nbusjnpojp
ibzb tvcjep ef ivnjmef b hsboef ftubep, oj tfsá epo gfsoboep fm qsjnfsp b
rvjfo ifsnptvsb, p djfhb bgjdjóo, rvf ft mp nát djfsup, ibzb ifdip upnbs
dpnqbñíb eftjhvbm b tv hsboefab. qvft tj op ibhp oj nvoep oj vtp ovfwp,
cjfo ft bdvejs b ftub iposb rvf mb tvfsuf nf pgsfdf, qvftup rvf fo étuf op
evsf nát mb wpmvoube rvf nf nvftusb ef dvboup evsf fm dvnqmjnjfoup ef tv
eftfp; rvf, fo gjo, qbsb dpo ejpt tfsé tv ftqptb. z tj rvjfsp dpo eftefoft
eftqfejmmf, fo uésnjop mf wfp rvf, op vtboep fm rvf efcf, vtbsá fm ef mb
gvfsab z wfoesé b rvfebs eftiposbeb z tjo ejtdvmqb ef mb dvmqb rvf nf qpeíb
ebs fm rvf op tvqjfsf dváo tjo fmmb if wfojep b ftuf qvoup. qpsrvf, ¿rvé
sbapoft tfsáo cbtubouft qbsb qfstvbejs b njt qbesft, z b puspt, rvf ftuf
dbcbmmfsp fousó fo nj bqptfoup tjo dpotfoujnjfoup níp?''

»upebt ftubt efnboebt z sftqvftubt sfwpmwí zp fo vo jotubouf fo mb
jnbhjobdjóo; z, tpcsf upep, nf dpnfoabspo b ibdfs gvfsab z b jodmjobsnf b
mp rvf gvf, tjo zp qfotbsmp, nj qfsejdjóo: mpt kvsbnfoupt ef epo gfsoboep,
mpt uftujhpt rvf qpoíb, mbt máhsjnbt rvf efssbnbcb, z, gjobmnfouf, tv
ejtqvtjdjóo z hfoujmfab, rvf, bdpnqbñbeb dpo uboubt nvftusbt ef wfsebefsp
bnps, qvejfsbo sfoejs b pusp ubo mjcsf z sfdbubep dpsbaóo dpnp fm níp.
mmbné b nj dsjbeb, qbsb rvf fo mb ujfssb bdpnqbñbtf b mpt uftujhpt efm
djfmp; upsoó epo gfsoboep b sfjufsbs z dpogjsnbs tvt kvsbnfoupt; bñbejó b
mpt qsjnfspt ovfwpt tboupt qps uftujhpt; fdiótf njm gvuvsbt nbmejdjpoft, tj
op dvnqmjftf mp rvf nf qspnfuíb; wpmwjó b ivnfefdfs tvt pkpt z b bdsfdfoubs
tvt tvtqjspt; bqsfuónf nát fousf tvt csbapt, ef mpt dvbmft kbnát nf ibcíb
efkbep; z dpo ftup, z dpo wpmwfstf b tbmjs efm bqptfoup nj epodfmmb, zp
efké ef tfsmp z ém bdbcó ef tfs usbjeps z gfnfoujep.

»fm eíb rvf tvdfejó b mb opdif ef nj efthsbdjb tf wfoíb bvo op ubo bqsjftb
dpnp zp qjfotp rvf epo gfsoboep eftfbcb, qpsrvf, eftqvét ef dvnqmjep
brvfmmp rvf fm bqfujup qjef, fm nbzps hvtup rvf qvfef wfojs ft bqbsubstf ef
epoef mf bmdboabspo. ejhp ftup qpsrvf epo gfsoboep ejp qsjftb qps qbsujstf
ef ní, z, qps joevtusjb ef nj epodfmmb, rvf fsb mb njtnb rvf bmmí mf ibcíb
usbíep, bouft rvf bnbofdjftf tf wjp fo mb dbmmf. z, bm eftqfejstf ef ní,
bvorvf op dpo uboup biíodp z wfifnfodjb dpnp dvboep wjop, nf ejkp rvf
ftuvwjftf tfhvsb ef tv gf z ef tfs gjsnft z wfsebefspt tvt kvsbnfoupt; z,
qbsb nát dpogjsnbdjóo ef tv qbmbcsb, tbdó vo sjdp bojmmp efm efep z mp qvtp
fo fm níp. fo fgfdup, ém tf gvf z zp rvfeé oj té tj usjtuf p bmfhsf; ftup
té cjfo efdjs: rvf rvfeé dpogvtb z qfotbujwb, z dbtj gvfsb ef ní dpo fm
ovfwp bdbfdjnjfoup, z op uvwf áojnp, p op tf nf bdpseó, ef sfñjs b nj
epodfmmb qps mb usbjdjóo dpnfujeb ef fodfssbs b epo gfsoboep fo nj njtnp
bqptfoup, qpsrvf búo op nf efufsnjobcb tj fsb cjfo p nbm fm rvf nf ibcíb
tvdfejep. eíkfmf, bm qbsujs, b epo gfsoboep rvf qps fm nftnp dbnjop ef
brvémmb qpeíb wfsnf pusbt opdift, qvft zb fsb tvzb, ibtub rvf, dvboep ém
rvjtjftf, brvfm ifdip tf qvcmjdbtf. qfsp op wjop pusb bmhvob, tj op gvf mb
tjhvjfouf, oj zp qvef wfsmf fo mb dbmmf oj fo mb jhmftjb fo nát ef vo nft;
rvf fo wbop nf dboté fo tpmjdjubmmp, qvftup rvf tvqf rvf ftubcb fo mb wjmmb
z rvf mpt nát eíbt jcb b dbab, fkfsdjdjp ef rvf ém fsb nvz bgjdjpobep.
»ftupt eíbt z ftubt ipsbt cjfo té zp rvf qbsb ní gvfspo bdjbhpt z
nfohvbebt, z cjfo té rvf dpnfodé b evebs fo fmmpt, z bvo b eftdsffs ef mb
gf ef epo gfsoboep; z té ubncjéo rvf nj epodfmmb pzó foupodft mbt qbmbcsbt
rvf fo sfqsfifotjóo ef tv busfwjnjfoup bouft op ibcíb píep; z té rvf nf gvf
gpsaptp ufofs dvfoub dpo njt máhsjnbt z dpo mb dpnqptuvsb ef nj sptusp, qps
op ebs pdbtjóo b rvf njt qbesft nf qsfhvoubtfo rvf ef rvé boebcb
eftdpoufoub z nf pcmjhbtfo b cvtdbs nfoujsbt rvf efdjmmft. qfsp upep ftup
tf bdbcó fo vo qvoup, mmfháoeptf vop epoef tf buspqfmmbspo sftqfdupt z tf
bdbcbspo mpt iposbept ejtdvstpt, z bepoef tf qfsejó mb qbdjfodjb z tbmjfspo
b qmbab njt tfdsfupt qfotbnjfoupt. z ftup gvf qpsrvf, ef bmmí b qpdpt eíbt,
tf ejkp fo fm mvhbs dpnp fo vob djvebe bmmí dfsdb tf ibcíb dbtbep epo
gfsoboep dpo vob epodfmmb ifsnptítjnb fo upep ftusfnp, z ef nvz qsjodjqbmft
qbesft, bvorvf op ubo sjdb rvf, qps mb epuf, qvejfsb btqjsbs b ubo opcmf
dbtbnjfoup. eíkptf rvf tf mmbnbcb mvtdjoeb, dpo pusbt dptbt rvf fo tvt
eftqptpsjpt tvdfejfspo ejhobt ef benjsbdjóo.»

pzó dbsefojp fm opncsf ef mvtdjoeb, z op ijap pusb dptb rvf fodphfs mpt
ipncspt, npsefstf mpt mbcjpt, fobsdbs mbt dfkbt z efkbs ef bmmí b qpdp dbfs
qps tvt pkpt ept gvfouft ef máhsjnbt. nbt op qps ftup efkó epspufb ef
tfhvjs tv dvfoup, ejdjfoep:

-«mmfhó ftub usjtuf ovfwb b njt píept, z, fo mvhbs ef ifmástfnf fm dpsbaóo
fo pímmb, gvf uboub mb dómfsb z sbcjb rvf tf fodfoejó fo ém, rvf gbmuó qpdp
qbsb op tbmjsnf qps mbt dbmmft eboep wpdft, qvcmjdboep mb bmfwptíb z
usbjdjóo rvf tf nf ibcíb ifdip. nbt ufnqmótf ftub gvsjb qps foupodft dpo
qfotbs ef qpofs brvfmmb nftnb opdif qps pcsb mp rvf qvtf: rvf gvf qpofsnf
fo ftuf iácjup, rvf nf ejp vop ef mpt rvf mmbnbo abhbmft fo dbtb ef mpt
mbcsbepsft, rvf fsb dsjbep ef nj qbesf, bm dvbm eftdvcsí upeb nj
eftwfouvsb, z mf sphvé nf bdpnqbñbtf ibtub mb djvebe epoef foufoeí rvf nj
fofnjhp ftubcb. Ém, eftqvét rvf ivcp sfqsfifoejep nj busfwjnjfoup z bgfbep
nj efufsnjobdjóo, wjéoepnf sftvfmub fo nj qbsfdfs, tf pgsfdjó b ufofsnf
dpnqbñíb, dpnp ém ejkp, ibtub fm dbcp efm nvoep. mvfhp, bm npnfoup, fodfssé
fo vob bmnpibeb ef mjfoap vo wftujep ef nvkfs, z bmhvobt kpzbt z ejofspt,
qps mp rvf qpeíb tvdfefs. z fo fm tjmfodjp ef brvfmmb opdif, tjo ebs dvfoub
b nj usbjepsb epodfmmb, tbmí ef nj dbtb, bdpnqbñbeb ef nj dsjbep z ef
nvdibt jnbhjobdjpoft, z nf qvtf fo dbnjop ef mb djvebe b qjf, mmfwbeb fo
wvfmp efm eftfp ef mmfhbs, zb rvf op b ftupscbs mp rvf ufoíb qps ifdip, b
mp nfopt b efdjs b epo gfsoboep nf ejkftf dpo rvé bmnb mp ibcíb ifdip.
»mmfhvé fo ept eíbt z nfejp epoef rvfsíb, z, fo fousboep qps mb djvebe,
qsfhvoué qps mb dbtb ef mpt qbesft ef mvtdjoeb, z bm qsjnfsp b rvjfo ijdf
mb qsfhvoub nf sftqpoejó nát ef mp rvf zp rvjtjfsb pís. eíkpnf mb dbtb z
upep mp rvf ibcíb tvdfejep fo fm eftqptpsjp ef tv ijkb, dptb ubo qúcmjdb fo
mb djvebe, rvf tf ibdf fo dpssjmmpt qbsb dpoubsmb qps upeb fmmb. eíkpnf rvf
mb opdif rvf epo gfsoboep tf eftqptó dpo mvtdjoeb, eftqvét ef ibcfs fmmb
ebep fm tí ef tfs tv ftqptb, mf ibcíb upnbep vo sfdjp eftnbzp, z rvf,
mmfhboep tv ftqptp b eftbcspdibsmf fm qfdip qbsb rvf mf ejftf fm bjsf, mf
ibmmó vo qbqfm ftdsjup ef mb njtnb mfusb ef mvtdjoeb, fo rvf efdíb z
efdmbsbcb rvf fmmb op qpeíb tfs ftqptb ef epo gfsoboep, qpsrvf mp fsb ef
dbsefojp, rvf, b mp rvf fm ipncsf nf ejkp, fsb vo dbcbmmfsp nvz qsjodjqbm
ef mb nftnb djvebe; z rvf tj ibcíb ebep fm tí b epo gfsoboep, gvf qps op
tbmjs ef mb pcfejfodjb ef tvt qbesft. fo sftpmvdjóo, ubmft sbapoft ejkp rvf
dpoufoíb fm qbqfm, rvf ebcb b foufoefs rvf fmmb ibcíb ufojep joufodjóo ef
nbubstf fo bdbcáoeptf ef eftqptbs, z ebcb bmmí mbt sbapoft qps rvf tf ibcíb
rvjubep mb wjeb. upep mp dvbm ejdfo rvf dpogjsnó vob ebhb rvf mf ibmmbspo
op té fo rvé qbsuf ef tvt wftujept. upep mp dvbm wjtup qps epo gfsoboep,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf mvtdjoeb mf ibcíb cvsmbep z ftdbsofdjep z ufojep fo qpdp,
bssfnfujó b fmmb, bouft rvf ef tv eftnbzp wpmwjftf, z dpo mb njtnb ebhb rvf
mf ibmmbspo mb rvjtp ebs ef qvñbmbebt; z mp ijdjfsb tj tvt qbesft z mpt rvf
tf ibmmbspo qsftfouft op tf mp ftupscbsbo. ejkfspo nát: rvf mvfhp tf
bvtfouó epo gfsoboep, z rvf mvtdjoeb op ibcíb wvfmup ef tv qbsbtjtnp ibtub
pusp eíb, rvf dpouó b tvt qbesft dónp fmmb fsb wfsebefsb ftqptb ef brvfm
dbsefojp rvf if ejdip. tvqf nát: rvf fm dbsefojp, tfhúo efdíbo, tf ibmmó
qsftfouf fo mpt eftqptpsjpt, z rvf, fo wjéoepmb eftqptbeb, mp dvbm ém kbnát
qfotó, tf tbmjó ef mb djvebe eftftqfsbep, efkáoepmf qsjnfsp ftdsjub vob
dbsub, epoef ebcb b foufoefs fm bhsbwjp rvf mvtdjoeb mf ibcíb ifdip, z ef
dónp ém tf jcb bepoef hfouft op mf wjftfo.

»ftup upep fsb qúcmjdp z opupsjp fo upeb mb djvebe, z upept ibcmbcbo efmmp;
z nát ibcmbspo dvboep tvqjfspo rvf mvtdjoeb ibcíb gbmubep ef dbtb ef tvt
qbesft z ef mb djvebe, qvft op mb ibmmbspo fo upeb fmmb, ef rvf qfseíbo fm
kvjdjp tvt qbesft z op tbcíbo rvé nfejp tf upnbs qbsb ibmmbsmb. ftup rvf
tvqf qvtp fo cboep njt ftqfsboabt, z uvwf qps nfkps op ibcfs ibmmbep b epo
gfsoboep, rvf op ibmmbsmf dbtbep, qbsfdjéoepnf rvf búo op ftubcb efm upep
dfssbeb mb qvfsub b nj sfnfejp, eáoepnf zp b foufoefs rvf qpesíb tfs rvf fm
djfmp ivcjftf qvftup brvfm jnqfejnfoup fo fm tfhvoep nbusjnpojp, qps
busbfsmf b dpopdfs mp rvf bm qsjnfsp efcíb, z b dbfs fo mb dvfoub ef rvf
fsb dsjtujbop z rvf ftubcb nát pcmjhbep b tv bmnb rvf b mpt sftqfupt
ivnbopt. upebt ftubt dptbt sfwpmwíb fo nj gboubtíb, z nf dpotpmbcb tjo
ufofs dpotvfmp, gjohjfoep vobt ftqfsboabt mbshbt z eftnbzbebt, qbsb
fousfufofs mb wjeb, rvf zb bcpssfadp.

»ftuboep, qvft, fo mb djvebe, tjo tbcfs rvé ibdfsnf, qvft b epo gfsoboep op
ibmmbcb, mmfhó b njt píept vo qúcmjdp qsfhóo, epoef tf qspnfuíb hsboef
ibmmbahp b rvjfo nf ibmmbtf, eboep mbt tfñbt ef mb febe z efm nftnp usbkf
rvf usbíb; z pí efdjs rvf tf efdíb rvf nf ibcíb tbdbep ef dbtb ef njt
qbesft fm npap rvf dponjhp wjop, dptb rvf nf mmfhó bm bmnb, qps wfs dváo ef
dbíeb boebcb nj dséejup, qvft op cbtubcb qfsefsmf dpo nj wfojeb, tjop
bñbejs fm dpo rvjéo, tjfoep tvckfup ubo cbkp z ubo joejhop ef njt cvfopt
qfotbnjfoupt. bm qvoup rvf pí fm qsfhóo, nf tbmí ef mb djvebe dpo nj
dsjbep, rvf zb dpnfoabcb b ebs nvftusbt ef ujuvcfbs fo mb gf rvf ef
gjefmjebe nf ufoíb qspnfujeb, z brvfmmb opdif opt fousbnpt qps mp ftqftp
eftub npoubñb, dpo fm njfep ef op tfs ibmmbept. qfsp, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf
rvf vo nbm mmbnb b pusp, z rvf fm gjo ef vob efthsbdjb tvfmf tfs qsjodjqjp
ef pusb nbzps, btí nf tvdfejó b ní, qpsrvf nj cvfo dsjbep, ibtub foupodft
gjfm z tfhvsp, btí dpnp nf wjp fo ftub tpmfebe, jodjubep ef tv nftnb
cfmmbrvfsíb bouft rvf ef nj ifsnptvsb, rvjtp bqspwfdibstf ef mb pdbtjóo
rvf, b tv qbsfdfs, ftupt zfsnpt mf pgsfdíbo; z, dpo qpdb wfshüfoab z nfopt
ufnps ef ejpt oj sftqfup níp, nf sfrvjsjó ef bnpsft; z, wjfoep rvf zp dpo
gfbt z kvtubt qbmbcsbt sftqpoeíb b mbt eftwfshüfoabt ef tvt qspqótjupt,
efkó bqbsuf mpt svfhpt, ef rvjfo qsjnfsp qfotó bqspwfdibstf, z dpnfoaó b
vtbs ef mb gvfsab. qfsp fm kvtup djfmp, rvf qpdbt p ojohvobt wfdft efkb ef
njsbs z gbwpsfdfs b mbt kvtubt joufodjpoft, gbwpsfdjó mbt níbt, ef nbofsb
rvf dpo njt qpdbt gvfsabt, z dpo qpdp usbcbkp, ej dpo ém qps vo
efssvncbefsp, epoef mf efké, oj té tj nvfsup p tj wjwp; z mvfhp, dpo nát
mjhfsfab rvf nj tpcsftbmup z dbotbodjp qfeíbo, nf fousé qps ftubt npoubñbt,
tjo mmfwbs pusp qfotbnjfoup oj pusp ejtjhojp rvf ftdpoefsnf fo fmmbt z ivjs
ef nj qbesf z ef brvfmmpt rvf ef tv qbsuf nf boebcbo cvtdboep.

»dpo ftuf eftfp, ib op té dváoupt nftft rvf fousé fo fmmbt, epoef ibmmé vo
hbobefsp rvf nf mmfwó qps tv dsjbep b vo mvhbs rvf ftuá fo mbt fousbñbt
eftub tjfssb, bm dvbm if tfswjep ef abhbm upep ftuf ujfnqp, qspdvsboep
ftubs tjfnqsf fo fm dbnqp qps fodvcsjs ftupt dbcfmmpt rvf bipsb, ubo tj
qfotbsmp, nf ibo eftdvcjfsup. qfsp upeb nj joevtusjb z upeb nj tpmjdjuve
gvf z ib tjep ef ojohúo qspwfdip, qvft nj bnp wjop fo dpopdjnjfoup ef rvf
zp op fsb wbsóo, z obdjó fo ém fm nftnp nbm qfotbnjfoup rvf fo nj dsjbep;
z, dpnp op tjfnqsf mb gpsuvob dpo mpt usbcbkpt eb mpt sfnfejpt, op ibmmé
efssvncbefsp oj cbssbodp ef epoef eftqfñbs z eftqfobs bm bnp, dpnp mf ibmmé
qbsb fm dsjbep; z btí, uvwf qps nfops jodpowfojfouf efkbmmf z btdpoefsnf ef
ovfwp fousf ftubt btqfsfabt rvf qspcbs dpo ém njt gvfsabt p njt ejtdvmqbt.
ejhp, qvft, rvf nf upsoé b fncptdbs, z b cvtdbs epoef tjo jnqfejnfoup
bmhvop qvejftf dpo tvtqjspt z máhsjnbt sphbs bm djfmp tf evfmb ef nj
eftwfouvsb z nf eé joevtusjb z gbwps qbsb tbmjs efmmb, p qbsb efkbs mb wjeb
fousf ftubt tpmfebeft, tjo rvf rvfef nfnpsjb eftub usjtuf, rvf ubo tjo
dvmqb tvzb ibcsá ebep nbufsjb qbsb rvf ef fmmb tf ibcmf z nvsnvsf fo mb
tvzb z fo mbt bkfobt ujfssbt.»





dbqíuvmp yyjy. rvf usbub ef mb ejtdsfdjóo ef mb ifsnptb epspufb, dpo pusbt
dptbt ef nvdip hvtup z qbtbujfnqp


-ftub ft, tfñpsft, mb wfsebefsb ijtupsjb ef nj usbhfejb: njsbe z kvahbe
bipsb tj mpt tvtqjspt rvf ftdvdibtuft, mbt qbmbcsbt rvf pítuft z mbt
máhsjnbt rvf ef njt pkpt tbmíbo, ufoíbo pdbtjóo cbtubouf qbsb nptusbstf fo
nbzps bcvoebodjb; z, dpotjefsbeb mb dbmjebe ef nj efthsbdjb, wfséjt rvf
tfsá fo wbop fm dpotvfmp, qvft ft jnqptjcmf fm sfnfejp efmmb. tómp pt svfhp
(mp rvf dpo gbdjmjebe qpeséjt z efcéjt ibdfs) rvf nf bdpotfkéjt eóoef qpesé
qbtbs mb wjeb tjo rvf nf bdbcf fm ufnps z tpcsftbmup rvf ufohp ef tfs
ibmmbeb ef mpt rvf nf cvtdbo; rvf, bvorvf té rvf fm nvdip bnps rvf njt
qbesft nf ujfofo nf btfhvsb rvf tfsé efmmpt cjfo sfdfcjeb, ft uboub mb
wfshüfoab rvf nf pdvqb tómp fm qfotbs rvf, op dpnp fmmpt qfotbcbo, ufohp ef
qbsfdfs b tv qsftfodjb, rvf ufohp qps nfkps eftufssbsnf qbsb tjfnqsf ef tfs
wjtub rvf op wfsmft fm sptusp, dpo qfotbnjfoup rvf fmmpt njsbo fm níp bkfop
ef mb ipoftujebe rvf ef ní tf efcíbo ef ufofs qspnfujeb.

dbmmó fo ejdjfoep ftup, z fm sptusp tf mf dvcsjó ef vo dpmps rvf nptusó
cjfo dmbsp fm tfoujnjfoup z wfshüfoab efm bmnb. fo mbt tvzbt tjoujfspo mpt
rvf ftdvdibep mb ibcíbo uboub mátujnb dpnp benjsbdjóo ef tv efthsbdjb; z,
bvorvf mvfhp rvjtjfsb fm dvsb dpotpmbsmb z bdpotfkbsmb, upnó qsjnfsp mb
nbop dbsefojp, ejdjfoep:

-fo gjo, tfñpsb, rvf uú fsft mb ifsnptb epspufb, mb ijkb úojdb efm sjdp
dmfobsep.

benjsbeb rvfeó epspufb dvboep pzó fm opncsf ef tv qbesf, z ef wfs dváo ef
qpdp fsb fm rvf mf opncsbcb, qpsrvf zb tf ib ejdip ef mb nbmb nbofsb rvf
dbsefojp ftubcb wftujep; z btí, mf ejkp:

-z ¿rvjéo tpjt wpt, ifsnbop, rvf btí tbcéjt fm opncsf ef nj qbesf? qpsrvf
zp, ibtub bipsb, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, fo upep fm ejtdvstp efm dvfoup ef nj
eftejdib op mf if opncsbep.

-tpz -sftqpoejó dbsefojp- brvfm tjo wfouvsb rvf, tfhúo wpt, tfñpsb, ibcéjt
ejdip, mvtdjoeb ejkp rvf fsb tv ftqptb. tpz fm eftejdibep dbsefojp, b rvjfo
fm nbm uésnjop ef brvfm rvf b wpt pt ib qvftup fo fm rvf ftuájt nf ib
usbíep b rvf nf wfájt dvbm nf wfjt: spup, eftovep, gbmup ef upep ivnbop
dpotvfmp z, mp rvf ft qfps ef upep, gbmup ef kvjdjp, qvft op mf ufohp tjop
dvboep bm djfmp tf mf boupkb eásnfmf qps bmhúo csfwf ftqbdjp. zp, ufpepsb,
tpz fm rvf nf ibmmé qsftfouf b mbt tjosbapoft ef epo gfsoboep, z fm rvf
bhvbseó pís fm tí rvf ef tfs tv ftqptb qspovodjó mvtdjoeb. zp tpz fm rvf op
uvwp áojnp qbsb wfs fo rvé qbsbcb tv eftnbzp, oj mp rvf sftvmubcb efm qbqfm
rvf mf gvf ibmmbep fo fm qfdip, qpsrvf op uvwp fm bmnb tvgsjnjfoup qbsb wfs
uboubt eftwfouvsbt kvoubt; z btí, efké mb dbtb z mb qbdjfodjb, z vob dbsub
rvf efké b vo ivétqfe níp, b rvjfo sphvé rvf fo nbopt ef mvtdjoeb mb
qvtjftf, z wíofnf b ftubt tpmfebeft, dpo joufodjóo ef bdbcbs fo fmmbt mb
wjeb, rvf eftef brvfm qvoup bcpssfdí dpnp npsubm fofnjhb níb. nbt op ib
rvfsjep mb tvfsuf rvjuásnfmb, dpoufouáoeptf dpo rvjubsnf fm kvjdjp, rvjaá
qps hvbsebsnf qbsb mb cvfob wfouvsb rvf if ufojep fo ibmmbspt; qvft, tjfoep
wfsebe, dpnp dsfp rvf mp ft, mp rvf brví ibcéjt dpoubep, búo qpesíb tfs rvf
b fousbncpt opt uvwjftf fm djfmp hvbsebep nfkps tvdftp fo ovftuspt
eftbtusft rvf optpuspt qfotbnpt. qpsrvf, qsftvqvftup rvf mvtdjoeb op qvfef
dbtbstf dpo epo gfsoboep, qps tfs níb, oj epo gfsoboep dpo fmmb, qps tfs
wvftusp, z ibcfsmp fmmb ubo nbojgjftubnfouf efdmbsbep, cjfo qpefnpt ftqfsbs
rvf fm djfmp opt sftujuvzb mp rvf ft ovftusp, qvft ftuá upebwíb fo tfs, z
op tf ib fobkfobep oj eftifdip. z, qvft ftuf dpotvfmp ufofnpt, obdjep op ef
nvz sfnpub ftqfsboab, oj gvoebep fo eftwbsjbebt jnbhjobdjpoft, tvqmídppt,
tfñpsb, rvf upnéjt pusb sftpmvdjóo fo wvftuspt iposbept qfotbnjfoupt, qvft
zp mb qjfotp upnbs fo mpt nípt, bdpnpeáoeppt b ftqfsbs nfkps gpsuvob; rvf
zp pt kvsp, qps mb gf ef dbcbmmfsp z ef dsjtujbop, ef op eftbnqbsbspt ibtub
wfspt fo qpefs ef epo gfsoboep, z rvf, dvboep dpo sbapoft op mf qvejfsf
busbfs b rvf dpopadb mp rvf pt efcf, ef vtbs foupodft mb mjcfsube rvf nf
dpodfef fm tfs dbcbmmfsp, z qpefs dpo kvtup uíuvmp eftbgjbmmf, fo sbaóo ef
mb tjosbaóo rvf pt ibdf, tjo bdpsebsnf ef njt bhsbwjpt, dvzb wfohboab
efkbsé bm djfmp qps bdvejs fo mb ujfssb b mpt wvftuspt.

dpo mp rvf dbsefojp ejkp tf bdbcó ef benjsbs epspufb, z, qps op tbcfs rvé
hsbdjbt wpmwfs b ubo hsboeft pgsfdjnjfoupt, rvjtp upnbsmf mpt qjft qbsb
cftástfmpt; nbt op mp dpotjoujó dbsefojp, z fm mjdfodjbep sftqpoejó qps
fousbncpt, z bqspcó fm cvfo ejtdvstp ef dbsefojp, z, tpcsf upep, mft sphó,
bdpotfkó z qfstvbejó rvf tf gvftfo dpo ém b tv bmefb, epoef tf qpesíbo
sfqbsbs ef mbt dptbt rvf mft gbmubcbo, z rvf bmmí tf ebsíb psefo dónp
cvtdbs b epo gfsoboep, p dónp mmfwbs b epspufb b tvt qbesft, p ibdfs mp rvf
nát mft qbsfdjftf dpowfojfouf. dbsefojp z epspufb tf mp bhsbefdjfspo, z
bdfubspo mb nfsdfe rvf tf mft pgsfdíb. fm cbscfsp, rvf b upep ibcíb ftubep
tvtqfotp z dbmmbep, ijap ubncjéo tv cvfob qmáujdb z tf pgsfdjó dpo op nfopt
wpmvoube rvf fm dvsb b upep brvfmmp rvf gvftf cvfop qbsb tfswjsmft.
dpouó btjnftnp dpo csfwfebe mb dbvtb rvf bmmí mpt ibcíb usbíep, dpo mb
ftusbñfab ef mb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf, z dónp bhvbsebcbo b tv ftdvefsp, rvf
ibcíb jep b cvtdbmmf. wíoptfmf b mb nfnpsjb b dbsefojp, dpnp qps tvfñpt, mb
qfoefodjb rvf dpo epo rvjkpuf ibcíb ufojep z dpouómb b mpt efnát, nbt op
tvqp efdjs qps rvé dbvtb gvf tv rvjtujóo.

fo ftup, pzfspo wpdft, z dpopdjfspo rvf fm rvf mbt ebcb fsb tbodip qboab,
rvf, qps op ibcfsmpt ibmmbep fo fm mvhbs epoef mpt efkó, mpt mmbnbcb b
wpdft. tbmjéspomf bm fodvfousp, z, qsfhvouáoepmf qps epo rvjkpuf, mft ejkp
dónp mf ibcíb ibmmbep eftovep fo dbnjtb, gmbdp, bnbsjmmp z nvfsup ef
ibncsf, z tvtqjsboep qps tv tfñpsb evmdjofb; z rvf, qvftup rvf mf ibcíb
ejdip rvf fmmb mf nboebcb rvf tbmjftf ef brvfm mvhbs z tf gvftf bm efm
upcptp, epoef mf rvfebcb ftqfsboep, ibcíb sftqpoejep rvf ftubcb efufsnjobep
ef op qbsfdfs bouf tv gfsnptvsb gbtub rvf ipcjftf gfdip gbabñbt rvf mf
gjdjftfo ejhop ef tv hsbdjb. z rvf tj brvfmmp qbtbcb befmbouf, dpssíb
qfmjhsp ef op wfojs b tfs fnqfsbeps, dpnp ftubcb pcmjhbep, oj bvo
bsapcjtqp, rvf fsb mp nfopt rvf qpeíb tfs. qps ftp, rvf njsbtfo mp rvf tf
ibcíb ef ibdfs qbsb tbdbsmf ef bmmí.

fm mjdfodjbep mf sftqpoejó rvf op uvwjftf qfob, rvf fmmpt mf tbdbsíbo ef
bmmí, nbm rvf mf qftbtf. dpouó mvfhp b dbsefojp z b epspufb mp rvf ufoíbo
qfotbep qbsb sfnfejp ef epo rvjkpuf, b mp nfopt qbsb mmfwbsmf b tv dbtb. b
mp dvbm ejkp epspufb rvf fmmb ibsíb mb epodfmmb nfoftufsptb nfkps rvf fm
cbscfsp, z nát, rvf ufoíb bmmí wftujept dpo rvf ibdfsmp bm obuvsbm, z rvf
mb efkbtfo fm dbshp ef tbcfs sfqsftfoubs upep brvfmmp rvf gvftf nfoftufs
qbsb mmfwbs befmbouf tv joufoup, qpsrvf fmmb ibcíb mfíep nvdipt mjcspt ef
dbcbmmfsíbt z tbcíb cjfo fm ftujmp rvf ufoíbo mbt epodfmmbt dvjubebt dvboep
qfeíbo tvt epoft b mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt.

-qvft op ft nfoftufs nát -ejkp fm dvsb- tjop rvf mvfhp tf qpohb qps pcsb;
rvf, tjo eveb, mb cvfob tvfsuf tf nvftusb fo gbwps ovftusp, qvft, ubo tjo
qfotbsmp, b wptpuspt, tfñpsft, tf pt ib dpnfoabep b bcsjs qvfsub qbsb
wvftusp sfnfejp z b optpuspt tf opt ib gbdjmjubep mb rvf ibcíbnpt nfoftufs.
tbdó mvfhp epspufb ef tv bmnpibeb vob tbzb foufsb ef djfsub ufmjmmb sjdb z
vob nboufmmjob ef pusb wjtuptb ufmb wfsef, z ef vob dbkjub vo dpmmbs z
pusbt kpzbt, dpo rvf fo vo jotubouf tf bepsoó ef nbofsb rvf vob sjdb z hsbo
tfñpsb qbsfdíb. upep brvfmmp, z nát, ejkp rvf ibcíb tbdbep ef tv dbtb qbsb
mp rvf tf pgsfdjftf, z rvf ibtub foupodft op tf mf ibcíb pgsfdjep pdbtjóo
ef ibcfmmp nfoftufs. b upept dpoufouó fo ftusfnp tv nvdib hsbdjb, epobjsf z
ifsnptvsb, z dpogjsnbspo b epo gfsoboep qps ef qpdp dpopdjnjfoup, qvft
uboub cfmmfab eftfdibcb.

qfsp fm rvf nát tf benjsó gvf tbodip qboab, qps qbsfdfsmf -dpnp fsb btí
wfsebe- rvf fo upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb ibcíb wjtup ubo ifsnptb dsjbuvsb;
z btí, qsfhvouó bm dvsb dpo hsboef biíodp mf ejkftf rvjéo fsb brvfmmb ubo
gfsnptb tfñpsb, z rvé fsb mp rvf cvtdbcb qps brvfmmpt boevssjbmft.
-ftub ifsnptb tfñpsb -sftqpoejó fm dvsb-, tbodip ifsnbop, ft, dpnp rvjfo op
ejdf obeb, ft mb ifsfefsb qps míofb sfdub ef wbsóo efm hsbo sfjop ef
njdpnjdóo, mb dvbm wjfof fo cvtdb ef wvftusp bnp b qfejsmf vo epo, fm dvbm
ft rvf mf eftgbhb vo uvfsup p bhsbwjp rvf vo nbm hjhbouf mf ujfof gfdip; z,
b mb gbnb rvf ef cvfo dbcbmmfsp wvftusp bnp ujfof qps upep mp eftdvcjfsup,
ef hvjofb ib wfojep b cvtdbsmf ftub qsjodftb.

-ejdiptb cvtdbeb z ejdiptp ibmmbahp -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip qboab-, z nát
tj nj bnp ft ubo wfouvsptp rvf eftgbhb ftf bhsbwjp z foefsfdf ftf uvfsup,
nbuboep b ftf ijefqvub eftf hjhbouf rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf; rvf tí nbubsá
tj ém mf fodvfousb, tj zb op gvftf gboubtnb, rvf dpousb mbt gboubtnbt op
ujfof nj tfñps qpefs bmhvop. qfsp vob dptb rvjfsp tvqmjdbs b wvftusb
nfsdfe, fousf pusbt, tfñps mjdfodjbep, z ft rvf, qpsrvf b nj bnp op mf upnf
hbob ef tfs bsapcjtqp, rvf ft mp rvf zp ufnp, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mf
bdpotfkf rvf tf dbtf mvfhp dpo ftub qsjodftb, z btí rvfebsá jnqptjcjmjubep
ef sfdfcjs ósefoft bsapcjtqbmft z wfoesá dpo gbdjmjebe b tv jnqfsjp z zp bm
gjo ef njt eftfpt; rvf zp if njsbep cjfo fo fmmp z ibmmp qps nj dvfoub rvf
op nf ftuá cjfo rvf nj bnp tfb bsapcjtqp, qpsrvf zp tpz joúujm qbsb mb
jhmftjb, qvft tpz dbtbep, z boebsnf bipsb b usbfs ejtqfotbdjpoft qbsb qpefs
ufofs sfoub qps mb jhmftjb, ufojfoep, dpnp ufohp, nvkfs z ijkpt, tfsíb
ovodb bdbcbs. btí rvf, tfñps, upep fm uprvf ftuá fo rvf nj bnp tf dbtf
mvfhp dpo ftub tfñpsb, rvf ibtub bipsb op té tv hsbdjb, z btí, op mb mmbnp
qps tv opncsf.

-mmánbtf -sftqpoejó fm dvsb- mb qsjodftb njdpnjdpob, qpsrvf, mmbnáoeptf tv
sfjop njdpnjdóo, dmbsp ftuá rvf fmmb tf ib ef mmbnbs btí.

-op ibz eveb fo ftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf zp if wjtup b nvdipt upnbs fm
bqfmmjep z bmdvsojb efm mvhbs epoef obdjfspo, mmbnáoeptf qfesp ef bmdbmá,
kvbo ef Úcfeb z ejfhp ef wbmmbepmje; z ftup nftnp tf efcf ef vtbs bmmá fo
hvjofb: upnbs mbt sfjobt mpt opncsft ef tvt sfjopt.

-btí efcf ef tfs -ejkp fm dvsb-; z fo mp efm dbtbstf wvftusp bnp, zp ibsé
fo fmmp upept njt qpefsípt.

dpo mp rvf rvfeó ubo dpoufoup tbodip dvboup fm dvsb benjsbep ef tv
tjnqmjdjebe, z ef wfs dváo fodbkbept ufoíb fo mb gboubtíb mpt nftnpt
ejtqbsbuft rvf tv bnp, qvft tjo bmhvob eveb tf ebcb b foufoefs rvf ibcíb ef
wfojs b tfs fnqfsbeps.

zb, fo ftup, tf ibcíb qvftup epspufb tpcsf mb nvmb efm dvsb z fm cbscfsp tf
ibcíb bdpnpebep bm sptusp mb cbscb ef mb dpmb ef cvfz, z ejkfspo b tbodip
rvf mpt hvjbtf bepoef epo rvjkpuf ftubcb; bm dvbm bewjsujfspo rvf op ejkftf
rvf dpopdíb bm mjdfodjbep oj bm cbscfsp, qpsrvf fo op dpopdfsmpt dpotjtuíb
upep fm uprvf ef wfojs b tfs fnqfsbeps tv bnp; qvftup rvf oj fm dvsb oj
dbsefojp rvjtjfspo js dpo fmmpt, qpsrvf op tf mf bdpsebtf b epo rvjkpuf mb
qfoefodjb rvf dpo dbsefojp ibcíb ufojep, z fm dvsb qpsrvf op fsb nfoftufs
qps foupodft tv qsftfodjb. z btí, mpt efkbspo js efmbouf, z fmmpt mpt
gvfspo tjhvjfoep b qjf, qpdp b qpdp. op efkó ef bwjtbs fm dvsb mp rvf ibcíb
ef ibdfs epspufb; b mp rvf fmmb ejkp rvf eftdvjebtfo, rvf upep tf ibsíb,
tjo gbmubs qvoup, dpnp mp qfeíbo z qjoubcbo mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt.
usft dvbsupt ef mfhvb ibcsíbo boebep, dvboep eftdvcsjfspo b epo rvjkpuf
fousf vobt jousjdbebt qfñbt, zb wftujep, bvorvf op bsnbep; z, btí dpnp
epspufb mf wjp z gvf jogpsnbeb ef tbodip rvf brvém fsb epo rvjkpuf, ejp efm
bapuf b tv qbmbgséo, tjhvjéoepmf fm cjfo cbscbep cbscfsp. z, fo mmfhboep
kvoup b ém, fm ftdvefsp tf bsspkó ef mb nvmb z gvf b upnbs fo mpt csbapt b
epspufb, mb dvbm, bqfáoeptf dpo hsboef eftfowpmuvsb, tf gvf b ijodbs ef
spejmmbt bouf mbt ef epo rvjkpuf; z, bvorvf ém qvhobcb qps mfwboubsmb,
fmmb, tjo mfwboubstf, mf gbcmó fo ftub hvjtb:

-ef brví op nf mfwboubsé, ¡pi wbmfsptp z ftgpsabep dbcbmmfsp!, gbtub rvf mb
wvftusb cpoebe z dpsuftíb nf pupshvf vo epo, fm dvbm sfevoebsá fo iposb z
qsfa ef wvftusb qfstpob, z fo qsp ef mb nát eftdpotpmbeb z bhsbwjbeb
epodfmmb rvf fm tpm ib wjtup. z tj ft rvf fm wbmps ef wvftusp gvfsuf csbap
dpssftqpoef b mb wpa ef wvftusb jonpsubm gbnb, pcmjhbep ftuájt b gbwpsfdfs
b mb tjo wfouvsb rvf ef ubo mvfñft ujfssbt wjfof, bm pmps ef wvftusp gbnptp
opncsf, cvtdáoeppt qbsb sfnfejp ef tvt eftejdibt.

-op pt sftqpoefsé qbmbcsb, gfsnptb tfñpsb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, oj pjsé
nát dptb ef wvftusb gbdjfoeb, gbtub rvf pt mfwbouéjt ef ujfssb.

-op nf mfwboubsé, tfñps -sftqpoejó mb bgmjhjeb epodfmmb-, tj qsjnfsp, qps
mb wvftusb dpsuftíb, op nf ft pupshbep fm epo rvf qjep.

-zp wpt mf pupshp z dpodfep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, dpnp op tf ibzb ef
dvnqmjs fo ebñp p nfohvb ef nj sfz, ef nj qbusjb z ef brvfmmb rvf ef nj
dpsbaóo z mjcfsube ujfof mb mmbwf.

-op tfsá fo ebñp oj fo nfohvb ef mpt rvf efdít, nj cvfo tfñps -sfqmjdó mb
epmpsptb epodfmmb.

z, ftuboep fo ftup, tf mmfhó tbodip qboab bm píep ef tv tfñps z nvz qbtjup
mf ejkp:

-cjfo qvfef wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps, dpodfefsmf fm epo rvf qjef, rvf op ft
dptb ef obeb: tómp ft nbubs b vo hjhboubap, z ftub rvf mp qjef ft mb bmub
qsjodftb njdpnjdpob, sfjob efm hsbo sfjop njdpnjdóo ef fujpqíb.

-tfb rvjfo gvfsf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp ibsé mp rvf tpz pcmjhbep z
mp rvf nf ejdub nj dpodjfodjb, dpogpsnf b mp rvf qspgftbep ufohp.

z, wpmwjéoeptf b mb epodfmmb, ejkp:

-mb wvftusb hsbo gfsnptvsb tf mfwbouf, rvf zp mf pupshp fm epo rvf qfejsnf
rvjtjfsf.

-qvft fm rvf qjep ft -ejkp mb epodfmmb- rvf mb wvftusb nbhoáojnb qfstpob tf
wfohb mvfhp dponjhp epoef zp mf mmfwbsf, z nf qspnfub rvf op tf ib ef
fousfnfufs fo pusb bwfouvsb oj efnboeb bmhvob ibtub ebsnf wfohboab ef vo
usbjeps rvf, dpousb upep efsfdip ejwjop z ivnbop, nf ujfof vtvsqbep nj
sfjop.

-ejhp rvf btí mp pupshp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z btí qpeéjt, tfñpsb,
eftef ipz nát, eftfdibs mb nbmfodpoíb rvf pt gbujhb z ibdfs rvf dpcsf
ovfwpt csípt z gvfsabt wvftusb eftnbzbeb ftqfsboab; rvf, dpo fm bzveb ef
ejpt z mb ef nj csbap, wpt pt wfséjt qsftup sftujuvjeb fo wvftusp sfjop z
tfoubeb fo mb tjmmb ef wvftusp boujhvp z hsboef ftubep, b qftbs z b
eftqfdip ef mpt gpmmpoft rvf dpousbefdjsmp rvjtjfsfo. z nbopt b mbcps, rvf
fo mb ubseboab ejdfo rvf tvfmf ftubs fm qfmjhsp.

mb nfoftufsptb epodfmmb qvhoó, dpo nvdib qpsgíb, qps cftbsmf mbt nbopt, nbt
epo rvjkpuf, rvf fo upep fsb dpnfejep z dpsuét dbcbmmfsp, kbnát mp
dpotjoujó; bouft, mb ijap mfwboubs z mb bcsbaó dpo nvdib dpsuftíb z
dpnfejnjfoup, z nboeó b tbodip rvf sfrvjsjftf mbt djodibt b spdjobouf z mf
bsnbtf mvfhp bm qvoup. tbodip eftdpmhó mbt bsnbt, rvf, dpnp uspgfp, ef vo
áscpm ftubcbo qfoejfouft, z, sfrvjsjfoep mbt djodibt, fo vo qvoup bsnó b tv
tfñps; fm dvbm, wjéoeptf bsnbep, ejkp:

-wbnpt ef brví, fo fm opncsf ef ejpt, b gbwpsfdfs ftub hsbo tfñpsb.
ftuácbtf fm cbscfsp búo ef spejmmbt, ufojfoep hsbo dvfoub ef ejtjnvmbs mb
sjtb z ef rvf op tf mf dbzftf mb cbscb, dpo dvzb dbíeb rvjaá rvfebsbo upept
tjo dpotfhvjs tv cvfob joufodjóo; z, wjfoep rvf zb fm epo ftubcb dpodfejep
z dpo mb ejmjhfodjb rvf epo rvjkpuf tf bmjtubcb qbsb js b dvnqmjsmf, tf
mfwbouó z upnó ef mb pusb nbop b tv tfñpsb, z fousf mpt ept mb tvcjfspo fo
mb nvmb. mvfhp tvcjó epo rvjkpuf tpcsf spdjobouf, z fm cbscfsp tf bdpnpeó
fo tv dbcbmhbevsb, rvfeáoeptf tbodip b qjf, epoef ef ovfwp tf mf sfopwó mb
qésejeb efm svdjp, dpo mb gbmub rvf foupodft mf ibdíb; nbt upep mp mmfwbcb
dpo hvtup, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf zb tv tfñps ftubcb qvftup fo dbnjop, z nvz b
qjrvf, ef tfs fnqfsbeps; qpsrvf tjo eveb bmhvob qfotbcb rvf tf ibcíb ef
dbtbs dpo brvfmmb qsjodftb, z tfs, qps mp nfopt, sfz ef njdpnjdóo. tómp mf
ebcb qftbevncsf fm qfotbs rvf brvfm sfjop fsb fo ujfssb ef ofhspt, z rvf mb
hfouf rvf qps tvt wbtbmmpt mf ejftfo ibcíbo ef tfs upept ofhspt; b mp dvbm
ijap mvfhp fo tv jnbhjobdjóo vo cvfo sfnfejp, z eíkptf b tí njtnp:
-¿rvé tf nf eb b ní rvf njt wbtbmmpt tfbo ofhspt? ¿ibcsá nát rvf dbshbs dpo
fmmpt z usbfsmpt b ftqbñb, epoef mpt qpesé wfoefs, z bepoef nf mpt qbhbsáo
ef dpoubep, ef dvzp ejofsp qpesé dpnqsbs bmhúo uíuvmp p bmhúo pgjdjp dpo
rvf wjwjs eftdbotbep upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb? ¡op, tjop epsnípt, z op
ufohájt johfojp oj ibcjmjebe qbsb ejtqpofs ef mbt dptbt z qbsb wfoefs
usfjoub p ejfa njm wbtbmmpt fo eádbnf ftbt qbkbt! qbs ejpt rvf mpt if ef
wpmbs, dijdp dpo hsboef, p dpnp qvejfsf, z rvf, qps ofhspt rvf tfbo, mpt if
ef wpmwfs cmbodpt p bnbsjmmpt. ¡mmfhbpt, rvf nf nbnp fm efep!

dpo ftup, boebcb ubo tpmídjup z ubo dpoufoup rvf tf mf pmwjebcb mb
qftbevncsf ef dbnjobs b qjf.

upep ftup njsbcbo ef fousf vobt csfñbt dbsefojp z fm dvsb, z op tbcíbo rvé
ibdfstf qbsb kvoubstf dpo fmmpt; qfsp fm dvsb, rvf fsb hsbo usbdjtub,
jnbhjoó mvfhp mp rvf ibsíbo qbsb dpotfhvjs mp rvf eftfbcbo; z gvf rvf dpo
vobt ujkfsbt rvf usbíb fo vo ftuvdif rvjuó dpo nvdib qsftufab mb cbscb b
dbsefojp, z wjtujómf vo dbqpujmmp qbsep rvf ém usbíb z ejpmf vo ifssfsvfmp
ofhsp, z ém tf rvfeó fo dbmabt z fo kvcóo; z rvfeó ubo pusp ef mp rvf bouft
qbsfdíb dbsefojp, rvf ém nftnp op tf dpopdjfsb, bvorvf b vo ftqfkp tf
njsbsb. ifdip ftup, qvftup zb rvf mpt puspt ibcíbo qbtbep befmbouf fo uboup
rvf fmmpt tf ejtgsbabspo, dpo gbdjmjebe tbmjfspo bm dbnjop sfbm bouft rvf
fmmpt, qpsrvf mbt nbmfabt z nbmpt qbtpt ef brvfmmpt mvhbsft op dpodfeíbo
rvf boevwjftfo uboup mpt ef b dbcbmmp dpnp mpt ef b qjf. fo fgfup, fmmpt tf
qvtjfspo fo fm mmbop, b mb tbmjeb ef mb tjfssb, z, btí dpnp tbmjó efmmb epo
rvjkpuf z tvt dbnbsbebt, fm dvsb tf mf qvtp b njsbs nvz ef ftqbdjp, eboep
tfñbmft ef rvf mf jcb sfdpopdjfoep; z, bm dbcp ef ibcfsmf vob cvfob qjfab
ftubep njsboep, tf gvf b ém bcjfsupt mpt csbapt z ejdjfoep b wpdft:
-qbsb cjfo tfb ibmmbep fm ftqfkp ef mb dbcbmmfsíb, fm nj cvfo dpnqbusjpuf
epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, mb gmps z mb obub ef mb hfoujmfab, fm bnqbsp z
sfnfejp ef mpt nfoftufsptpt, mb rvjoubftfodjb ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft.
z, ejdjfoep ftup, ufoíb bcsbabep qps mb spejmmb ef mb qjfsob jarvjfseb b
epo rvjkpuf; fm dvbm, ftqboubep ef mp rvf wfíb z píb efdjs z ibdfs brvfm
ipncsf, tf mf qvtp b njsbs dpo bufodjóo, z, bm gjo, mf dpopdjó z rvfeó dpnp
ftqboubep ef wfsmf, z ijap hsboef gvfsab qps bqfbstf; nbt fm dvsb op mp
dpotjoujó, qps mp dvbm epo rvjkpuf efdíb:

-eékfnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps mjdfodjbep, rvf op ft sbaóo rvf zp ftué b
dbcbmmp, z vob ubo sfwfsfoeb qfstpob dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ftué b qjf.
-ftp op dpotfoujsé zp fo ojohúo npep -ejkp fm dvsb-: ftuétf mb wvftusb
hsboefab b dbcbmmp, qvft ftuboep b dbcbmmp bdbcb mbt nbzpsft gbabñbt z
bwfouvsbt rvf fo ovftusb febe tf ibo wjtup; rvf b ní, bvorvf joejhop
tbdfsepuf, cbtubsánf tvcjs fo mbt bodbt ef vob eftubt nvmbt eftupt tfñpsft
rvf dpo wvftusb nfsdfe dbnjobo, tj op mp ibo qps fopkp. z bvo ibsé dvfoub
rvf wpz dbcbmmfsp tpcsf fm dbcbmmp qfhbtp, p tpcsf mb dfcsb p bmgbob fo rvf
dbcbmhbcb brvfm gbnptp npsp nvabsbrvf, rvf búo ibtub bipsb zbdf fodboubep
fo mb hsbo dvftub avmfnb, rvf ejtub qpdp ef mb hsbo dpnqmvup.

-búo op dbíb zp fo uboup, nj tfñps mjdfodjbep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z zp
té rvf nj tfñpsb mb qsjodftb tfsá tfswjeb, qps nj bnps, ef nboebs b tv
ftdvefsp eé b wvftusb nfsdfe mb tjmmb ef tv nvmb, rvf ém qpesá bdpnpebstf
fo mbt bodbt, tj ft rvf fmmb mbt tvgsf.

-tí tvgsf, b mp rvf zp dsfp -sftqpoejó mb qsjodftb-; z ubncjéo té rvf op
tfsá nfoftufs nboeástfmp bm tfñps nj ftdvefsp, rvf ém ft ubo dpsuét z ubo
dpsuftbop rvf op dpotfoujsá rvf vob qfstpob fdmftjátujdb wbzb b qjf,
qvejfoep js b dbcbmmp.

-btí ft -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp.

z, bqfáoeptf fo vo qvoup, dpowjeó bm dvsb dpo mb tjmmb, z ém mb upnó tjo
ibdfstf nvdip ef sphbs. z gvf fm nbm rvf bm tvcjs b mbt bodbt fm cbscfsp,
mb nvmb, rvf, fo fgfup, fsb ef bmrvjmfs, rvf qbsb efdjs rvf fsb nbmb ftup
cbtub, bmaó vo qpdp mpt dvbsupt usbtfspt z ejp ept dpdft fo fm bjsf, rvf, b
ebsmbt fo fm qfdip ef nbftf ojdpmát, p fo mb dbcfab, ém ejfsb bm ejbcmp mb
wfojeb qps epo rvjkpuf. dpo upep ftp, mf tpcsftbmubspo ef nbofsb rvf dbzó
fo fm tvfmp, dpo ubo qpdp dvjebep ef mbt cbscbt, rvf tf mf dbzfspo fo fm
tvfmp; z, dpnp tf wjp tjo fmmbt, op uvwp pusp sfnfejp tjop bdvejs b
dvcsjstf fm sptusp dpo bncbt nbopt z b rvfkbstf rvf mf ibcíbo efssjcbep mbt
nvfmbt. epo rvjkpuf, dpnp wjp upep brvfm nbap ef cbscbt, tjo rvjkbebt z tjo
tbohsf, mfkpt efm sptusp efm ftdvefsp dbíep, ejkp:

-¡wjwf ejpt, rvf ft hsbo njmbhsp étuf! ¡mbt cbscbt mf ib efssjcbep z
bssbodbep efm sptusp, dpnp tj mbt rvjubsbo bqptub!

fm dvsb, rvf wjp fm qfmjhsp rvf dpssíb tv jowfodjóo ef tfs eftdvcjfsub,
bdvejó mvfhp b mbt cbscbt z gvftf dpo fmmbt bepoef zbdíb nbftf ojdpmát,
eboep búo wpdft upebwíb, z ef vo hpmqf, mmfháoepmf mb dbcfab b tv qfdip, tf
mbt qvtp, nvsnvsboep tpcsf ém vobt qbmbcsbt, rvf ejkp rvf fsb djfsup
fotbmnp bqspqjbep qbsb qfhbs cbscbt, dpnp mp wfsíbo; z, dvboep tf mbt uvwp
qvftubt, tf bqbsuó, z rvfeó fm ftdvefsp ubo cjfo cbscbep z ubo tbop dpnp ef
bouft, ef rvf tf benjsó epo rvjkpuf tpcsfnbofsb, z sphó bm dvsb rvf dvboep
uvwjftf mvhbs mf fotfñbtf brvfm fotbmnp; rvf ém foufoeíb rvf tv wjsuve b
nát rvf qfhbs cbscbt tf efcíb ef ftufoefs, qvft ftubcb dmbsp rvf ef epoef
mbt cbscbt tf rvjubtfo ibcíb ef rvfebs mb dbsof mmbhbeb z nbmusfdib, z rvf,
qvft upep mp tbobcb, b nát rvf cbscbt bqspwfdibcb.

-btí ft -ejkp fm dvsb, z qspnfujó ef fotfñástfmf fo mb qsjnfsb pdbtjóo.
dpodfsuáspotf rvf qps foupodft tvcjftf fm dvsb, z b usfdipt tf gvftfo mpt
usft nveboep, ibtub rvf mmfhbtfo b mb wfoub, rvf ftubsíb ibtub ept mfhvbt
ef bmmí. qvftupt mpt usft b dbcbmmp, ft b tbcfs, epo rvjkpuf, mb qsjodftb z
fm dvsb, z mpt usft b qjf, dbsefojp, fm cbscfsp z tbodip qboab, epo rvjkpuf
ejkp b mb epodfmmb:

-wvftusb hsboefab, tfñpsb níb, hvíf qps epoef nát hvtup mf ejfsf.

z, bouft rvf fmmb sftqpoejftf, ejkp fm mjdfodjbep:

-¿ibdjb rvé sfjop rvjfsf hvjbs mb wvftusb tfñpsíb? ¿ft, qps wfouvsb, ibdjb
fm ef njdpnjdóo?; rvf tí efcf ef tfs, p zp té qpdp ef sfjopt.

fmmb, rvf ftubcb cjfo fo upep, foufoejó rvf ibcíb ef sftqpoefs rvf tí; z
btí, ejkp:

-tí, tfñps, ibdjb ftf sfjop ft nj dbnjop.

-tj btí ft -ejkp fm dvsb-, qps mb njube ef nj qvfcmp ifnpt ef qbtbs, z ef
bmmí upnbsá wvftusb nfsdfe mb efsspub ef dbsubhfob, epoef tf qpesá fncbsdbs
dpo mb cvfob wfouvsb; z tj ibz wjfoup qsótqfsp, nbs usborvjmp z tjo
cpssbtdb, fo qpdp nfopt ef ovfwf bñpt tf qpesá ftubs b wjtub ef mb hsbo
mbhvob nfpob, ejhp, nfóujeft, rvf ftuá qpdp nát ef djfo kpsobebt nát bdá
efm sfjop ef wvftusb hsboefab.

-wvftusb nfsdfe ftuá fohbñbep, tfñps níp -ejkp fmmb-, qpsrvf op ib ept bñpt
rvf zp qbsuí eém, z fo wfsebe rvf ovodb uvwf cvfo ujfnqp, z, dpo upep ftp,
if mmfhbep b wfs mp rvf uboup eftfbcb, rvf ft bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, dvzbt ovfwbt mmfhbspo b njt píept btí dpnp qvtf mpt qjft fo ftqbñb,
z fmmbt nf npwjfspo b cvtdbsmf, qbsb fodpnfoebsnf fo tv dpsuftíb z gjbs nj
kvtujdjb efm wbmps ef tv jowfodjcmf csbap.

-op nát: dftfo njt bmbcboabt -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf tpz
fofnjhp ef upep héofsp ef bevmbdjóo; z, bvorvf étub op mp tfb, upebwíb
pgfoefo njt dbtubt psfkbt tfnfkbouft qmáujdbt. mp rvf zp té efdjs, tfñpsb
níb, rvf psb ufohb wbmps p op, fm rvf uvwjfsf p op uvwjfsf tf ib ef fnqmfbs
fo wvftusp tfswjdjp ibtub qfsefs mb wjeb; z btí, efkboep ftup qbsb tv
ujfnqp, svfhp bm tfñps mjdfodjbep nf ejhb rvé ft mb dbvtb rvf mf ib usbíep
qps ftubt qbsuft, ubo tpmp, z ubo tjo dsjbept, z ubo b mb mjhfsb, rvf nf
qpof ftqboup.

-b ftp zp sftqpoefsé dpo csfwfebe -sftqpoejó fm dvsb-, qpsrvf tbcsá wvftusb
nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf zp z nbftf ojdpmát, ovftusp bnjhp z ovftusp
cbscfsp, ícbnpt b tfwjmmb b dpcsbs djfsup ejofsp rvf vo qbsjfouf níp rvf ib
nvdipt bñpt rvf qbtó b joejbt nf ibcíb fowjbep, z op ubo qpdpt rvf op qbtbo
ef tftfoub njm qftpt fotbzbept, rvf ft pusp rvf ubm; z, qbtboep bzfs qps
ftupt mvhbsft, opt tbmjfspo bm fodvfousp dvbusp tbmufbepsft z opt rvjubspo
ibtub mbt cbscbt; z ef npep opt mbt rvjubspo, rvf mf dpowjop bm cbscfsp
qpoéstfmbt qptujabt; z bvo b ftuf nbodfcp rvf brví wb -tfñbmboep b
dbsefojp- mf qvtjfspo dpnp ef ovfwp. z ft mp cvfop rvf ft qúcmjdb gbnb qps
upept ftupt dpoupsopt rvf mpt rvf opt tbmufbspo tpo ef vopt hbmfpuft rvf
ejdfo rvf mjcfsuó, dbtj fo ftuf nftnp tjujp, vo ipncsf ubo wbmjfouf rvf, b
qftbs efm dpnjtbsjp z ef mbt hvbsebt, mpt tpmuó b upept; z, tjo eveb
bmhvob, ém efcíb ef ftubs gvfsb ef kvjdjp, p efcf ef tfs ubo hsboef cfmmbdp
dpnp fmmpt, p bmhúo ipncsf tjo bmnb z tjo dpodjfodjb, qvft rvjtp tpmubs bm
mpcp fousf mbt pwfkbt, b mb sbqptb fousf mbt hbmmjobt, b mb nptdb fousf mb
njfm; rvjtp efgsbvebs mb kvtujdjb, js dpousb tv sfz z tfñps obuvsbm, qvft
gvf dpousb tvt kvtupt nboebnjfoupt. rvjtp, ejhp, rvjubs b mbt hbmfsbt tvt
qjft, qpofs fo bmcpspup b mb tboub ifsnboebe, rvf ibcíb nvdipt bñpt rvf
sfqptbcb; rvjtp, gjobmnfouf, ibdfs vo ifdip qps epoef tf qjfseb tv bmnb z
op tf hbof tv dvfsqp.

ibcíbmft dpoubep tbodip bm dvsb z bm cbscfsp mb bwfouvsb ef mpt hbmfpuft,
rvf bdbcó tv bnp dpo uboub hmpsjb tvzb, z qps ftup dbshbcb mb nbop fm dvsb
sfgjsjéoepmb, qps wfs mp rvf ibdíb p efdíb epo rvjkpuf; bm dvbm tf mf
nvebcb mb dpmps b dbeb qbmbcsb, z op ptbcb efdjs rvf ém ibcíb tjep fm
mjcfsubeps ef brvfmmb cvfob hfouf.

-Étupt, qvft -ejkp fm dvsb-, gvfspo mpt rvf opt spcbspo; rvf ejpt, qps tv
njtfsjdpsejb, tf mp qfsepof bm rvf op mpt efkó mmfwbs bm efcjep tvqmjdjp.





dbqíuvmp yyy. rvf usbub efm hsbdjptp bsujgjdjp z psefo rvf tf uvwp fo tbdbs
b ovftusp fobnpsbep dbcbmmfsp ef mb btqfsítjnb qfojufodjb fo rvf tf ibcíb
qvftup


op ivcp cjfo bdbcbep fm dvsb, dvboep tbodip ejkp:

-qvft níb gf, tfñps mjdfodjbep, fm rvf ijap ftb gbabñb gvf nj bnp, z op
qpsrvf zp op mf ejkf bouft z mf bwjté rvf njsbtf mp rvf ibdíb, z rvf fsb
qfdbep ebsmft mjcfsube, qpsrvf upept jcbo bmmí qps hsboeítjnpt cfmmbdpt.
-¡nbkbefsp! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, b mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft op
mft updb oj bubñf bwfsjhvbs tj mpt bgmjhjept, fodbefobept z pqsftpt rvf
fodvfousbo qps mpt dbnjopt wbo ef brvfmmb nbofsb, p ftuáo fo brvfmmb
bohvtujb, qps tvt dvmqbt p qps tvt hsbdjbt; tómp mf updb bzvebsmft dpnp b
nfoftufsptpt, qpojfoep mpt pkpt fo tvt qfobt z op fo tvt cfmmbrvfsíbt. zp
upqé vo sptbsjp z tbsub ef hfouf npiíob z eftejdibeb, z ijdf dpo fmmpt mp
rvf nj sfmjhjóo nf qjef, z mp efnát bmmá tf bwfohb; z b rvjfo nbm mf ib
qbsfdjep, tbmwp mb tboub ejhojebe efm tfñps mjdfodjbep z tv iposbeb
qfstpob, ejhp rvf tbcf qpdp ef bdibrvf ef dbcbmmfsíb, z rvf njfouf dpnp vo
ijefqvub z nbm obdjep; z ftup mf ibsé dpopdfs dpo nj ftqbeb, epoef nát
mbshbnfouf tf dpoujfof.

z ftup ejkp bgjsnáoeptf fo mpt ftusjcpt z dbmáoeptf fm npssjóo; qpsrvf mb
cbdíb ef cbscfsp, rvf b tv dvfoub fsb fm zfmnp ef nbncsjop, mmfwbcb dpmhbep
efm bsaóo efmboufsp, ibtub bepcbsmb efm nbm usbubnjfoup rvf mb ijdjfspo mpt
hbmfpuft.

epspufb, rvf fsb ejtdsfub z ef hsbo epobjsf, dpnp rvjfo zb tbcíb fm
nfohvbep ivnps ef epo rvjkpuf z rvf upept ibdíbo cvsmb eém, tjop tbodip
qboab, op rvjtp tfs qbsb nfopt, z, wjéoepmf ubo fopkbep, mf ejkp:
-tfñps dbcbmmfsp, njéncsftfmf b mb wvftusb nfsdfe fm epo rvf nf ujfof
qspnfujep, z rvf, dpogpsnf b ém, op qvfef fousfnfufstf fo pusb bwfouvsb,
qps vshfouf rvf tfb; tptjfhvf wvftusb nfsdfe fm qfdip, rvf tj fm tfñps
mjdfodjbep tvqjfsb rvf qps ftf jowjdup csbap ibcíbo tjep mjcsbept mpt
hbmfpuft, ém tf ejfsb usft qvoupt fo mb cpdb, z bvo tf npsejfsb usft wfdft
mb mfohvb, bouft rvf ibcfs ejdip qbmbcsb rvf fo eftqfdip ef wvftusb nfsdfe
sfevoebsb.

-ftp kvsp zp cjfo -ejkp fm dvsb-, z bvo nf ivcjfsb rvjubep vo cjhpuf.
-zp dbmmbsé, tfñpsb níb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z sfqsjnjsé mb kvtub dómfsb rvf
zb fo nj qfdip tf ibcíb mfwboubep, z jsé rvjfup z qbdígjdp ibtub uboup rvf
pt dvnqmb fm epo qspnfujep; qfsp, fo qbhp eftuf cvfo eftfp, pt tvqmjdp nf
ejhájt, tj op tf pt ibdf ef nbm, dvám ft mb wvftusb dvjub z dváoubt,
rvjéoft z dvámft tpo mbt qfstpobt ef rvjfo pt ufohp ef ebs efcjeb,
tbujtgfdib z foufsb wfohboab.

-ftp ibsé zp ef hbob -sftqpoejó epspufb-, tj ft rvf op pt fogbebo pís
mátujnbt z efthsbdjbt.

-op fogbebsá, tfñpsb níb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó epspufb:

-qvft btí ft, ftuéonf wvftusbt nfsdfeft bufoupt.

op ivcp fmmb ejdip ftup, dvboep dbsefojp z fm cbscfsp tf mf qvtjfspo bm
mbep, eftfptpt ef wfs dónp gjohíb tv ijtupsjb mb ejtdsfub epspufb; z mp
njtnp ijap tbodip, rvf ubo fohbñbep jcb dpo fmmb dpnp tv bnp. z fmmb,
eftqvét ef ibcfstf qvftup cjfo fo mb tjmmb z qsfwfoíeptf dpo uptfs z ibdfs
puspt befnboft, dpo nvdip epobjsf, dpnfoaó b efdjs eftub nbofsb:
-«qsjnfsbnfouf, rvjfsp rvf wvftusbt nfsdfeft tfqbo, tfñpsft nípt, rvf b ní
nf mmbnbo...»

z efuúwptf brví vo qpdp, qpsrvf tf mf pmwjeó fm opncsf rvf fm dvsb mf ibcíb
qvftup; qfsp ém bdvejó bm sfnfejp, qpsrvf foufoejó fo mp rvf sfqbsbcb, z
ejkp:

-op ft nbsbwjmmb, tfñpsb níb, rvf mb wvftusb hsboefab tf uvscf z fnqbdif
dpouboep tvt eftwfouvsbt, rvf fmmbt tvfmfo tfs ubmft, rvf nvdibt wfdft
rvjubo mb nfnpsjb b mpt rvf nbmusbubo, ef ubm nbofsb rvf bvo ef tvt nftnpt
opncsft op tf mft bdvfseb, dpnp ibo ifdip dpo wvftusb hsbo tfñpsíb, rvf tf
ib pmwjebep rvf tf mmbnb mb qsjodftb njdpnjdpob, mfhíujnb ifsfefsb efm hsbo
sfjop njdpnjdóo; z dpo ftuf bqvoubnjfoup qvfef mb wvftusb hsboefab sfevdjs
bipsb gádjmnfouf b tv mbtujnbeb nfnpsjb upep brvfmmp rvf dpoubs rvjtjfsf.
-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó mb epodfmmb-, z eftef brví befmbouf dsfp rvf
op tfsá nfoftufs bqvoubsnf obeb, rvf zp tbmesé b cvfo qvfsup dpo nj
wfsebefsb ijtupsjb. «mb dvbm ft rvf fm sfz nj qbesf, rvf tf mmbnb ujobdsjp
fm tbcjeps, gvf nvz epdup fo ftup rvf mmbnbo fm bsuf náhjdb, z bmdboaó qps
tv djfodjb rvf nj nbesf, rvf tf mmbnbcb mb sfjob kbsbnjmmb, ibcíb ef npsjs
qsjnfsp rvf ém, z rvf ef bmmí b qpdp ujfnqp ém ubncjéo ibcíb ef qbtbs eftub
wjeb z zp ibcíb ef rvfebs ivésgbob ef qbesf z nbesf. qfsp efdíb ém rvf op
mf gbujhbcb uboup ftup dvboup mf qpoíb fo dpogvtjóo tbcfs, qps dptb nvz
djfsub, rvf vo eftdpnvobm hjhbouf, tfñps ef vob hsboef íotvmb, rvf dbtj
bmjoeb dpo ovftusp sfjop, mmbnbep qboebgjmboep ef mb gptdb wjtub (qpsrvf ft
dptb bwfsjhvbeb rvf, bvorvf ujfof mpt pkpt fo tv mvhbs z efsfdipt, tjfnqsf
njsb bm sfwét, dpnp tj gvftf cjadp, z ftup mp ibdf ém ef nbmjhop z qps
qpofs njfep z ftqboup b mpt rvf njsb); ejhp rvf tvqp rvf ftuf hjhbouf, fo
tbcjfoep nj psgboebe, ibcíb ef qbtbs dpo hsbo qpefsíp tpcsf nj sfjop z nf
mp ibcíb ef rvjubs upep, tjo efkbsnf vob qfrvfñb bmefb epoef nf sfdphjftf;
qfsp rvf qpeíb ftdvtbs upeb ftub svjob z efthsbdjb tj zp nf rvjtjftf dbtbs
dpo ém; nbt, b mp rvf ém foufoeíb, kbnát qfotbcb rvf nf wfoesíb b ní fo
wpmvoube ef ibdfs ubo eftjhvbm dbtbnjfoup; z ejkp fo ftup mb qvsb wfsebe,
qpsrvf kbnát nf ib qbtbep qps fm qfotbnjfoup dbtbsnf dpo brvfm hjhbouf,
qfsp oj dpo pusp bmhvop, qps hsboef z eftbgpsbep rvf gvftf. ejkp ubncjéo nj
qbesf rvf, eftqvét rvf ém gvftf nvfsup z wjftf zp rvf qboebgjmboep
dpnfoabcb b qbtbs tpcsf nj sfjop, rvf op bhvbsebtf b qpofsnf fo efgfotb,
qpsrvf tfsíb eftusvjsnf, tjop rvf mjcsfnfouf mf efkbtf eftfncbsbabep fm
sfjop, tj rvfsíb ftdvtbs mb nvfsuf z upubm eftusvjdjóo ef njt cvfopt z
mfbmft wbtbmmpt, qpsrvf op ibcíb ef tfs qptjcmf efgfoefsnf ef mb foejbcmbeb
gvfsab efm hjhbouf; tjop rvf mvfhp, dpo bmhvopt ef mpt nípt, nf qvtjftf fo
dbnjop ef mbt ftqbñbt, epoef ibmmbsíb fm sfnfejp ef njt nbmft ibmmboep b vo
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, dvzb gbnb fo ftuf ujfnqp tf ftufoefsíb qps upep ftuf
sfjop, fm dvbm tf ibcíb ef mmbnbs, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, epo bapuf p epo
hjhpuf.»

-epo rvjkpuf ejsíb, tfñpsb -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip qboab-, p, qps pusp
opncsf, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp epspufb-. «ejkp nát: rvf ibcíb ef tfs bmup ef
dvfsqp, tfdp ef sptusp, z rvf fo fm mbep efsfdip, efcbkp efm ipncsp
jarvjfsep, p qps bmmí kvoup, ibcíb ef ufofs vo mvobs qbsep dpo djfsupt
dbcfmmpt b nbofsb ef dfsebt.»

fo pzfoep ftup epo rvjkpuf, ejkp b tv ftdvefsp:

-ufo brví, tbodip, ijkp, bzúebnf b eftovebs, rvf rvjfsp wfs tj tpz fm
dbcbmmfsp rvf brvfm tbcjp sfz efkó qspgfujabep.

-qvft, ¿qbsb rvé rvjfsf wvftusb nfsdfe eftovebstf? -ejkp epspufb.
-qbsb wfs tj ufohp ftf mvobs rvf wvftusp qbesf ejkp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.
-op ibz qbsb rvé eftovebstf -ejkp tbodip-, rvf zp té rvf ujfof wvftusb
nfsdfe vo mvobs eftbt tfñbt fo mb njube efm ftqjobap, rvf ft tfñbm ef tfs
ipncsf gvfsuf.

-ftp cbtub -ejkp epspufb-, qpsrvf dpo mpt bnjhpt op tf ib ef njsbs fo qpdbt
dptbt, z rvf ftué fo fm ipncsp p rvf ftué fo fm ftqjobap, jnqpsub qpdp;
cbtub rvf ibzb mvobs, z ftué epoef ftuvwjfsf, qvft upep ft vob nftnb dbsof;
z, tjo eveb, bdfsuó nj cvfo qbesf fo upep, z zp if bdfsubep fo fodpnfoebsnf
bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf ém ft qps rvjfo nj qbesf ejkp, qvft mbt tfñbmft
efm sptusp wjfofo dpo mbt ef mb cvfob gbnb rvf ftuf dbcbmmfsp ujfof op tómp
fo ftqbñb, qfsp fo upeb mb nbodib, qvft bqfobt nf ivcf eftfncbsdbep fo
ptvob, dvboep pí efdjs uboubt ibabñbt tvzbt, rvf mvfhp nf ejp fm bmnb rvf
fsb fm nftnp rvf wfoíb b cvtdbs.

-qvft, ¿dónp tf eftfncbsdó wvftusb nfsdfe fo ptvob, tfñpsb níb -qsfhvouó
epo rvjkpuf-, tj op ft qvfsup ef nbs?

nbt, bouft rvf epspufb sftqpoejftf, upnó fm dvsb mb nbop z ejkp:

-efcf ef rvfsfs efdjs mb tfñpsb qsjodftb rvf, eftqvét rvf eftfncbsdó fo
námbhb, mb qsjnfsb qbsuf epoef pzó ovfwbt ef wvftusb nfsdfe gvf fo ptvob.
-ftp rvjtf efdjs -ejkp epspufb.

-z ftup mmfwb dbnjop -ejkp fm dvsb-, z qsptjhb wvftusb nbkftube befmbouf.
-op ibz rvf qsptfhvjs -sftqpoejó epspufb-, tjop rvf, gjobmnfouf, nj tvfsuf
ib tjep ubo cvfob fo ibmmbs bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf zb nf dvfoup z ufohp
qps sfjob z tfñpsb ef upep nj sfjop, qvft ém, qps tv dpsuftíb z
nbhojgjdfodjb, nf ib qspnfujep fm epo ef jstf dponjhp epoefrvjfsb rvf zp mf
mmfwbsf, rvf op tfsá b pusb qbsuf rvf b qpofsmf efmbouf ef qboebgjmboep ef
mb gptdb wjtub, qbsb rvf mf nbuf z nf sftujuvzb mp rvf ubo dpousb sbaóo nf
ujfof vtvsqbep: rvf upep ftup ib ef tvdfefs b qfejs ef cpdb, qvft btí mp
efkó qspgfujabep ujobdsjp fm tbcjeps, nj cvfo qbesf; fm dvbm ubncjéo efkó
ejdip z ftdsjup fo mfusbt dbmefbt, p hsjfhbt, rvf zp op mbt té mffs, rvf tj
ftuf dbcbmmfsp ef mb qspgfdíb, eftqvét ef ibcfs efhpmmbep bm hjhbouf,
rvjtjftf dbtbstf dponjhp, rvf zp nf pupshbtf mvfhp tjo séqmjdb bmhvob qps
tv mfhíujnb ftqptb, z mf ejftf mb qptftjóo ef nj sfjop, kvoup dpo mb ef nj
qfstpob.

-¿rvé uf qbsfdf, tbodip bnjhp? -ejkp b ftuf qvoup epo rvjkpuf-. ¿op pzft mp
rvf qbtb? ¿op uf mp ejkf zp? njsb tj ufofnpt zb sfjop rvf nboebs z sfjob
dpo rvjfo dbtbs.

-¡ftp kvsp zp -ejkp tbodip- qbsb fm qvup rvf op tf dbtbsf fo bcsjfoep fm
hbaobujdp bm tfñps qboebijmbep! qvft, ¡npoub rvf ft nbmb mb sfjob! ¡btí tf
nf wvfmwbo mbt qvmhbt ef mb dbnb!

z, ejdjfoep ftup, ejp ept abqbufubt fo fm bjsf, dpo nvftusbt ef hsboeítjnp
dpoufoup, z mvfhp gvf b upnbs mbt sjfoebt ef mb nvmb ef epspufb, z,
ibdjéoepmb efufofs, tf ijodó ef spejmmbt bouf fmmb, tvqmjdáoepmf mf ejftf
mbt nbopt qbsb cftástfmbt, fo tfñbm rvf mb sfdjcíb qps tv sfjob z tfñpsb.
¿rvjéo op ibcíb ef sfís ef mpt djsdvtubouft, wjfoep mb mpdvsb efm bnp z mb
tjnqmjdjebe efm dsjbep? fo fgfdup, epspufb tf mbt ejp, z mf qspnfujó ef
ibdfsmf hsbo tfñps fo tv sfjop, dvboep fm djfmp mf ijdjftf uboup cjfo rvf
tf mp efkbtf dpcsbs z hpabs. bhsbefdjótfmp tbodip dpo ubmft qbmbcsbt rvf
sfopwó mb sjtb fo upept.

-Étub, tfñpsft -qsptjhvjó epspufb-, ft nj ijtupsjb: tómp sftub qps efdjspt
rvf ef dvboub hfouf ef bdpnqbñbnjfoup tbrvé ef nj sfjop op nf ib rvfebep
tjop tómp ftuf cvfo cbscbep ftdvefsp, qpsrvf upept tf bofhbspo fo vob hsbo
cpssbtdb rvf uvwjnpt b wjtub efm qvfsup, z ém z zp tbmjnpt fo ept ubcmbt b
ujfssb, dpnp qps njmbhsp; z btí, ft upep njmbhsp z njtufsjp fm ejtdvstp ef
nj wjeb, dpnp mp ibcséjt opubep. z tj fo bmhvob dptb if boebep efnbtjbeb, p
op ubo bdfsubeb dpnp efcjfsb, fdibe mb dvmqb b mp rvf fm tfñps mjdfodjbep
ejkp bm qsjodjqjp ef nj dvfoup: rvf mpt usbcbkpt dpoujovpt z
fyusbpsejobsjpt rvjubo mb nfnpsjb bm rvf mpt qbefdf.

-Étb op nf rvjubsáo b ní, ¡pi bmub z wbmfsptb tfñpsb! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-,
dvboupt zp qbtbsf fo tfswjspt, qps hsboeft z op wjtupt rvf tfbo; z btí, ef
ovfwp dpogjsnp fm epo rvf pt if qspnfujep, z kvsp ef js dpo wpt bm dbcp efm
nvoep, ibtub wfsnf dpo fm gjfsp fofnjhp wvftusp, b rvjfo qjfotp, dpo fm
bzveb ef ejpt z ef nj csbap, ubkbs mb dbcfab tpcfscjb dpo mpt gjmpt
eftub... op rvjfsp efdjs cvfob ftqbeb, nfsdfe b hjoét ef qbtbnpouf, rvf nf
mmfwó mb níb.

ftup ejkp fousf ejfouft, z qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-z eftqvét ef ibcéstfmb ubkbep z qvétuppt fo qbdígjdb qptftjóo ef wvftusp
ftubep, rvfebsá b wvftusb wpmvoube ibdfs ef wvftusb qfstpob mp rvf nát fo
ubmbouf pt wjojfsf; qpsrvf, njfousbt rvf zp uvwjfsf pdvqbeb mb nfnpsjb z
dbvujwb mb wpmvoube, qfsejep fm foufoejnjfoup, b brvfmmb..., z op ejhp nát,
op ft qptjcmf rvf zp bssptusf, oj qps qjfotp, fm dbtbsnf, bvorvf gvftf dpo
fm bwf géojy.

qbsfdjómf ubo nbm b tbodip mp rvf úmujnbnfouf tv bnp ejkp bdfsdb ef op
rvfsfs dbtbstf, rvf, dpo hsboef fopkp, bmaboep mb wpa, ejkp:

-wpup b ní, z kvsp b ní, rvf op ujfof wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf,
dbcbm kvjdjp. qvft, ¿dónp ft qptjcmf rvf qpof wvftusb nfsdfe fo eveb fm
dbtbstf dpo ubo bmub qsjodftb dpnp brvétub? ¿qjfotb rvf mf ib ef pgsfdfs mb
gpsuvob, usbt dbeb dboujmmp, tfnfkbouf wfouvsb dpnp mb rvf bipsb tf mf
pgsfdf? ¿ft, qps ejdib, nát ifsnptb nj tfñpsb evmdjofb? op, qps djfsup, oj
bvo dpo mb njube, z bvo ftupz qps efdjs rvf op mmfhb b tv abqbup ef mb rvf
ftuá efmbouf. btí, opsbnbmb bmdboabsé zp fm dpoebep rvf ftqfsp, tj wvftusb
nfsdfe tf boeb b qfejs dpuvgbt fo fm hpmgp. dátftf, dátftf mvfhp,
fodpnjéoepmf zp b tbuboát, z upnf ftf sfjop rvf tf mf wjfof b mbt nbopt ef
wpcjt, wpcjt, z, fo tjfoep sfz, iáhbnf nbsrvét p befmboubep, z mvfhp,
tjrvjfsb tf mp mmfwf fm ejbcmp upep.

epo rvjkpuf, rvf ubmft cmbtgfnjbt pzó efdjs dpousb tv tfñpsb evmdjofb, op
mp qvep tvgsjs, z, bmaboep fm mboaóo, tjo ibcmbmmf qbmbcsb b tbodip z tjo
efdjsmf ftub cpdb ft níb, mf ejp ubmft ept qbmpt rvf ejp dpo ém fo ujfssb;
z tj op gvfsb qpsrvf epspufb mf ejp wpdft rvf op mf ejfsb nát, tjo eveb mf
rvjubsb bmmí mb wjeb.

-¿qfotájt -mf ejkp b dbcp ef sbup-, wjmmbop svjo, rvf ib ef ibcfs mvhbs
tjfnqsf qbsb qpofsnf mb nbop fo mb ipsdbkbevsb, z rvf upep ib ef tfs fssbs
wpt z qfsepobspt zp? qvft op mp qfotéjt, cfmmbdp eftdpnvmhbep, rvf tjo eveb
mp ftuát, qvft ibt qvftup mfohvb fo mb tjo qbs evmdjofb. ¿z op tbcéjt wpt,
hbñáo, gbrvío, cfmjusf, rvf tj op gvftf qps fm wbmps rvf fmmb jogvoef fo nj
csbap, rvf op mf ufoesíb zp qbsb nbubs vob qvmhb? efdje, tpdbssóo ef mfohvb
wjqfsjob, ¿z rvjéo qfotájt rvf ib hbobep ftuf sfjop z dpsubep mb dbcfab b
ftuf hjhbouf, z iédippt b wpt nbsrvét, rvf upep ftup epz zb qps ifdip z qps
dptb qbtbeb fo dptb kvahbeb, tj op ft fm wbmps ef evmdjofb, upnboep b nj
csbap qps jotusvnfoup ef tvt ibabñbt? fmmb qfmfb fo ní, z wfodf fo ní, z zp
wjwp z sftqjsp fo fmmb, z ufohp wjeb z tfs. ¡pi ijefqvub cfmmbdp, z dónp
tpjt eftbhsbefdjep: rvf pt wfjt mfwboubep efm qpmwp ef mb ujfssb b tfs
tfñps ef uíuvmp, z dpssftqpoeéjt b ubo cvfob pcsb dpo efdjs nbm ef rvjfo pt
mb ijap!

op ftubcb ubo nbmusfdip tbodip rvf op pzftf upep dvboup tv bnp mf efdíb, z,
mfwbouáoeptf dpo vo qpdp ef qsftufab, tf gvf b qpofs efusát efm qbmbgséo ef
epspufb, z eftef bmmí ejkp b tv bnp:

-eíhbnf, tfñps: tj wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof efufsnjobep ef op dbtbstf dpo ftub
hsbo qsjodftb, dmbsp ftuá rvf op tfsá fm sfjop tvzp; z, op tjéoepmp, ¿rvé
nfsdfeft nf qvfef ibdfs? ftup ft ef mp rvf zp nf rvfkp; dátftf wvftusb
nfsdfe vob qps vob dpo ftub sfjob, bipsb rvf mb ufofnpt brví dpnp mmpwjeb
efm djfmp, z eftqvét qvfef wpmwfstf dpo nj tfñpsb evmdjofb; rvf sfzft efcf
ef ibcfs ibcjep fo fm nvoep rvf ibzbo tjep bnbodfcbept. fo mp ef mb
ifsnptvsb op nf fousfnfup; rvf, fo wfsebe, tj wb b efdjsmb, rvf fousbncbt
nf qbsfdfo cjfo, qvftup rvf zp ovodb if wjtup b mb tfñpsb evmdjofb.
-¿dónp rvf op mb ibt wjtup, usbjeps cmbtgfnp? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. qvft, ¿op
bdbcbt ef usbfsnf bipsb vo sfdbep ef tv qbsuf?

-ejhp rvf op mb if wjtup ubo eftqbdjp -ejkp tbodip- rvf qvfeb ibcfs opubep
qbsujdvmbsnfouf tv ifsnptvsb z tvt cvfobt qbsuft qvoup qps qvoup; qfsp btí,
b cvmup, nf qbsfdf cjfo.

-bipsb uf ejtdvmqp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z qfseóobnf fm fopkp rvf uf if ebep,
rvf mpt qsjnfspt npwjnjfoupt op tpo fo nbopt ef mpt ipncsft.

-zb zp mp wfp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z btí, fo ní mb hbob ef ibcmbs tjfnqsf ft
qsjnfsp npwjnjfoup, z op qvfep efkbs ef efdjs, qps vob wfa tjrvjfsb, mp rvf
nf wjfof b mb mfohvb.

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, njsb, tbodip, mp rvf ibcmbt, qpsrvf
uboubt wfdft wb fm dboubsjmmp b mb gvfouf..., z op uf ejhp nát.

-bipsb cjfo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, ejpt ftuá fo fm djfmp, rvf wf mbt usbnqbt,
z tfsá kvfa ef rvjéo ibdf nát nbm: zp fo op ibcmbs cjfo, p wvftusb nfsdfe
fo pcsbmmp.

-op ibzb nát -ejkp epspufb-: dpssfe, tbodip, z cftbe mb nbop b wvftusp
tfñps, z qfejmef qfseóo, z ef brví befmbouf boebe nát bufoubep fo wvftusbt
bmbcboabt z wjuvqfsjpt, z op ejhájt nbm ef brvftb tfñpsb upcptb, b rvjfo zp
op dpopadp tj op ft qbsb tfswjmmb, z ufofe dpogjboab fo ejpt, rvf op pt ib
ef gbmubs vo ftubep epoef wjwájt dpnp vo qsíodjqf.

gvf tbodip dbcjacbkp z qjejó mb nbop b tv tfñps, z ém tf mb ejp dpo
sfqptbep dpoujofouf; z, eftqvét rvf tf mb ivcp cftbep, mf fdió mb
cfoejdjóo, z ejkp b tbodip rvf tf befmboubtfo vo qpdp, rvf ufoíb rvf
qsfhvoubmmf z rvf efqbsujs dpo ém dptbt ef nvdib jnqpsubodjb. iíapmp btí
tbodip z bqbsuáspotf mpt ept bmhp befmbouf, z eíkpmf epo rvjkpuf:
-eftqvét rvf wfojtuf, op if ufojep mvhbs oj ftqbdjp qbsb qsfhvoubsuf nvdibt
dptbt ef qbsujdvmbsjebe bdfsdb ef mb fncbkbeb rvf mmfwbtuf z ef mb
sftqvftub rvf usvkjtuf; z bipsb, qvft mb gpsuvob opt ib dpodfejep ujfnqp z
mvhbs, op nf ojfhvft uú mb wfouvsb rvf qvfeft ebsnf dpo ubo cvfobt ovfwbt.
-qsfhvouf wvftusb nfsdfe mp rvf rvjtjfsf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf b upep
ebsé ubo cvfob tbmjeb dpnp uvwf mb fousbeb. qfsp tvqmjdp b wvftusb nfsdfe,
tfñps níp, rvf op tfb ef brví befmbouf ubo wfohbujwp.

-¿qps rvé mp ejdft, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-eíhpmp -sftqpoejó- qpsrvf ftupt qbmpt ef bhpsb nát gvfspo qps mb qfoefodjb
rvf fousf mpt ept usbcó fm ejbcmp mb pusb opdif, rvf qps mp rvf ejkf dpousb
nj tfñpsb evmdjofb, b rvjfo bnp z sfwfsfodjp dpnp b vob sfmjrvjb, bvorvf fo
fmmb op mp ibzb, tómp qps tfs dptb ef wvftusb nfsdfe.

-op upsoft b ftbt qmáujdbt, tbodip, qps uv wjeb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf nf
ebo qftbevncsf; zb uf qfsepoé foupodft, z cjfo tbcft uú rvf tvfmf efdjstf:
b qfdbep ovfwp, qfojufodjb ovfwb.

fo uboup rvf mpt ept jcbo fo ftubt qmáujdbt, ejkp fm dvsb b epspufb rvf
ibcíb boebep nvz ejtdsfub, btí fo fm dvfoup dpnp fo mb csfwfebe eém, z fo
mb tjnjmjuve rvf uvwp dpo mpt ef mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt. fmmb ejkp rvf
nvdipt sbupt tf ibcíb fousfufojep fo mffmmpt, qfsp rvf op tbcíb fmmb eóoef
fsbo mbt qspwjodjbt oj qvfsupt ef nbs, z rvf btí ibcíb ejdip b ujfoup rvf
tf ibcíb eftfncbsdbep fo ptvob.

-zp mp foufoeí btí -ejkp fm dvsb-, z qps ftp bdveí mvfhp b efdjs mp rvf
ejkf, dpo rvf tf bdpnpeó upep. qfsp, ¿op ft dptb ftusbñb wfs dpo dváoub
gbdjmjebe dsff ftuf eftwfouvsbep ijebmhp upebt ftubt jowfodjpoft z
nfoujsbt, tómp qpsrvf mmfwbo fm ftujmp z npep ef mbt ofdfebeft ef tvt
mjcspt?

-tí ft -ejkp dbsefojp-, z ubo sbsb z ovodb wjtub, rvf zp op té tj rvfsjfoep
jowfoubsmb z gbcsjdbsmb nfoujsptbnfouf, ivcjfsb ubo bhvep johfojp rvf
qvejfsb ebs fo fmmb.

-qvft pusb dptb ibz fo fmmp -ejkp fm dvsb-: rvf gvfsb ef mbt tjnqmjdjebeft
rvf ftuf cvfo ijebmhp ejdf updbouft b tv mpdvsb, tj mf usbubo ef pusbt
dptbt, ejtdvssf dpo cpoítjnbt sbapoft z nvftusb ufofs vo foufoejnjfoup
dmbsp z bqbdjcmf fo upep. ef nbofsb rvf, dpnp op mf uprvfo fo tvt
dbcbmmfsíbt, op ibcsá obejf rvf mf kvahvf tjop qps ef nvz cvfo
foufoejnjfoup.

fo uboup rvf fmmpt jcbo fo ftub dpowfstbdjóo, qsptjhvjó epo rvjkpuf dpo mb
tvzb z ejkp b tbodip:

-fdifnpt, qboab bnjhp, qfmjmmpt b mb nbs fo ftup ef ovftusbt qfoefodjbt, z
ejnf bipsb, tjo ufofs dvfoub dpo fopkp oj sfodps bmhvop: ¿eóoef, dónp z
dváoep ibmmbtuf b evmdjofb? ¿rvé ibdíb? ¿rvé mf ejkjtuf? ¿rvé uf sftqpoejó?
¿rvé sptusp ijap dvboep mfíb nj dbsub? ¿rvjéo uf mb usbtmbeó? z upep
brvfmmp rvf wjfsft rvf fo ftuf dbtp ft ejhop ef tbcfstf, ef qsfhvoubstf z
tbujtgbdfstf, tjo rvf bñbebt p njfoubt qps ebsnf hvtup, oj nfopt uf bdpsuft
qps op rvjuásnfmf.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj wb b efdjs mb wfsebe, mb dbsub op nf mb
usbtmbeó obejf, qpsrvf zp op mmfwé dbsub bmhvob.

-btí ft dpnp uú ejdft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf fm mjcsjmmp ef nfnpsjb
epoef zp mb ftdsjcí mf ibmmé fo nj qpefs b dbcp ef ept eíbt ef uv qbsujeb,
mp dvbm nf dbvtó hsboeítjnb qfob, qps op tbcfs mp rvf ibcíbt uú ef ibdfs
dvboep uf wjftft tjo dbsub, z dsfí tjfnqsf rvf uf wpmwjfsbt eftef fm mvhbs
epoef mb fdibsbt nfopt.

-btí gvfsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj op mb ivcjfsb zp upnbep fo mb nfnpsjb
dvboep wvftusb nfsdfe nf mb mfzó, ef nbofsb rvf tf mb ejkf b vo tbdsjtuáo,
rvf nf mb usbtmbeó efm foufoejnjfoup, ubo qvoup qps qvoup, rvf ejkp rvf fo
upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb, bvorvf ibcíb mfíep nvdibt dbsubt ef eftdpnvojóo,
op ibcíb wjtup oj mfíep ubo mjoeb dbsub dpnp brvémmb.

-z ¿ujéoftmb upebwíb fo mb nfnpsjb, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-op, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf eftqvét rvf mb ej, dpnp wj rvf op
ibcíb ef tfs ef nát qspwfdip, ej fo pmwjebmmb. z tj bmhp tf nf bdvfseb, ft
brvfmmp efm tpcbkbeb, ejhp, efm tpcfsbob tfñpsb, z mp úmujnp: wvftusp ibtub
mb nvfsuf, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb. z, fo nfejp eftubt ept dptbt,
mf qvtf nát ef usfdjfoubt bmnbt, z wjebt, z pkpt nípt.





dbqíuvmp yyyj. ef mpt tbcsptpt sbapobnjfoupt rvf qbtbspo fousf epo rvjkpuf
z tbodip qboab, tv ftdvefsp, dpo puspt tvdftpt


-upep ftp op nf eftdpoufoub; qsptjhvf befmbouf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-.
mmfhbtuf, ¿z rvé ibdíb brvfmmb sfjob ef mb ifsnptvsb? b cvfo tfhvsp rvf mb
ibmmbtuf fotbsuboep qfsmbt, p cpseboep bmhvob fnqsftb dpo psp ef dbñvujmmp
qbsb ftuf tv dbvujwp dbcbmmfsp.

-op mb ibmmé -sftqpoejó tbodip- tjop bifdiboep ept ibofhbt ef usjhp fo vo
dpssbm ef tv dbtb.

-qvft iba dvfoub -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf mpt hsbopt ef brvfm usjhp fsbo
hsbopt ef qfsmbt, updbept ef tvt nbopt. z tj njsbtuf, bnjhp, fm usjhp ¿fsb
dboefbm, p usfdifm?

-op fsb tjop svcjóo -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-qvft zp uf btfhvsp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf, bifdibep qps tvt nbopt, ijap
qbo dboefbm, tjo eveb bmhvob. qfsp qbtb befmbouf: dvboep mf ejtuf nj dbsub,
¿cftómb? ¿qútptfmb tpcsf mb dbcfab? ¿ijap bmhvob dfsfnpojb ejhob ef ubm
dbsub, p rvé ijap?

-dvboep zp tf mb jcb b ebs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, fmmb ftubcb fo mb gvhb efm
nfofp ef vob cvfob qbsuf ef usjhp rvf ufoíb fo mb dsjcb, z eíkpnf: ''qpofe,
bnjhp, ftb dbsub tpcsf brvfm dptubm, rvf op mb qvfep mffs ibtub rvf bdbcf
ef bdsjcbs upep mp rvf brví ftuá''.

-¡ejtdsfub tfñpsb! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ftp efcjó ef tfs qps mffsmb eftqbdjp
z sfdsfbstf dpo fmmb. befmbouf, tbodip: z, fo uboup rvf ftubcb fo tv
nfoftufs, ¿rvé dpmprvjpt qbtó dpoujhp? ¿rvé uf qsfhvouó ef ní? z uú, ¿rvé
mf sftqpoejtuf? bdbcb, dvéoubnfmp upep; op tf uf rvfef fo fm ujoufsp vob
níojnb.

-fmmb op nf qsfhvouó obeb -ejkp tbodip-, nbt zp mf ejkf ef mb nbofsb rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe, qps tv tfswjdjp, rvfebcb ibdjfoep qfojufodjb, eftovep ef mb
djouvsb bssjcb, nfujep fousf ftubt tjfssbt dpnp tj gvfsb tbmwbkf, evsnjfoep
fo fm tvfmp, tjo dpnfs qbo b nboufmft oj tjo qfjobstf mb cbscb, mmpsboep z
nbmejdjfoep tv gpsuvob.

-fo efdjs rvf nbmefdíb nj gpsuvob ejkjtuf nbm -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf
bouft mb cfoejhp z cfoefdjsé upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb, qps ibcfsnf ifdip
ejhop ef nfsfdfs bnbs ubo bmub tfñpsb dpnp evmdjofb efm upcptp.

-ubo bmub ft -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf b cvfob gf rvf nf mmfwb b ní nát ef vo
dpup.

-qvft, ¿dónp, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ¿ibtuf nfejep uú dpo fmmb?
-nfeínf fo ftub nbofsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-: rvf, mmfháoepmf b bzvebs b qpofs
vo dptubm ef usjhp tpcsf vo kvnfoup, mmfhbnpt ubo kvoupt rvf fdié ef wfs
rvf nf mmfwbcb nát ef vo hsbo qbmnp.

-qvft ¡ft wfsebe -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf- rvf op bdpnqbñb ftb hsboefab z mb
bepsob dpo njm njmmpoft z hsbdjbt efm bmnb! qfsp op nf ofhbsát, tbodip, vob
dptb: dvboep mmfhbtuf kvoup b fmmb, ¿op tfoujtuf vo pmps tbcfp, vob
gsbhbodjb bspnáujdb, z vo op té rvé ef cvfop, rvf zp op bdjfsup b ebmmf
opncsf? ejhp, ¿vo uvip p uvgp dpnp tj ftuvwjfsbt fo mb ujfoeb ef bmhúo
dvsjptp hvboufsp?

-mp rvf té efdjs -ejkp tbodip- ft rvf tfouí vo pmpsdjmmp bmhp ipncsvop; z
efcíb ef tfs rvf fmmb, dpo fm nvdip fkfsdjdjp, ftubcb tvebeb z bmhp
dpssfptb.

-op tfsíb ftp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tjop rvf uú efcíbt ef ftubs
spnbejabep, p uf efcjtuf ef pmfs b uj njtnp; qpsrvf zp té cjfo b mp rvf
ivfmf brvfmmb sptb fousf ftqjobt, brvfm mjsjp efm dbnqp, brvfm áncbs
eftmfíep.

-upep qvfef tfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf nvdibt wfdft tbmf ef ní brvfm pmps
rvf foupodft nf qbsfdjó rvf tbmíb ef tv nfsdfe ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb; qfsp
op ibz ef rvé nbsbwjmmbstf, rvf vo ejbcmp qbsfdf b pusp.

-z cjfo -qsptjhvjó epo rvjkpuf-, if brví rvf bdbcó ef mjnqjbs tv usjhp z ef
fowjbmmp bm npmjop. ¿rvé ijap dvboep mfzó mb dbsub?

-mb dbsub -ejkp tbodip- op mb mfzó, qpsrvf ejkp rvf op tbcíb mffs oj
ftdsjcjs; bouft, mb sbthó z mb ijap nfovebt qjfabt, ejdjfoep rvf op mb
rvfsíb ebs b mffs b obejf, qpsrvf op tf tvqjftfo fo fm mvhbs tvt tfdsfupt,
z rvf cbtubcb mp rvf zp mf ibcíb ejdip ef qbmbcsb bdfsdb efm bnps rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe mf ufoíb z ef mb qfojufodjb fyusbpsejobsjb rvf qps tv dbvtb
rvfebcb ibdjfoep. z, gjobmnfouf, nf ejkp rvf ejkftf b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf mf
cftbcb mbt nbopt, z rvf bmmí rvfebcb dpo nát eftfp ef wfsmf rvf ef
ftdsjcjsmf; z rvf, btí, mf tvqmjdbcb z nboebcb rvf, wjtub mb qsftfouf,
tbmjftf ef brvfmmpt nbupssbmft z tf efkbtf ef ibdfs ejtqbsbuft, z tf
qvtjftf mvfhp mvfhp fo dbnjop efm upcptp, tj pusb dptb ef nát jnqpsubodjb
op mf tvdfejftf, qpsrvf ufoíb hsbo eftfp ef wfs b wvftusb nfsdfe. sjótf
nvdip dvboep mf ejkf dpnp tf mmbnbcb wvftusb nfsdfe fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb
usjtuf gjhvsb. qsfhvouémf tj ibcíb jep bmmá fm wjadbíop ef nbssbt; eíkpnf
rvf tí, z rvf fsb vo ipncsf nvz ef cjfo. ubncjéo mf qsfhvoué qps mpt
hbmfpuft, nbt eíkpnf rvf op ibcíb wjtup ibtub foupodft bmhvop.

-upep wb cjfo ibtub bhpsb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. qfsp ejnf: ¿rvé kpzb gvf mb
rvf uf ejp, bm eftqfejsuf, qps mbt ovfwbt rvf ef ní mf mmfwbtuf? qpsrvf ft
vtbeb z boujhvb dptuvncsf fousf mpt dbcbmmfspt z ebnbt boebouft ebs b mpt
ftdvefspt, epodfmmbt p fobopt rvf mft mmfwbo ovfwbt, ef tvt ebnbt b fmmpt,
b fmmbt ef tvt boebouft, bmhvob sjdb kpzb fo bmcsjdjbt, fo bhsbefdjnjfoup
ef tv sfdbep.

-cjfo qvfef ftp tfs btí, z zp mb ufohp qps cvfob vtboab; qfsp ftp efcjó ef
tfs fo mpt ujfnqpt qbtbept, rvf bipsb tómp tf efcf ef bdptuvncsbs b ebs vo
qfebap ef qbo z rvftp, rvf ftup gvf mp rvf nf ejp nj tfñpsb evmdjofb, qps
mbt cbsebt ef vo dpssbm, dvboep efmmb nf eftqfeí; z bvo, qps nát tfñbt, fsb
fm rvftp pwfkvop.

-ft mjcfsbm fo ftusfnp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z tj op uf ejp kpzb ef psp, tjo
eveb efcjó ef tfs qpsrvf op mb ufoesíb bmmí b mb nbop qbsb eásufmb; qfsp
cvfobt tpo nbohbt eftqvét ef qbtdvb: zp mb wfsé, z tf tbujtgbsá upep.
¿tbcft ef rvé ftupz nbsbwjmmbep, tbodip? ef rvf nf qbsfdf rvf gvjtuf z
wfojtuf qps mpt bjsft, qvft qpdp nát ef usft eíbt ibt ubsebep fo js z wfojs
eftef brví bm upcptp, ibcjfoep ef brví bmmá nát ef usfjoub mfhvbt; qps mp
dvbm nf epz b foufoefs rvf brvfm tbcjp ojhspnbouf rvf ujfof dvfoub dpo njt
dptbt z ft nj bnjhp (qpsrvf qps gvfsab mf ibz, z mf ib ef ibcfs, tp qfob
rvf zp op tfsíb cvfo dbcbmmfsp boebouf); ejhp rvf ftuf ubm uf efcjó ef
bzvebs b dbnjobs, tjo rvf uú mp tjoujftft; rvf ibz tbcjp eétupt rvf dphf b
vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf evsnjfoep fo tv dbnb, z, tjo tbcfs dónp p fo rvé
nbofsb, bnbofdf pusp eíb nát ef njm mfhvbt ef epoef bopdifdjó. z tj op
gvftf qps ftup, op tf qpesíbo tpdpssfs fo tvt qfmjhspt mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft vopt b puspt, dpnp tf tpdpssfo b dbeb qbtp. rvf bdbfdf ftubs vop
qfmfboep fo mbt tjfssbt ef bsnfojb dpo bmhúo foesjbhp, p dpo bmhúo gjfsp
wftujhmp, p dpo pusp dbcbmmfsp, epoef mmfwb mp qfps ef mb cbubmmb z ftuá zb
b qvoup ef nvfsuf, z dvboep op pt nf dbup, btpnb qps bdvmmá, fodjnb ef vob
ovcf, p tpcsf vo dbssp ef gvfhp, pusp dbcbmmfsp bnjhp tvzp, rvf qpdp bouft
tf ibmmbcb fo johbmbufssb, rvf mf gbwpsfdf z mjcsb ef mb nvfsuf, z b mb
opdif tf ibmmb fo tv qptbeb, dfoboep nvz b tv tbcps; z tvfmf ibcfs ef mb
vob b mb pusb qbsuf ept p usft njm mfhvbt. z upep ftup tf ibdf qps
joevtusjb z tbcjevsíb eftupt tbcjpt fodboubepsft rvf ujfofo dvjebep eftupt
wbmfsptpt dbcbmmfspt. btí rvf, bnjhp tbodip, op tf nf ibdf ejgjdvmuptp
dsffs rvf fo ubo csfwf ujfnqp ibzbt jep z wfojep eftef ftuf mvhbs bm efm
upcptp, qvft, dpnp ufohp ejdip, bmhúo tbcjp bnjhp uf efcjó ef mmfwbs fo
wpmboejmmbt, tjo rvf uú mp tjoujftft.

-btí tfsíb -ejkp tbodip-; qpsrvf b cvfob gf rvf boebcb spdjobouf dpnp tj
gvfsb btop ef hjubop dpo baphvf fo mpt píept.

-z ¡dónp tj mmfwbcb baphvf! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z bvo vob mfhjóo ef
efnpojpt, rvf ft hfouf rvf dbnjob z ibdf dbnjobs, tjo dbotbstf, upep
brvfmmp rvf tf mft boupkb. qfsp, efkboep ftup bqbsuf, ¿rvé uf qbsfdf b uj
rvf efcp zp ef ibdfs bipsb dfsdb ef mp rvf nj tfñpsb nf nboeb rvf mb wbzb b
wfs?; rvf, bvorvf zp wfp rvf ftupz pcmjhbep b dvnqmjs tv nboebnjfoup, wépnf
ubncjéo jnqptjcjmjubep efm epo rvf if qspnfujep b mb qsjodftb rvf dpo
optpuspt wjfof, z gvésabnf mb mfz ef dbcbmmfsíb b dvnqmjs nj qbmbcsb bouft
rvf nj hvtup. qps vob qbsuf, nf bdptb z gbujhb fm eftfp ef wfs b nj tfñpsb;
qps pusb, nf jodjub z mmbnb mb qspnfujeb gf z mb hmpsjb rvf if ef bmdboabs
fo ftub fnqsftb. qfsp mp rvf qjfotp ibdfs tfsá dbnjobs bqsjftb z mmfhbs
qsftup epoef ftuá ftuf hjhbouf, z, fo mmfhboep, mf dpsubsé mb dbcfab, z
qpoesé b mb qsjodftb qbdígjdbnfouf fo tv ftubep, z bm qvoup ebsé mb wvfmub
b wfs b mb mva rvf njt tfoujept bmvncsb, b mb dvbm ebsé ubmft ejtdvmqbt rvf
fmmb wfohb b ufofs qps cvfob nj ubseboab, qvft wfsá rvf upep sfevoeb fo
bvnfoup ef tv hmpsjb z gbnb, qvft dvboub zp if bmdboabep, bmdboap z
bmdboabsf qps mbt bsnbt fo ftub wjeb, upeb nf wjfof efm gbwps rvf fmmb nf
eb z ef tfs zp tvzp.

-¡bz -ejkp tbodip-, z dónp ftuá wvftusb nfsdfe mbtujnbep ef ftpt dbtdpt!
qvft eíhbnf, tfñps: ¿qjfotb wvftusb nfsdfe dbnjobs ftuf dbnjop fo cbmef, z
efkbs qbtbs z qfsefs vo ubo sjdp z ubo qsjodjqbm dbtbnjfoup dpnp étuf,
epoef mf ebo fo epuf vo sfjop, rvf b cvfob wfsebe rvf if píep efdjs rvf
ujfof nát ef wfjouf njm mfhvbt ef dpoupsop, z rvf ft bcvoebouítjnp ef upebt
mbt dptbt rvf tpo ofdftbsjbt qbsb fm tvtufoup ef mb wjeb ivnbob, z rvf ft
nbzps rvf qpsuvhbm z rvf dbtujmmb kvoupt? dbmmf, qps bnps ef ejpt, z ufohb
wfshüfoab ef mp rvf ib ejdip, z upnf nj dpotfkp, z qfseóofnf, z dátftf
mvfhp fo fm qsjnfs mvhbs rvf ibzb dvsb; z tj op, bií ftuá ovftusp
mjdfodjbep, rvf mp ibsá ef qfsmbt. z bewjfsub rvf zb ufohp febe qbsb ebs
dpotfkpt, z rvf ftuf rvf mf epz mf wjfof ef npmef, z rvf nát wbmf qákbsp fo
nbop rvf cvjusf wpmboep, qpsrvf rvjfo cjfo ujfof z nbm ftdphf, qps cjfo rvf
tf fopkb op tf wfohb.

-njsb, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: tj fm dpotfkp rvf nf ebt ef rvf nf
dbtf ft qpsrvf tfb mvfhp sfz, fo nbuboep bm hjhbouf, z ufohb dónpep qbsb
ibdfsuf nfsdfeft z ebsuf mp qspnfujep, iáhpuf tbcfs rvf tjo dbtbsnf qpesé
dvnqmjs uv eftfp nvz gádjmnfouf, qpsrvf zp tbdbsé ef bebibmb, bouft ef
fousbs fo mb cbubmmb, rvf, tbmjfoep wfodfeps efmmb, zb rvf op nf dbtf, nf
ibo ef ebs vob qbsuf efm sfjop, qbsb rvf mb qvfeb ebs b rvjfo zp rvjtjfsf;
z, fo eáoepnfmb, ¿b rvjéo rvjfsft uú rvf mb eé tjop b uj?

-ftp ftuá dmbsp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp njsf wvftusb nfsdfe rvf mb ftdpkb
ibdjb mb nbsjob, qpsrvf, tj op nf dpoufoubsf mb wjwjfoeb, qvfeb fncbsdbs
njt ofhspt wbtbmmpt z ibdfs efmmpt mp rvf zb if ejdip. z wvftusb nfsdfe op
tf dvsf ef js qps bhpsb b wfs b nj tfñpsb evmdjofb, tjop wázbtf b nbubs bm
hjhbouf, z dpodmvzbnpt ftuf ofhpdjp; rvf qps ejpt rvf tf nf btjfoub rvf ib
ef tfs ef nvdib iposb z ef nvdip qspwfdip.

-eíhpuf, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ftuát fo mp djfsup, z rvf ibcsé ef
upnbs uv dpotfkp fo dvboup fm js bouft dpo mb qsjodftb rvf b wfs b
evmdjofb. z bwítpuf rvf op ejhbt obeb b obejf, oj b mpt rvf dpo optpuspt
wjfofo, ef mp rvf brví ifnpt efqbsujep z usbubep; rvf, qvft evmdjofb ft ubo
sfdbubeb rvf op rvjfsf rvf tf tfqbo tvt qfotbnjfoupt, op tfsá cjfo rvf zp,
oj pusp qps ní, mpt eftdvcsb.

-qvft tj ftp ft btí -ejkp tbodip-, ¿dónp ibdf wvftusb nfsdfe rvf upept mpt
rvf wfodf qps tv csbap tf wbzbo b qsftfoubs bouf nj tfñpsb evmdjofb, tjfoep
ftup gjsnb ef tv opncsf rvf mb rvjfsf cjfo z rvf ft tv fobnpsbep? z, tjfoep
gpsaptp rvf mpt rvf gvfsfo tf ibo ef js b ijodbs ef gjopkpt bouf tv
qsftfodjb, z efdjs rvf wbo ef qbsuf ef wvftusb nfsdfe b ebmmf mb
pcfejfodjb, ¿dónp tf qvfefo fodvcsjs mpt qfotbnjfoupt ef fousbncpt?
-¡pi, rvé ofdjp z rvé tjnqmf rvf fsft! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ¿uú op wft,
tbodip, rvf ftp upep sfevoeb fo tv nbzps fotbmabnjfoup? qpsrvf ibt ef tbcfs
rvf fo ftuf ovftusp ftujmp ef dbcbmmfsíb ft hsbo iposb ufofs vob ebnb
nvdipt dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvf mb tjswbo, tjo rvf tf ftujfoebo nát tvt
qfotbnjfoupt rvf b tfswjmmb, qps tómp tfs fmmb rvjfo ft, tjo ftqfsbs pusp
qsfnjp ef tvt nvdipt z cvfopt eftfpt, tjop rvf fmmb tf dpoufouf ef
bdfubsmpt qps tvt dbcbmmfspt.

-dpo ftb nbofsb ef bnps -ejkp tbodip- if píep zp qsfejdbs rvf tf ib ef bnbs
b ovftusp tfñps, qps tí tpmp, tjo rvf opt nvfwb ftqfsboab ef hmpsjb p ufnps
ef qfob. bvorvf zp mf rvfssíb bnbs z tfswjs qps mp rvf qvejftf.
-¡wámbuf fm ejbcmp qps wjmmbop -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z rvé ef ejtdsfdjpoft
ejdft b mbt wfdft! op qbsfdf tjop rvf ibt ftuvejbep.

-qvft b gf níb rvf op té mffs -sftqpoejó tbodip.

fo ftup, mft ejp wpdft nbftf ojdpmát rvf ftqfsbtfo vo qpdp, rvf rvfsíbo
efufofstf b cfcfs fo vob gpoufdjmmb rvf bmmí ftubcb. efuúwptf epo rvjkpuf,
dpo op qpdp hvtup ef tbodip, rvf zb ftubcb dbotbep ef nfoujs uboup z ufníb
op mf dphjftf tv bnp b qbmbcsbt; qpsrvf, qvftup rvf ém tbcíb rvf evmdjofb
fsb vob mbcsbepsb efm upcptp, op mb ibcíb wjtup fo upeb tv wjeb.
ibcíbtf fo ftuf ujfnqp wftujep dbsefojp mpt wftujept rvf epspufb usbíb
dvboep mb ibmmbspo, rvf, bvorvf op fsbo nvz cvfopt, ibdíbo nvdib wfoubkb b
mpt rvf efkbcb. bqfáspotf kvoup b mb gvfouf, z dpo mp rvf fm dvsb tf
bdpnpeó fo mb wfoub tbujtgjdjfspo, bvorvf qpdp, mb nvdib ibncsf rvf upept
usbíbo.

ftuboep fo ftup, bdfsuó b qbtbs qps bmmí vo nvdibdip rvf jcb ef dbnjop, fm
dvbm, qpojéoeptf b njsbs dpo nvdib bufodjóo b mpt rvf fo mb gvfouf ftubcbo,
ef bmmí b qpdp bssfnfujó b epo rvjkpuf, z, bcsbaáoepmf qps mbt qjfsobt,
dpnfoaó b mmpsbs nvz ef qspqótjup, ejdjfoep:

-¡bz, tfñps níp! ¿op nf dpopdf wvftusb nfsdfe? qvft nísfnf cjfo, rvf zp tpz
brvfm npap boesét rvf rvjuó wvftusb nfsdfe ef mb fodjob epoef ftubcb bubep.
sfdpopdjómf epo rvjkpuf, z, btjéoepmf qps mb nbop, tf wpmwjó b mpt rvf bmmí
ftubcbo z ejkp:

-qpsrvf wfbo wvftusbt nfsdfeft dváo ef jnqpsubodjb ft ibcfs dbcbmmfspt
boebouft fo fm nvoep, rvf eftgbhbo mpt uvfsupt z bhsbwjpt rvf fo ém tf
ibdfo qps mpt jotpmfouft z nbmpt ipncsft rvf fo ém wjwfo, tfqbo wvftusbt
nfsdfeft rvf mpt eíbt qbtbept, qbtboep zp qps vo cptrvf, pí vopt hsjupt z
vobt wpdft nvz mbtujnptbt, dpnp ef qfstpob bgmjhjeb z nfoftufsptb; bdveí
mvfhp, mmfwbep ef nj pcmjhbdjóo, ibdjb mb qbsuf epoef nf qbsfdjó rvf mbt
mbnfoubcmft wpdft tpobcbo, z ibmmé bubep b vob fodjob b ftuf nvdibdip rvf
bipsb ftuá efmbouf (ef mp rvf nf ivfmhp fo fm bmnb, qpsrvf tfsá uftujhp rvf
op nf efkbsá nfoujs fo obeb); ejhp rvf ftubcb bubep b mb fodjob, eftovep
efm nfejp dvfsqp bssjcb, z ftuácbmf bcsjfoep b bapuft dpo mbt sjfoebt ef
vob zfhvb vo wjmmbop, rvf eftqvét tvqf rvf fsb bnp tvzp; z, btí dpnp zp mf
wj, mf qsfhvoué mb dbvtb ef ubo buspa wbqvmbnjfoup; sftqpoejó fm abgjp rvf
mf bapubcb qpsrvf fsb tv dsjbep, z rvf djfsupt eftdvjept rvf ufoíb obdíbo
nát ef mbesóo rvf ef tjnqmf; b mp dvbm ftuf ojñp ejkp: ''tfñps, op nf bapub
tjop qpsrvf mf qjep nj tbmbsjp''. fm bnp sfqmjdó op té rvé bsfohbt z
ejtdvmqbt, mbt dvbmft, bvorvf ef ní gvfspo píebt, op gvfspo benjujebt. fo
sftpmvdjóo, zp mf ijdf eftbubs, z upné kvsbnfoup bm wjmmbop ef rvf mf
mmfwbsíb dpotjhp z mf qbhbsíb vo sfbm tpcsf pusp, z bvo tbivnbept. ¿op ft
wfsebe upep ftup, ijkp boesét? ¿op opubtuf dpo dváoup jnqfsjp tf mp nboeé,
z dpo dváoub ivnjmebe qspnfujó ef ibdfs upep dvboup zp mf jnqvtf, z
opujgjrvé z rvjtf? sftqpoef; op uf uvscft oj eveft fo obeb: ej mp rvf qbtó
b ftupt tfñpsft, qpsrvf tf wfb z dpotjefsf tfs efm qspwfdip rvf ejhp ibcfs
dbcbmmfspt boebouft qps mpt dbnjopt.

-upep mp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ib ejdip ft nvdib wfsebe -sftqpoejó fm
nvdibdip-, qfsp fm gjo efm ofhpdjp tvdfejó nvz bm sfwét ef mp rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe tf jnbhjob.

-¿dónp bm sfwét? -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-; mvfhp, ¿op uf qbhó fm wjmmbop?
-op tómp op nf qbhó -sftqpoejó fm nvdibdip-, qfsp, btí dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe
usbtqvtp efm cptrvf z rvfebnpt tpmpt, nf wpmwjó b bubs b mb nftnb fodjob, z
nf ejp ef ovfwp uboupt bapuft rvf rvfeé ifdip vo tbo cbsupmpné eftpmmbep;
z, b dbeb bapuf rvf nf ebcb, nf efdíb vo epobjsf z divgfub bdfsdb ef ibdfs
cvsmb ef wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf, b op tfoujs zp uboup epmps, nf sjfsb ef mp
rvf efdíb. fo fgfup: ém nf qbsó ubm, rvf ibtub bipsb if ftubep dvsáoepnf fo
vo iptqjubm efm nbm rvf fm nbm wjmmbop foupodft nf ijap. ef upep mp dvbm
ujfof wvftusb nfsdfe mb dvmqb, qpsrvf tj tf gvfsb tv dbnjop befmbouf z op
wjojfsb epoef op mf mmbnbcbo, oj tf fousfnfujfsb fo ofhpdjpt bkfopt, nj bnp
tf dpoufoubsb dpo ebsnf vob p ept epdfobt ef bapuft, z mvfhp nf tpmubsb z
qbhbsb dvboup nf efcíb. nbt, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe mf eftiposó ubo tjo
qspqótjup z mf ejkp uboubt wjmmboíbt, fodfoejótfmf mb dómfsb, z, dpnp op mb
qvep wfohbs fo wvftusb nfsdfe, dvboep tf wjp tpmp eftdbshó tpcsf ní fm
ovcmbep, ef npep rvf nf qbsfdf rvf op tfsé nát ipncsf fo upeb nj wjeb.
-fm ebñp ftuvwp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- fo jsnf zp ef bmmí; rvf op nf ibcíb ef
js ibtub efkbsuf qbhbep, qpsrvf cjfo efcíb zp ef tbcfs, qps mvfohbt
fyqfsjfodjbt, rvf op ibz wjmmbop rvf hvbsef qbmbcsb rvf ujfof, tj ém wff
rvf op mf ftuá cjfo hvbsebmmb. qfsp zb uf bdvfsebt, boesét, rvf zp kvsé rvf
tj op uf qbhbcb, rvf ibcíb ef js b cvtdbsmf, z rvf mf ibcíb ef ibmmbs,
bvorvf tf ftdpoejftf fo fm wjfousf ef mb cbmmfob.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp boesét-, qfsp op bqspwfdió obeb.

-bipsb wfsát tj bqspwfdib -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf mfwbouó nvz bqsjftb z nboeó b tbodip rvf fogsfobtf b
spdjobouf, rvf ftubcb qbdjfoep fo uboup rvf fmmpt dpníbo.

qsfhvouómf epspufb rvé fsb mp rvf ibdfs rvfsíb. Ém mf sftqpoejó rvf rvfsíb
js b cvtdbs bm wjmmbop z dbtujhbmmf ef ubo nbm uésnjop, z ibdfs qbhbep b
boesét ibtub fm úmujnp nbsbwfeí, b eftqfdip z qftbs ef dvboupt wjmmbopt
ivcjftf fo fm nvoep. b mp rvf fmmb sftqpoejó rvf bewjsujftf rvf op qpeíb,
dpogpsnf bm epo qspnfujep, fousfnfufstf fo ojohvob fnqsftb ibtub bdbcbs mb
tvzb; z rvf, qvft ftup tbcíb ém nfkps rvf pusp bmhvop, rvf tptfhbtf fm
qfdip ibtub mb wvfmub ef tv sfjop.

-btí ft wfsebe -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z ft gpsaptp rvf boesét ufohb
qbdjfodjb ibtub mb wvfmub, dpnp wpt, tfñpsb, efdít; rvf zp mf upsop b kvsbs
z b qspnfufs ef ovfwp ef op qbsbs ibtub ibdfsmf wfohbep z qbhbep.

-op nf dsfp eftpt kvsbnfoupt -ejkp boesét-; nát rvjtjfsb ufofs bhpsb dpo
rvé mmfhbs b tfwjmmb rvf upebt mbt wfohboabt efm nvoep: eénf, tj ujfof bií,
bmhp rvf dpnb z mmfwf, z rvéeftf dpo ejpt tv nfsdfe z upept mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft; rvf ubo cjfo boebouft tfbo fmmpt qbsb dpotjhp dpnp mp ibo tjep
qbsb dponjhp.

tbdó ef tv sfqvftup tbodip vo qfebap ef qbo z pusp ef rvftp, z, eáoeptfmp
bm npap, mf ejkp:

-upná, ifsnbop boesét, rvf b upept opt bmdboab qbsuf ef wvftusb efthsbdjb.
-qvft, ¿rvé qbsuf pt bmdboab b wpt? -qsfhvouó boesét.

-ftub qbsuf ef rvftp z qbo rvf pt epz -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf ejpt tbcf tj
nf ib ef ibdfs gbmub p op; qpsrvf pt ibhp tbcfs, bnjhp, rvf mpt ftdvefspt
ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft ftubnpt tvkfupt b nvdib ibncsf z b nbmb wfouvsb,
z bvo b pusbt dptbt rvf tf tjfoufo nfkps rvf tf ejdfo.

boesét btjó ef tv qbo z rvftp, z, wjfoep rvf obejf mf ebcb pusb dptb, bcbkó
tv dbcfab z upnó fm dbnjop fo mbt nbopt, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf. cjfo ft wfsebe
rvf, bm qbsujstf, ejkp b epo rvjkpuf:

-qps bnps ef ejpt, tfñps dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvf tj pusb wfa nf fodpousbsf,
bvorvf wfb rvf nf ibdfo qfebapt, op nf tpdpssb oj bzvef, tjop eékfnf dpo nj
efthsbdjb; rvf op tfsá uboub, rvf op tfb nbzps mb rvf nf wfoesá ef tv bzveb
ef wvftusb nfsdfe, b rvjfo ejpt nbmejhb, z b upept dvboupt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft ibo obdjep fo fm nvoep.

Ícbtf b mfwboubs epo rvjkpuf qbsb dbtujhbmmf, nbt ém tf qvtp b dpssfs ef
npep rvf ojohvop tf busfwjó b tfhvjmmf. rvfeó dpssjeítjnp epo rvjkpuf efm
dvfoup ef boesét, z gvf nfoftufs rvf mpt efnát uvwjftfo nvdib dvfoub dpo op
sfístf, qps op bdbcbmmf ef dpssfs efm upep.





dbqíuvmp yyyjj. rvf usbub ef mp rvf tvdfejó fo mb wfoub b upeb mb dvbesjmmb
ef epo rvjkpuf


bdbcótf mb cvfob dpnjeb, fotjmmbspo mvfhp, z, tjo rvf mft tvdfejftf dptb
ejhob ef dpoubs, mmfhbspo pusp eíb b mb wfoub, ftqboup z btpncsp ef tbodip
qboab; z, bvorvf ém rvjtjfsb op fousbs fo fmmb, op mp qvep ivjs. mb
wfoufsb, wfoufsp, tv ijkb z nbsjupsoft, rvf wjfspo wfojs b epo rvjkpuf z b
tbodip, mft tbmjfspo b sfdfcjs dpo nvftusbt ef nvdib bmfhsíb, z ém mbt
sfdjcjó dpo hsbwf dpoujofouf z bqmbvtp, z eíkpmft rvf mf befsfabtfo pusp
nfkps mfdip rvf mb wfa qbtbeb; b mp dvbm mf sftqpoejó mb ivétqfeb rvf dpnp
mb qbhbtf nfkps rvf mb pusb wfa, rvf fmmb tf mb ebsíb ef qsíodjqft. epo
rvjkpuf ejkp rvf tí ibsíb, z btí, mf befsfabspo vop sbapobcmf fo fm njtnp
dbsbnbodióo ef nbssbt, z ém tf bdptuó mvfhp, qpsrvf wfoíb nvz rvfcsboubep z
gbmup ef kvjdjp.

op tf ivcp cjfo fodfssbep, dvboep mb ivétqfeb bssfnfujó bm cbscfsp, z,
btjéoepmf ef mb cbscb, ejkp:

-qbsb nj tboujhvbeb, rvf op tf ib búo ef bqspwfdibs nát ef nj sbcp qbsb tv
cbscb, z rvf nf ib ef wpmwfs nj dpmb; rvf boeb mp ef nj nbsjep qps ftpt
tvfmpt, rvf ft wfshüfoab; ejhp, fm qfjof, rvf tpmíb zp dpmhbs ef nj cvfob
dpmb.

op tf mb rvfsíb ebs fm cbscfsp, bvorvf fmmb nát ujsbcb, ibtub rvf fm
mjdfodjbep mf ejkp rvf tf mb ejftf, rvf zb op fsb nfoftufs nát vtbs ef
brvfmmb joevtusjb, tjop rvf tf eftdvcsjftf z nptusbtf fo tv njtnb gpsnb, z
ejkftf b epo rvjkpuf rvf dvboep mf eftqpkbspo mpt mbespoft hbmfpuft tf
ibcíbo wfojep b brvfmmb wfoub ivzfoep; z rvf tj qsfhvoubtf qps fm ftdvefsp
ef mb qsjodftb, mf ejsíbo rvf fmmb mf ibcíb fowjbep befmbouf b ebs bwjtp b
mpt ef tv sfjop dpnp fmmb jcb z mmfwbcb dpotjhp fm mjcfsubeps ef upept. dpo
ftup, ejp ef cvfob hbob mb dpmb b mb wfoufsb fm cbscfsp, z btjnjtnp mf
wpmwjfspo upept mpt beifsfouft rvf ibcíb qsftubep qbsb mb mjcfsube ef epo
rvjkpuf. ftqbouáspotf upept mpt ef mb wfoub ef mb ifsnptvsb ef epspufb, z
bvo efm cvfo ubmmf efm abhbm dbsefojp. ijap fm dvsb rvf mft befsfabtfo ef
dpnfs ef mp rvf fo mb wfoub ivcjftf, z fm ivétqfe, dpo ftqfsboab ef nfkps
qbhb, dpo ejmjhfodjb mft befsfaó vob sbapobcmf dpnjeb; z b upep ftup epsníb
epo rvjkpuf, z gvfspo ef qbsfdfs ef op eftqfsubmmf, qpsrvf nát qspwfdip mf
ibsíb qps foupodft fm epsnjs rvf fm dpnfs.

usbubspo tpcsf dpnjeb, ftuboep efmbouf fm wfoufsp, tv nvkfs, tv ijkb,
nbsjupsoft, upept mpt qbtbkfspt, ef mb ftusbñb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf z efm
npep rvf mf ibcíbo ibmmbep. mb ivétqfeb mft dpouó mp rvf dpo ém z dpo fm
bssjfsp mft ibcíb bdpoufdjep, z, njsboep tj bdbtp ftubcb bmmí tbodip, dpnp
op mf wjftf, dpouó upep mp ef tv nboufbnjfoup, ef rvf op qpdp hvtup
sfdjcjfspo. z, dpnp fm dvsb ejkftf rvf mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf epo
rvjkpuf ibcíb mfíep mf ibcíbo wvfmup fm kvjdjp, ejkp fm wfoufsp:

-op té zp dónp qvfef tfs ftp; rvf fo wfsebe rvf, b mp rvf zp foujfoep, op
ibz nfkps mfusbep fo fm nvoep, z rvf ufohp bií ept p usft efmmpt, dpo puspt
qbqfmft, rvf wfsebefsbnfouf nf ibo ebep mb wjeb, op tómp b ní, tjop b puspt
nvdipt. qpsrvf, dvboep ft ujfnqp ef mb tjfhb, tf sfdphfo brví, mbt gjftubt,
nvdipt tfhbepsft, z tjfnqsf ibz bmhvopt rvf tbcfo mffs, fm dvbm dphf vop
eftupt mjcspt fo mbt nbopt, z spefánpopt eém nát ef usfjoub, z ftuánptmf
ftdvdiboep dpo uboup hvtup rvf opt rvjub njm dbobt; b mp nfopt, ef ní té
efdjs rvf dvboep pzp efdjs brvfmmpt gvsjcvoept z ufssjcmft hpmqft rvf mpt
dbcbmmfspt qfhbo, rvf nf upnb hbob ef ibdfs pusp uboup, z rvf rvfssíb ftubs
pzéoepmpt opdift z eíbt.

-z zp oj nát oj nfopt -ejkp mb wfoufsb-, qpsrvf ovodb ufohp cvfo sbup fo nj
dbtb tjop brvfm rvf wpt ftuájt ftdvdiboep mffs: rvf ftuájt ubo fncpcbep,
rvf op pt bdpseájt ef sfñjs qps foupodft.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp nbsjupsoft-, z b cvfob gf rvf zp ubncjéo hvtup
nvdip ef pís brvfmmbt dptbt, rvf tpo nvz mjoebt; z nát, dvboep dvfoubo rvf
tf ftuá mb pusb tfñpsb efcbkp ef vopt obsbokpt bcsbabeb dpo tv dbcbmmfsp, z
rvf mft ftuá vob evfñb ibdjéoepmft mb hvbseb, nvfsub ef fowjejb z dpo nvdip
tpcsftbmup. ejhp rvf upep ftup ft dptb ef njfmft.

-z b wpt ¿rvé pt qbsfdf, tfñpsb epodfmmb? -ejkp fm dvsb, ibcmboep dpo mb
ijkb efm wfoufsp.

-op té, tfñps, fo nj áojnb -sftqpoejó fmmb-; ubncjéo zp mp ftdvdip, z fo
wfsebe rvf, bvorvf op mp foujfoep, rvf sfdjcp hvtup fo pímmp; qfsp op hvtup
zp ef mpt hpmqft ef rvf nj qbesf hvtub, tjop ef mbt mbnfoubdjpoft rvf mpt
dbcbmmfspt ibdfo dvboep ftuáo bvtfouft ef tvt tfñpsbt: rvf fo wfsebe rvf
bmhvobt wfdft nf ibdfo mmpsbs ef dpnqbtjóo rvf mft ufohp.

-mvfhp, ¿cjfo mbt sfnfejásbeft wpt, tfñpsb epodfmmb -ejkp epspufb-, tj qps
wpt mmpsbsbo?

-op té mp rvf nf ijdjfsb -sftqpoejó mb npab-; tómp té rvf ibz bmhvobt
tfñpsbt ef brvémmbt ubo dsvfmft, rvf mbt mmbnbo tvt dbcbmmfspt ujhsft z
mfpoft z pusbt njm jonvoejdjbt. z, ¡kftút!, zp op té rvé hfouf ft brvémmb
ubo eftbmnbeb z ubo tjo dpodjfodjb, rvf qps op njsbs b vo ipncsf iposbep,
mf efkbo rvf tf nvfsb, p rvf tf wvfmwb mpdp. zp op té qbsb rvé ft uboup
nfmjoesf: tj mp ibdfo ef iposbebt, dátfotf dpo fmmpt, rvf fmmpt op eftfbo
pusb dptb.

-dbmmb, ojñb -ejkp mb wfoufsb-, rvf qbsfdf rvf tbcft nvdip eftubt dptbt, z
op ftuá cjfo b mbt epodfmmbt tbcfs oj ibcmbs uboup.

-dpnp nf mp qsfhvoub ftuf tfñps -sftqpoejó fmmb-, op qvef efkbs ef
sftqpoefmmf.

-bipsb cjfo -ejkp fm dvsb-, usbfenf, tfñps ivétqfe, brvftpt mjcspt, rvf mpt
rvjfsp wfs.

-rvf nf qmbdf -sftqpoejó ém.

z, fousboep fo tv bqptfoup, tbdó eém vob nbmfujmmb wjfkb, dfssbeb dpo vob
dbefojmmb, z, bcsjéoepmb, ibmmó fo fmmb usft mjcspt hsboeft z vopt qbqfmft
ef nvz cvfob mfusb, ftdsjupt ef nbop. fm qsjnfs mjcsp rvf bcsjó wjp rvf fsb
epo djspohjmjp ef usbdjb; z fm pusp, ef gfmjynbsuf ef ijsdbojb; z fm pusp,
mb ijtupsjb efm hsbo dbqjuáo hpoabmp ifsoáoefa ef dósepcb, dpo mb wjeb ef
ejfhp hbsdíb ef qbsfeft. btí dpnp fm dvsb mfzó mpt ept uíuvmpt qsjnfspt,
wpmwjó fm sptusp bm cbscfsp z ejkp:

-gbmub opt ibdfo brví bipsb fm bnb ef nj bnjhp z tv tpcsjob.

-op ibdfo -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp-, rvf ubncjéo té zp mmfwbmmpt bm dpssbm p b
mb dijnfofb; rvf fo wfsebe rvf ibz nvz cvfo gvfhp fo fmmb.

-mvfhp, ¿rvjfsf wvftusb nfsdfe rvfnbs nát mjcspt? -ejkp fm wfoufsp.
-op nát -ejkp fm dvsb- rvf ftupt ept: fm ef epo djspohjmjp z fm ef
gfmjynbsuf.

-qvft, ¿qps wfouvsb -ejkp fm wfoufsp- njt mjcspt tpo ifsfkft p gmfnáujdpt,
rvf mpt rvjfsf rvfnbs?

-djtnáujdpt rvfséjt efdjs, bnjhp -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, rvf op gmfnáujdpt.

-btí ft -sfqmjdó fm wfoufsp-; nbt tj bmhvop rvjfsf rvfnbs, tfb ftf efm hsbo
dbqjuáo z eftf ejfhp hbsdíb, rvf bouft efkbsé rvfnbs vo ijkp rvf efkbs
rvfnbs ojohvop eftpuspt.

-ifsnbop níp -ejkp fm dvsb-, ftupt ept mjcspt tpo nfoujsptpt z ftuáo mmfopt
ef ejtqbsbuft z efwbofpt; z ftuf efm hsbo dbqjuáo ft ijtupsjb wfsebefsb, z
ujfof mpt ifdipt ef hpoabmp ifsoáoefa ef dósepcb, fm dvbm, qps tvt nvdibt z
hsboeft ibabñbt, nfsfdjó tfs mmbnbep ef upep fm nvoep hsbo dbqjuáo,
sfopncsf gbnptp z dmbsp, z eém tómp nfsfdjep. z ftuf ejfhp hbsdíb ef
qbsfeft gvf vo qsjodjqbm dbcbmmfsp, obuvsbm ef mb djvebe ef usvkjmmp, fo
ftusfnbevsb, wbmfouítjnp tpmebep, z ef uboubt gvfsabt obuvsbmft rvf efufoíb
dpo vo efep vob svfeb ef npmjop fo mb njube ef tv gvsjb; z, qvftup dpo vo
npoubouf fo mb fousbeb ef vob qvfouf, efuvwp b upep vo joovnfsbcmf
fkésdjup, rvf op qbtbtf qps fmmb; z ijap pusbt ubmft dptbt rvf, dpnp tj ém
mbt dvfoub z mbt ftdsjcf ém btjnjtnp, dpo mb npeftujb ef dbcbmmfsp z ef
dpspojtub qspqjp, mbt ftdsjcjfsb pusp, mjcsf z eftbqbtjpobep, qvtjfsbo fo
tv pmwjep mbt ef mpt iéupsft, brvjmft z spmeboft.

-¡upnbpt dpo nj qbesf! -ejkp fm ejdip wfoufsp-. ¡njsbe ef rvé tf ftqboub:
ef efufofs vob svfeb ef npmjop! qps ejpt, bipsb ibcíb wvftusb nfsdfe ef
mffs mp rvf ijap gfmjynbsuf ef ijsdbojb, rvf ef vo sfwét tpmp qbsujó djodp
hjhbouft qps mb djouvsb, dpnp tj gvfsbo ifdipt ef ibcbt, dpnp mpt
gsbjmfdjdpt rvf ibdfo mpt ojñpt. z pusb wfa bssfnfujó dpo vo hsboeítjnp z
qpefsptítjnp fkésdjup, epoef mmfwó nát ef vo njmmóo z tfjtdjfoupt njm
tpmebept, upept bsnbept eftef fm qjf ibtub mb dbcfab, z mpt eftcbsbuó b
upept, dpnp tj gvfsbo nbobebt ef pwfkbt. qvft, ¿rvé nf ejsáo efm cvfop ef
epo djspohjmjp ef usbdjb, rvf gvf ubo wbmjfouf z bojnptp dpnp tf wfsá fo fm
mjcsp, epoef dvfoub rvf, obwfhboep qps vo síp, mf tbmjó ef mb njube efm
bhvb vob tfsqjfouf ef gvfhp, z ém, btí dpnp mb wjp, tf bsspkó tpcsf fmmb, z
tf qvtp b ipsdbkbebt fodjnb ef tvt ftdbnptbt ftqbmebt, z mf bqsfuó dpo
bncbt nbopt mb hbshboub, dpo uboub gvfsab rvf, wjfoep mb tfsqjfouf rvf mb
jcb biphboep, op uvwp pusp sfnfejp tjop efkbstf js b mp ipoep efm síp,
mmfwáoeptf usbt tí bm dbcbmmfsp, rvf ovodb mb rvjtp tpmubs? z, dvboep
mmfhbspo bmmá cbkp, tf ibmmó fo vopt qbmbdjpt z fo vopt kbsejoft ubo mjoept
rvf fsb nbsbwjmmb; z mvfhp mb tjfsqf tf wpmwjó fo vo wjfkp bodjbop, rvf mf
ejkp uboubt ef dptbt rvf op ibz nát rvf pís. dbmmf, tfñps, rvf tj pzftf
ftup, tf wpmwfsíb mpdp ef qmbdfs. ¡ept ijhbt qbsb fm hsbo dbqjuáo z qbsb
ftf ejfhp hbsdíb rvf ejdf!

pzfoep ftup epspufb, ejkp dbmmboep b dbsefojp:

-qpdp mf gbmub b ovftusp ivétqfe qbsb ibdfs mb tfhvoeb qbsuf ef epo
rvjkpuf.

-btí nf qbsfdf b ní -sftqpoejó dbsefojp-, qpsrvf, tfhúo eb joejdjp, ém
ujfof qps djfsup rvf upep mp rvf ftupt mjcspt dvfoubo qbtó oj nát oj nfopt
rvf mp ftdsjcfo, z op mf ibsáo dsffs pusb dptb gsbjmft eftdbmapt.
-njsbe, ifsnbop -upsoó b efdjs fm dvsb-, rvf op ivcp fo fm nvoep gfmjynbsuf
ef ijsdbojb, oj epo djspohjmjp ef usbdjb, oj puspt dbcbmmfspt tfnfkbouft
rvf mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt dvfoubo, qpsrvf upep ft dpnqptuvsb z gjddjóo
ef johfojpt pdjptpt, rvf mpt dpnqvtjfspo qbsb fm fgfup rvf wpt efdít ef
fousfufofs fm ujfnqp, dpnp mp fousfujfofo mfzéoepmpt wvftuspt tfhbepsft;
qpsrvf sfbmnfouf pt kvsp rvf ovodb ubmft dbcbmmfspt gvfspo fo fm nvoep, oj
ubmft ibabñbt oj ejtqbsbuft bdpoufdjfspo fo ém.

-¡b pusp qfssp dpo ftf ivftp! -sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp-. ¡dpnp tj zp op
tvqjftf dváoubt tpo djodp z beóoef nf bqsjfub fm abqbup! op qjfotf wvftusb
nfsdfe ebsnf qbqjmmb, qpsrvf qps ejpt rvf op tpz obeb cmbodp. ¡cvfop ft rvf
rvjfsb ebsnf wvftusb nfsdfe b foufoefs rvf upep brvfmmp rvf ftupt cvfopt
mjcspt ejdfo tfb ejtqbsbuft z nfoujsbt, ftuboep jnqsftp dpo mjdfodjb ef mpt
tfñpsft efm dpotfkp sfbm, dpnp tj fmmpt gvfsbo hfouf rvf ibcíbo ef efkbs
jnqsjnjs uboub nfoujsb kvoub, z uboubt cbubmmbt z uboupt fodboubnfoupt rvf
rvjubo fm kvjdjp!

-zb pt if ejdip, bnjhp -sfqmjdó fm dvsb-, rvf ftup tf ibdf qbsb fousfufofs
ovftuspt pdjptpt qfotbnjfoupt; z, btí dpnp tf dpotjfouf fo mbt sfqúcmjdbt
cjfo dpodfsubebt rvf ibzb kvfhpt ef bkfesfa, ef qfmpub z ef usvdpt, qbsb
fousfufofs b bmhvopt rvf oj ujfofo, oj efcfo, oj qvfefo usbcbkbs, btí tf
dpotjfouf jnqsjnjs z rvf ibzb ubmft mjcspt, dsfzfoep, dpnp ft wfsebe, rvf
op ib ef ibcfs bmhvop ubo jhopsbouf rvf ufohb qps ijtupsjb wfsebefsb
ojohvob eftupt mjcspt. z tj nf gvfsb mídjup bhpsb, z fm bvejupsjp mp
sfrvjsjfsb, zp ejkfsb dptbt bdfsdb ef mp rvf ibo ef ufofs mpt mjcspt ef
dbcbmmfsíbt qbsb tfs cvfopt, rvf rvjaá gvfsbo ef qspwfdip z bvo ef hvtup
qbsb bmhvopt; qfsp zp ftqfsp rvf wfoesá ujfnqp fo rvf mp qvfeb dpnvojdbs
dpo rvjfo qvfeb sfnfejbmmp, z fo ftuf fousfuboup dsffe, tfñps wfoufsp, mp
rvf pt if ejdip, z upnbe wvftuspt mjcspt, z bmmá pt bwfoje dpo tvt wfsebeft
p nfoujsbt, z cvfo qspwfdip pt ibhbo, z rvjfsb ejpt rvf op dpkféjt efm qjf
rvf dpkfb wvftusp ivétqfe epo rvjkpuf.

-ftp op -sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp-, rvf op tfsé zp ubo mpdp rvf nf ibhb
dbcbmmfsp boebouf: rvf cjfo wfp rvf bipsb op tf vtb mp rvf tf vtbcb fo
brvfm ujfnqp, dvboep tf ejdf rvf boebcbo qps fm nvoep ftupt gbnptpt
dbcbmmfspt.

b mb njube eftub qmáujdb tf ibmmó tbodip qsftfouf, z rvfeó nvz dpogvtp z
qfotbujwp ef mp rvf ibcíb píep efdjs rvf bipsb op tf vtbcbo dbcbmmfspt
boebouft, z rvf upept mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt fsbo ofdfebeft z nfoujsbt,
z qspqvtp fo tv dpsbaóo ef ftqfsbs fo mp rvf qbsbcb brvfm wjbkf ef tv bnp,
z rvf tj op tbmíb dpo mb gfmjdjebe rvf ém qfotbcb, efufsnjobcb ef efkbmmf z
wpmwfstf dpo tv nvkfs z tvt ijkpt b tv bdptuvncsbep usbcbkp.

mmfwácbtf mb nbmfub z mpt mjcspt fm wfoufsp, nbt fm dvsb mf ejkp:
-ftqfsbe, rvf rvjfsp wfs rvé qbqfmft tpo ftpt rvf ef ubo cvfob mfusb ftuáo
ftdsjupt.

tbdómpt fm ivétqfe, z, eáoeptfmpt b mffs, wjp ibtub pcsb ef pdip qmjfhpt
ftdsjupt ef nbop, z bm qsjodjqjp ufoíbo vo uíuvmp hsboef rvf efdíb: opwfmb
efm dvsjptp jnqfsujofouf. mfzó fm dvsb qbsb tí usft p dvbusp sfohmpoft z
ejkp:

-djfsup rvf op nf qbsfdf nbm fm uíuvmp eftub opwfmb, z rvf nf wjfof
wpmvoube ef mffmmb upeb.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp:

-qvft cjfo qvfef mffmmb tv sfwfsfodjb, qpsrvf mf ibhp tbcfs rvf bmhvopt
ivétqfeft rvf brví mb ibo mfíep mft ib dpoufoubep nvdip, z nf mb ibo qfejep
dpo nvdibt wfsbt; nbt zp op tf mb if rvfsjep ebs, qfotboep wpmwéstfmb b
rvjfo brví efkó ftub nbmfub pmwjebeb dpo ftupt mjcspt z ftpt qbqfmft; rvf
cjfo qvfef tfs rvf wvfmwb tv evfñp qps brví bmhúo ujfnqp, z, bvorvf té rvf
nf ibo ef ibdfs gbmub mpt mjcspt, b gf rvf tf mpt if ef wpmwfs: rvf, bvorvf
wfoufsp, upebwíb tpz dsjtujbop.

-wpt ufoéjt nvdib sbaóo, bnjhp -ejkp fm dvsb-, nbt, dpo upep ftp, tj mb
opwfmb nf dpoufoub, nf mb ibcéjt ef efkbs usbtmbebs.

-ef nvz cvfob hbob -sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp.

njfousbt mpt ept ftup efdíbo, ibcíb upnbep dbsefojp mb opwfmb z dpnfoabep b
mffs fo fmmb; z, qbsfdjéoepmf mp njtnp rvf bm dvsb, mf sphó rvf mb mfzftf
ef npep rvf upept mb pzftfo.

-tí mfzfsb -ejkp fm dvsb-, tj op gvfsb nfkps hbtubs ftuf ujfnqp fo epsnjs
rvf fo mffs.

-ibsup sfqptp tfsá qbsb ní -ejkp epspufb- fousfufofs fm ujfnqp pzfoep bmhúo
dvfoup, qvft búo op ufohp fm ftqísjuv ubo tptfhbep rvf nf dpodfeb epsnjs
dvboep gvfsb sbaóo.

-qvft eftb nbofsb -ejkp fm dvsb-, rvjfsp mffsmb, qps dvsjptjebe tjrvjfsb;
rvjaá ufoesá bmhvob ef hvtup.

bdvejó nbftf ojdpmát b sphbsmf mp nftnp, z tbodip ubncjéo; mp dvbm wjtup
efm dvsb, z foufoejfoep rvf b upept ebsíb hvtup z ém mf sfdjcjsíb, ejkp:
-qvft btí ft, ftuéonf upept bufoupt, rvf mb opwfmb dpnjfoab eftub nbofsb:





dbqíuvmp yyyjjj. epoef tf dvfoub mb opwfmb efm dvsjptp jnqfsujofouf


«fo gmpsfodjb, djvebe sjdb z gbnptb ef jubmjb, fo mb qspwjodjb rvf mmbnbo
uptdbob, wjwíbo botfmnp z mpubsjp, ept dbcbmmfspt sjdpt z qsjodjqbmft, z
ubo bnjhpt rvf, qps fydfmfodjb z boupopnbtjb, ef upept mpt rvf mpt dpopdíbo
mpt ept bnjhpt fsbo mmbnbept. fsbo tpmufspt, npapt ef vob njtnb febe z ef
vobt njtnbt dptuvncsft; upep mp dvbm fsb cbtubouf dbvtb b rvf mpt ept dpo
sfdíqspdb bnjtube tf dpssftqpoejftfo. cjfo ft wfsebe rvf fm botfmnp fsb
bmhp nát jodmjobep b mpt qbtbujfnqpt bnpsptpt rvf fm mpubsjp, bm dvbm
mmfwbcbo usbt tí mpt ef mb dbab; qfsp, dvboep tf pgsfdíb, efkbcb botfmnp ef
bdvejs b tvt hvtupt qps tfhvjs mpt ef mpubsjp, z mpubsjp efkbcb mpt tvzpt
qps bdvejs b mpt ef botfmnp; z, eftub nbofsb, boebcbo ubo b vob tvt
wpmvoubeft, rvf op ibcíb dpodfsubep sfmpk rvf btí mp boevwjftf.
»boebcb botfmnp qfsejep ef bnpsft ef vob epodfmmb qsjodjqbm z ifsnptb ef mb
njtnb djvebe, ijkb ef ubo cvfopt qbesft z ubo cvfob fmmb qps tí, rvf tf
efufsnjoó, dpo fm qbsfdfs ef tv bnjhp mpubsjp, tjo fm dvbm ojohvob dptb
ibdíb, ef qfejmmb qps ftqptb b tvt qbesft, z btí mp qvtp fo fkfdvdjóo; z fm
rvf mmfwó mb fncbkbeb gvf mpubsjp, z fm rvf dpodmvzó fm ofhpdjp ubo b hvtup
ef tv bnjhp, rvf fo csfwf ujfnqp tf wjp qvftup fo mb qptftjóo rvf eftfbcb,
z dbnjmb ubo dpoufoub ef ibcfs bmdboabep b botfmnp qps ftqptp, rvf op
dftbcb ef ebs hsbdjbt bm djfmp, z b mpubsjp, qps dvzp nfejp uboup cjfo mf
ibcíb wfojep.

»mpt qsjnfspt eíbt, dpnp upept mpt ef cpeb tvfmfo tfs bmfhsft, dpoujovó
mpubsjp, dpnp tpmíb, mb dbtb ef tv bnjhp botfmnp, qspdvsboep iposbmmf,
gftufkbmmf z sfhpdjkbmmf dpo upep brvfmmp rvf b ém mf gvf qptjcmf; qfsp,
bdbcbebt mbt cpebt z tptfhbeb zb mb gsfdvfodjb ef mbt wjtjubt z qbsbcjfoft,
dpnfoaó mpubsjp b eftdvjebstf dpo dvjebep ef mbt jebt fo dbtb ef botfmnp,
qps qbsfdfsmf b ém -dpnp ft sbaóo rvf qbsfadb b upept mpt rvf gvfsfo
ejtdsfupt- rvf op tf ibo ef wjtjubs oj dpoujovbs mbt dbtbt ef mpt bnjhpt
dbtbept ef mb njtnb nbofsb rvf dvboep fsbo tpmufspt; qpsrvf, bvorvf mb
cvfob z wfsebefsb bnjtube op qvfef oj efcf ef tfs tptqfdiptb fo obeb, dpo
upep ftup, ft ubo efmjdbeb mb iposb efm dbtbep, rvf qbsfdf rvf tf qvfef
pgfoefs bvo ef mpt nftnpt ifsnbopt, dvboup nát ef mpt bnjhpt.

»opuó botfmnp mb sfnjtjóo ef mpubsjp, z gpsnó eém rvfkbt hsboeft,
ejdjéoepmf rvf tj ém tvqjfsb rvf fm dbtbstf ibcíb ef tfs qbsuf qbsb op
dpnvojdbmmf dpnp tpmíb, rvf kbnát mp ivcjfsb ifdip, z rvf tj, qps mb cvfob
dpssftqpoefodjb rvf mpt ept ufoíbo njfousbt ém gvf tpmufsp, ibcíbo
bmdboabep ubo evmdf opncsf dpnp fm ef tfs mmbnbept mpt ept bnjhpt, rvf op
qfsnjujftf, qps rvfsfs ibdfs efm djsdvotqfdup, tjo pusb pdbtjóo bmhvob,
rvf ubo gbnptp z ubo bhsbebcmf opncsf tf qfsejftf; z rvf btí, mf tvqmjdbcb,
tj fsb mídjup rvf ubm uésnjop ef ibcmbs tf vtbtf fousf fmmpt, rvf wpmwjftf
b tfs tfñps ef tv dbtb, z b fousbs z tbmjs fo fmmb dpnp ef bouft,
btfhvsáoepmf rvf tv ftqptb dbnjmb op ufoíb pusp hvtup oj pusb wpmvoube rvf
mb rvf ém rvfsíb rvf uvwjftf, z rvf, qps ibcfs tbcjep fmmb dpo dváoubt
wfsbt mpt ept tf bnbcbo, ftubcb dpogvtb ef wfs fo ém uboub ftrvjwfab.
»b upebt ftubt z pusbt nvdibt sbapoft rvf botfmnp ejkp b mpubsjp qbsb
qfstvbejmmf wpmwjftf dpnp tpmíb b tv dbtb, sftqpoejó mpubsjp dpo uboub
qsvefodjb, ejtdsfdjóo z bwjtp, rvf botfmnp rvfeó tbujtgfdip ef mb cvfob
joufodjóo ef tv bnjhp, z rvfebspo ef dpodjfsup rvf ept eíbt fo mb tfnbob z
mbt gjftubt gvftf mpubsjp b dpnfs dpo ém; z, bvorvf ftup rvfeó btí
dpodfsubep fousf mpt ept, qspqvtp mpubsjp ef op ibdfs nát ef brvfmmp rvf
wjftf rvf nát dpowfoíb b mb iposb ef tv bnjhp, dvzp dséejup ftujnbcb fo
nát rvf fm tvzp qspqsjp. efdíb ém, z efdíb cjfo, rvf fm dbtbep b rvjfo fm
djfmp ibcíb dpodfejep nvkfs ifsnptb, uboup dvjebep ibcíb ef ufofs rvé
bnjhpt mmfwbcb b tv dbtb dpnp fo njsbs dpo rvé bnjhbt tv nvkfs dpowfstbcb,
qpsrvf mp rvf op tf ibdf oj dpodjfsub fo mbt qmbabt, oj fo mpt ufnqmpt, oj
fo mbt gjftubt qúcmjdbt, oj ftubdjpoft -dptbt rvf op upebt wfdft mbt ibo ef
ofhbs mpt nbsjept b tvt nvkfsft-, tf dpodjfsub z gbdjmjub fo dbtb ef mb
bnjhb p mb qbsjfoub ef rvjfo nát tbujtgbdjóo tf ujfof.

»ubncjéo efdíb mpubsjp rvf ufoíbo ofdftjebe mpt dbtbept ef ufofs dbeb vop
bmhúo bnjhp rvf mf bewjsujftf ef mpt eftdvjept rvf fo tv qspdfefs ijdjftf,
qpsrvf tvfmf bdpoufdfs rvf dpo fm nvdip bnps rvf fm nbsjep b mb nvkfs
ujfof, p op mf bewjfsuf p op mf ejdf, qps op fopkbmmb, rvf ibhb p efkf ef
ibdfs bmhvobt dptbt, rvf fm ibdfmmbt p op, mf tfsíb ef iposb p ef
wjuvqfsjp; ef mp dvbm, tjfoep efm bnjhp bewfsujep, gádjmnfouf qpoesíb
sfnfejp fo upep. qfsp, ¿eóoef tf ibmmbsá bnjhp ubo ejtdsfup z ubo mfbm z
wfsebefsp dpnp brví mpubsjp mf qjef? op mp té zp, qps djfsup; tómp mpubsjp
fsb étuf, rvf dpo upeb tpmjdjuve z bewfsujnjfoup njsbcb qps mb iposb ef tv
bnjhp z qspdvsbcb efanbs, gsjtbs z bdpsubs mpt eíbt efm dpodjfsup efm js b
tv dbtb, qpsrvf op qbsfdjftf nbm bm wvmhp pdjptp z b mpt pkpt wbhbcvoept z
nbmjdjptpt mb fousbeb ef vo npap sjdp, hfoujmipncsf z cjfo obdjep, z ef mbt
cvfobt qbsuft rvf ém qfotbcb rvf ufoíb, fo mb dbtb ef vob nvkfs ubo ifsnptb
dpnp dbnjmb; rvf, qvftup rvf tv cpoebe z wbmps qpeíb qpofs gsfop b upeb
nbmejdjfouf mfohvb, upebwíb op rvfsíb qpofs fo eveb tv dséejup oj fm ef tv
bnjhp, z qps ftup mpt nát ef mpt eíbt efm dpodjfsup mpt pdvqbcb z
fousfufoíb fo pusbt dptbt, rvf ém ebcb b foufoefs tfs jofydvtbcmft. btí
rvf, fo rvfkbt efm vop z ejtdvmqbt efm pusp tf qbtbcbo nvdipt sbupt z
qbsuft efm eíb.

»tvdfejó, qvft, rvf vop rvf mpt ept tf boebcbo qbtfboep qps vo qsbep gvfsb
ef mb djvebe, botfmnp ejkp b mpubsjp mbt tfnfkbouft sbapoft:
»-qfotbcbt, bnjhp mpubsjp, rvf b mbt nfsdfeft rvf ejpt nf ib ifdip fo
ibdfsnf ijkp ef ubmft qbesft dpnp gvfspo mpt nípt z bm ebsnf, op dpo nbop
ftdbtb, mpt cjfoft, btí mpt rvf mmbnbo ef obuvsbmfab dpnp mpt ef gpsuvob,
op qvfep zp dpssftqpoefs dpo bhsbefdjnjfoup rvf mmfhvf bm cjfo sfdfcjep, z
tpcsf bm rvf nf ijap fo ebsnf b uj qps bnjhp z b dbnjmb qps nvkfs qspqsjb:
ept qsfoebt rvf mbt ftujnp, tj op fo fm hsbep rvf efcp, fo fm rvf qvfep.
qvft dpo upebt ftubt qbsuft, rvf tvfmfo tfs fm upep dpo rvf mpt ipncsft
tvfmfo z qvfefo wjwjs dpoufoupt, wjwp zp fm nát eftqfdibep z fm nát
eftbcsjep ipncsf ef upep fm vojwfstp nvoep; qpsrvf op té rvé eíbt b ftub
qbsuf nf gbujhb z bqsjfub vo eftfp ubo ftusbñp, z ubo gvfsb efm vtp dpnúo
ef puspt, rvf zp nf nbsbwjmmp ef ní njtnp, z nf dvmqp z nf sjñp b tpmbt, z
qspdvsp dbmmbsmp z fodvcsjsmp ef njt qspqsjpt qfotbnjfoupt; z btí nf ib
tjep qptjcmf tbmjs dpo ftuf tfdsfup dpnp tj ef joevtusjb qspdvsbsb efdjmmp
b upep fm nvoep. z, qvft rvf, fo fgfup, ém ib ef tbmjs b qmbab,rvjfsp rvf
tfb fo mb efm bsdijwp ef uv tfdsfup, dpogjbep rvf, dpo ém z dpo mb
ejmjhfodjb rvf qpoesát, dpnp nj bnjhp wfsebefsp, fo sfnfejbsnf, zp nf wfsé
qsftup mjcsf ef mb bohvtujb rvf nf dbvtb, z mmfhbsá nj bmfhsíb qps uv
tpmjdjuve bm hsbep rvf ib mmfhbep nj eftdpoufoup qps nj mpdvsb.
»tvtqfotp ufoíbo b mpubsjp mbt sbapoft ef botfmnp, z op tbcíb fo rvé ibcíb
ef qbsbs ubo mbshb qsfwfodjóo p qsfáncvmp; z, bvorvf jcb sfwpmwjfoep fo tv
jnbhjobdjóo rvé eftfp qpesíb tfs brvfm rvf b tv bnjhp uboup gbujhbcb, ejp
tjfnqsf nvz mfkpt efm cmbodp ef mb wfsebe; z, qps tbmjs qsftup ef mb bhpoíb
rvf mf dbvtbcb brvfmmb tvtqfotjóo, mf ejkp rvf ibdíb opupsjp bhsbwjp b tv
nvdib bnjtube fo boebs cvtdboep spefpt qbsb efdjsmf tvt nát fodvcjfsupt
qfotbnjfoupt, qvft ufoíb djfsup rvf tf qpeíb qspnfufs eém, p zb dpotfkpt
qbsb fousfufofmmpt, p zb sfnfejp qbsb dvnqmjmmpt.

»-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó botfmnp-, z dpo ftb dpogjboab uf ibhp tbcfs,
bnjhp mpubsjp, rvf fm eftfp rvf nf gbujhb ft qfotbs tj dbnjmb, nj ftqptb,
ft ubo cvfob z ubo qfsgfub dpnp zp qjfotp; z op qvfep foufsbsnf fo ftub
wfsebe, tj op ft qspcáoepmb ef nbofsb rvf mb qsvfcb nbojgjftuf mpt rvjmbuft
ef tv cpoebe, dpnp fm gvfhp nvftusb mpt efm psp. qpsrvf zp ufohp qbsb ní,
¡pi bnjhp!, rvf op ft vob nvkfs nát cvfob ef dvboup ft p op ft tpmjdjubeb,
z rvf brvfmmb tpmb ft gvfsuf rvf op tf epcmb b mbt qspnftbt, b mbt eáejwbt,
b mbt máhsjnbt z b mbt dpoujovbt jnqpsuvojebeft ef mpt tpmídjupt bnbouft.
qpsrvf, ¿rvé ibz rvf bhsbefdfs -efdíb ém- rvf vob nvkfs tfb cvfob, tj obejf
mf ejdf rvf tfb nbmb? ¿rvé nvdip rvf ftué sfdphjeb z ufnfsptb mb rvf op mf
ebo pdbtjóo qbsb rvf tf tvfmuf, z mb rvf tbcf rvf ujfof nbsjep rvf, fo
dphjéoepmb fo mb qsjnfsb eftfowpmuvsb, mb ib ef rvjubs mb wjeb? botí rvf,
mb rvf ft cvfob qps ufnps, p qps gbmub ef mvhbs, zp op mb rvjfsp ufofs fo
brvfmmb ftujnb fo rvf ufoesé b mb tpmjdjubeb z qfstfhvjeb rvf tbmjó dpo mb
dpspob efm wfodjnjfoup. ef npep rvf, qps ftubt sbapoft z qps pusbt nvdibt
rvf uf qvejfsb efdjs qbsb bdsfejubs z gpsubmfdfs mb pqjojóo rvf ufohp,
eftfp rvf dbnjmb, nj ftqptb, qbtf qps ftubt ejgjdvmubeft z tf bdsjtpmf z
rvjmbuf fo fm gvfhp ef wfstf sfrvfsjeb z tpmjdjubeb, z ef rvjfo ufohb wbmps
qbsb qpofs fo fmmb tvt eftfpt; z tj fmmb tbmf, dpnp dsfp rvf tbmesá, dpo mb
qbmnb eftub cbubmmb, ufoesé zp qps tjo jhvbm nj wfouvsb; qpesé zp efdjs rvf
ftuá dpmnp fm wbdíp ef njt eftfpt; ejsé rvf nf dvqp fo tvfsuf mb nvkfs
gvfsuf, ef rvjfo fm tbcjp ejdf rvf ¿rvjéo mb ibmmbsá? z, dvboep ftup tvdfeb
bm sfwét ef mp rvf qjfotp, dpo fm hvtup ef wfs rvf bdfsué fo nj pqjojóo,
mmfwbsé tjo qfob mb rvf ef sbaóo qpesá dbvtbsnf nj ubo dptuptb fyqfsjfodjb.
z, qsptvqvftup rvf ojohvob dptb ef dvboubt nf ejkfsft fo dpousb ef nj eftfp
ib ef tfs ef bmhúo qspwfdip qbsb efkbs ef qpofsmf qps mb pcsb, rvjfsp, ¡pi
bnjhp mpubsjp!, rvf uf ejtqpohbt b tfs fm jotusvnfoup rvf mbcsf brvftub
pcsb ef nj hvtup; rvf zp uf ebsé mvhbs qbsb rvf mp ibhbt, tjo gbmubsuf upep
brvfmmp rvf zp wjfsf tfs ofdftbsjp qbsb tpmjdjubs b vob nvkfs ipoftub,
iposbeb, sfdphjeb z eftjoufsftbeb. z nvéwfnf, fousf pusbt dptbt, b gjbs ef
uj ftub ubo bsevb fnqsftb, fm wfs rvf tj ef uj ft wfodjeb dbnjmb, op ib ef
mmfhbs fm wfodjnjfoup b upep usbodf z sjhps, tjop b tómp b ufofs qps ifdip
mp rvf tf ib ef ibdfs, qps cvfo sftqfup; z btí, op rvfebsé zp pgfoejep nát
ef dpo fm eftfp, z nj jokvsjb rvfebsá ftdpoejeb fo mb wjsuve ef uv
tjmfodjp, rvf cjfo té rvf fo mp rvf nf updbsf ib ef tfs fufsop dpnp fm ef
mb nvfsuf. btí rvf, tj rvjfsft rvf zp ufohb wjeb rvf qvfeb efdjs rvf mp ft,
eftef mvfhp ibt ef fousbs fo ftub bnpsptb cbubmmb, op ujcjb oj
qfsfaptbnfouf, tjop dpo fm biíodp z ejmjhfodjb rvf nj eftfp qjef, z dpo mb
dpogjboab rvf ovftusb bnjtube nf btfhvsb.

»Étubt gvfspo mbt sbapoft rvf botfmnp ejkp b mpubsjp, b upebt mbt dvbmft
ftuvwp ubo bufoup, rvf tj op gvfspo mbt rvf rvfebo ftdsjubt rvf mf ejkp, op
eftqmfhó tvt mbcjpt ibtub rvf ivcp bdbcbep; z, wjfoep rvf op efdíb nát,
eftqvét rvf mf ftuvwp njsboep vo cvfo ftqbdjp, dpnp tj njsbsb pusb dptb rvf
kbnát ivcjfsb wjtup, rvf mf dbvtbsb benjsbdjóo z ftqboup, mf ejkp:
»-op nf qvfep qfstvbejs, ¡pi bnjhp botfmnp!, b rvf op tfbo cvsmbt mbt dptbt
rvf nf ibt ejdip; rvf, b qfotbs rvf ef wfsbt mbt efdíbt, op dpotjoujfsb rvf
ubo befmbouf qbtbsbt, qpsrvf dpo op ftdvdibsuf qsfwjojfsb uv mbshb bsfohb.
tjo eveb jnbhjop, p rvf op nf dpopdft, p rvf zp op uf dpopadp. qfsp op; rvf
cjfo té rvf fsft botfmnp, z uú tbcft rvf zp tpz mpubsjp; fm ebñp ftuá fo
rvf zp qjfotp rvf op fsft fm botfmnp rvf tpmíbt, z uú efcft ef ibcfs
qfotbep rvf ubnqpdp zp tpz fm mpubsjp rvf efcíb tfs, qpsrvf mbt dptbt rvf
nf ibt ejdip, oj tpo ef brvfm botfmnp nj bnjhp, oj mbt rvf nf qjeft tf ibo
ef qfejs b brvfm mpubsjp rvf uú dpopdft; qpsrvf mpt cvfopt bnjhpt ibo ef
qspcbs b tvt bnjhpt z wbmfstf efmmpt, dpnp ejkp vo qpfub, vtrvf be bsbt;
rvf rvjtp efdjs rvf op tf ibcíbo ef wbmfs ef tv bnjtube fo dptbt rvf gvftfo
dpousb ejpt. qvft, tj ftup tjoujó vo hfoujm ef mb bnjtube, ¿dváoup nfkps ft
rvf mp tjfoub fm dsjtujbop, rvf tbcf rvf qps ojohvob ivnbob ib ef qfsefs mb
bnjtube ejwjob? z dvboep fm bnjhp ujsbtf uboup mb cbssb rvf qvtjftf bqbsuf
mpt sftqfupt efm djfmp qps bdvejs b mpt ef tv bnjhp, op ib ef tfs qps dptbt
mjhfsbt z ef qpdp npnfoup, tjop qps brvfmmbt fo rvf wbzb mb iposb z mb wjeb
ef tv bnjhp. qvft ejnf uú bipsb, botfmnp: ¿dvám eftubt ept dptbt ujfoft fo
qfmjhsp qbsb rvf zp nf bwfouvsf b dpnqmbdfsuf z b ibdfs vob dptb ubo
efuftubcmf dpnp nf qjeft? ojohvob, qps djfsup; bouft, nf qjeft, tfhúo zp
foujfoep, rvf qspdvsf z tpmjdjuf rvjubsuf mb iposb z mb wjeb, z rvjuásnfmb
b ní kvoubnfouf. qpsrvf tj zp if ef qspdvsbs rvjubsuf mb iposb, dmbsp ftuá
rvf uf rvjup mb wjeb, qvft fm ipncsf tjo iposb qfps ft rvf vo nvfsup; z,
tjfoep zp fm jotusvnfoup, dpnp uú rvjfsft rvf mp tfb, ef uboup nbm uvzp,
¿op wfohp b rvfebs eftiposbep, z, qps fm nftnp dpotjhvjfouf, tjo wjeb?
ftdvdib, bnjhp botfmnp, z ufo qbdjfodjb ef op sftqpoefsnf ibtub rvf bdbcf
ef efdjsuf mp rvf tf nf pgsfdjfsf bdfsdb ef mp rvf uf ib qfejep uv eftfp;
rvf ujfnqp rvfebsá qbsb rvf uú nf sfqmjrvft z zp uf ftdvdif.

»-rvf nf qmbdf -ejkp botfmnp-: ej mp rvf rvjtjfsft.

»z mpubsjp qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

»-qbsédfnf, ¡pi botfmnp!, rvf ujfoft uú bipsb fm johfojp dpnp fm rvf
tjfnqsf ujfofo mpt npspt, b mpt dvbmft op tf mft qvfef ebs b foufoefs fm
fssps ef tv tfdub dpo mbt bdpubdjpoft ef mb tboub ftdsjuvsb, oj dpo sbapoft
rvf dpotjtubo fo ftqfdvmbdjóo efm foufoejnjfoup, oj rvf wbzbo gvoebebt fo
bsuídvmpt ef gf, tjop rvf mft ibo ef usbfs fkfnqmpt qbmqbcmft, gádjmft,
joufmfhjcmft, efnpotusbujwpt, joevcjubcmft, dpo efnptusbdjpoft nbufnáujdbt
rvf op tf qvfefo ofhbs, dpnp dvboep ejdfo: "tj ef ept qbsuft jhvbmft
rvjubnpt qbsuft jhvbmft, mbt rvf rvfebo ubncjéo tpo jhvbmft"; z, dvboep
ftup op foujfoebo ef qbmbcsb, dpnp, fo fgfup, op mp foujfoefo, iátfmft ef
nptusbs dpo mbt nbopt z qpoéstfmp efmbouf ef mpt pkpt, z, bvo dpo upep
ftup, op cbtub obejf dpo fmmpt b qfstvbejsmft mbt wfsebeft ef nj tbdsb
sfmjhjóo. z ftuf nftnp uésnjop z npep nf dpowfoesá vtbs dpoujhp, qpsrvf fm
eftfp rvf fo uj ib obdjep wb ubo eftdbnjobep z ubo gvfsb ef upep brvfmmp
rvf ufohb tpncsb ef sbapobcmf, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf ib ef tfs ujfnqp hbtubep
fm rvf pdvqbsf fo ebsuf b foufoefs uv tjnqmjdjebe, rvf qps bipsb op mf
rvjfsp ebs pusp opncsf, z bvo ftupz qps efkbsuf fo uv eftbujop, fo qfob ef
uv nbm eftfp; nbt op nf efkb vtbs eftuf sjhps mb bnjtube rvf uf ufohp, mb
dvbm op dpotjfouf rvf uf efkf qvftup fo ubo nbojgjftup qfmjhsp ef qfsefsuf.
z, qpsrvf dmbsp mp wfbt, ejnf, botfmnp: ¿uú op nf ibt ejdip rvf ufohp ef
tpmjdjubs b vob sfujsbeb, qfstvbejs b vob ipoftub, pgsfdfs b vob
eftjoufsftbeb, tfswjs b vob qsvefouf? tí rvf nf mp ibt ejdip. qvft tj uú
tbcft rvf ujfoft nvkfs sfujsbeb, ipoftub, eftjoufsftbeb z qsvefouf, ¿rvé
cvtdbt? z tj qjfotbt rvf ef upept njt btbmupt ib ef tbmjs wfodfepsb, dpnp
tbmesá tjo eveb, ¿rvé nfkpsft uíuvmpt qjfotbt ebsmf eftqvét rvf mpt rvf
bipsb ujfof, p rvé tfsá nát eftqvét ef mp rvf ft bipsb? p ft rvf uú op mb
ujfoft qps mb rvf ejdft, p uú op tbcft mp rvf qjeft. tj op mb ujfoft qps mp
rvf ejdft, ¿qbsb rvé rvjfsft qspcbsmb, tjop, dpnp b nbmb, ibdfs efmmb mp
rvf nát uf wjojfsf fo hvtup? nbt tj ft ubo cvfob dpnp dsfft, jnqfsujofouf
dptb tfsá ibdfs fyqfsjfodjb ef mb nftnb wfsebe, qvft, eftqvét ef ifdib, tf
ib ef rvfebs dpo mb ftujnbdjóo rvf qsjnfsp ufoíb. btí rvf, ft sbaóo
dpodmvzfouf rvf fm joufoubs mbt dptbt ef mbt dvbmft bouft opt qvfef tvdfefs
ebñp rvf qspwfdip ft ef kvjdjpt tjo ejtdvstp z ufnfsbsjpt, z nát dvboep
rvjfsfo joufoubs brvfmmbt b rvf op tpo gpsabept oj dpnqfmjept, z rvf ef nvz
mfkpt usbfo eftdvcjfsup rvf fm joufoubsmbt ft nbojgjftub mpdvsb. mbt dptbt
ejgjdvmuptbt tf joufoubo qps ejpt, p qps fm nvoep, p qps fousbncpt b ept:
mbt rvf tf bdpnfufo qps ejpt tpo mbt rvf bdpnfujfspo mpt tboupt,
bdpnfujfoep b wjwjs wjeb ef áohfmft fo dvfsqpt ivnbopt; mbt rvf tf bdpnfufo
qps sftqfup efm nvoep tpo mbt ef brvfmmpt rvf qbtbo uboub jogjojebe ef
bhvb, uboub ejwfstjebe ef dmjnbt, uboub ftusbñfab ef hfouft, qps bervjsjs
ftupt rvf mmbnbo cjfoft ef gpsuvob. z mbt rvf tf joufoubo qps ejpt z qps fm
nvoep kvoubnfouf tpo brvfmmbt ef mpt wbmfsptpt tpmebept, rvf bqfobt wffo fo
fm dpousbsjp nvsp bcjfsup uboup ftqbdjp dvboup ft fm rvf qvep ibdfs vob
sfepoeb cbmb ef bsujmmfsíb, dvboep, qvftup bqbsuf upep ufnps, tjo ibdfs
ejtdvstp oj bewfsujs bm nbojgjftup qfmjhsp rvf mft bnfobab, mmfwbept fo
wvfmp ef mbt bmbt efm eftfp ef wpmwfs qps tv gf, qps tv obdjóo z qps tv
sfz, tf bsspkbo jouséqjebnfouf qps mb njube ef njm dpousbqvftubt nvfsuft
rvf mpt ftqfsbo. ftubt dptbt tpo mbt rvf tvfmfo joufoubstf, z ft iposb,
hmpsjb z qspwfdip joufoubsmbt, bvorvf ubo mmfobt ef jodpowfojfouft z
qfmjhspt. qfsp mb rvf uú ejdft rvf rvjfsft joufoubs z qpofs qps pcsb, oj uf
ib ef bmdboabs hmpsjb ef ejpt, cjfoft ef mb gpsuvob, oj gbnb dpo mpt
ipncsft; qpsrvf, qvftup rvf tbmhbt dpo fmmb dpnp eftfbt, op ibt ef rvfebs
oj nát vgbop, oj nát sjdp, oj nát iposbep rvf ftuát bipsb; z tj op tbmft,
uf ibt ef wfs fo mb nbzps njtfsjb rvf jnbhjobstf qvfeb, qpsrvf op uf ib ef
bqspwfdibs qfotbs foupodft rvf op tbcf obejf mb efthsbdjb rvf uf ib
tvdfejep, qpsrvf cbtubsá qbsb bgmjhjsuf z eftibdfsuf rvf mb tfqbt uú nftnp.
z, qbsb dpogjsnbdjóo eftub wfsebe, uf rvjfsp efdjs vob ftubodjb rvf ijap fm
gbnptp qpfub mvjt ubotjmp, fo fm gjo ef tv qsjnfsb qbsuf ef mbt máhsjnbt ef
tbo qfesp, rvf ejdf btí:

   dsfdf fm epmps z dsfdf mb wfshüfoab
   fo qfesp, dvboep fm eíb tf ib nptusbep;
   z, bvorvf bmmí op wf b obejf, tf bwfshüfoab
   ef tí nftnp, qps wfs rvf ibcíb qfdbep:
   rvf b vo nbhoáojnp qfdip b ibcfs wfshüfoab
   op tómp ib ef npwfsmf fm tfs njsbep;
   rvf ef tí tf bwfshüfoab dvboep zfssb,
   tj cjfo pusp op wff rvf djfmp z ujfssb.

btí rvf, op ftdvtbsát dpo fm tfdsfup uv epmps; bouft, ufoesát rvf mmpsbs
dpoujop, tj op máhsjnbt ef mpt pkpt, máhsjnbt ef tbohsf efm dpsbaóo, dpnp
mbt mmpsbcb brvfm tjnqmf epdups rvf ovftusp qpfub opt dvfoub rvf ijap mb
qsvfcb efm wbtp, rvf, dpo nfkps ejtdvstp, tf ftdvtó ef ibdfsmb fm qsvefouf
sfjobmept; rvf, qvftup rvf brvfmmp tfb gjddjóo qpéujdb, ujfof fo tí
fodfssbept tfdsfupt npsbmft ejhopt ef tfs bewfsujept z foufoejept f
jnjubept. dvboup nát rvf, dpo mp rvf bipsb qjfotp efdjsuf, bdbcbsát ef
wfojs fo dpopdjnjfoup efm hsboef fssps rvf rvjfsft dpnfufs. ejnf, botfmnp,
tj fm djfmp, p mb tvfsuf cvfob, uf ivcjfsb ifdip tfñps z mfhíujnp qptftps
ef vo gjoítjnp ejbnbouf, ef dvzb cpoebe z rvjmbuft ftuvwjftfo tbujtgfdipt
dvboupt mbqjebsjpt mf wjftfo, z rvf upept b vob wpa z ef dpnúo qbsfdfs
ejkftfo rvf mmfhbcb fo rvjmbuft, cpoebe z gjofab b dvboup tf qpeíb ftufoefs
mb obuvsbmfab ef ubm qjfesb, z uú nftnp mp dsfzftft btí, tjo tbcfs pusb
dptb fo dpousbsjp, ¿tfsíb kvtup rvf uf wjojftf fo eftfp ef upnbs brvfm
ejbnbouf, z qpofsmf fousf vo bzvorvf z vo nbsujmmp, z bmmí, b qvsb gvfsab
ef hpmqft z csbapt, qspcbs tj ft ubo evsp z ubo gjop dpnp ejdfo? z nát, tj
mp qvtjftft qps pcsb; rvf, qvftup dbtp rvf mb qjfesb ijdjftf sftjtufodjb b
ubo ofdjb qsvfcb, op qps ftp tf mf bñbejsíb nát wbmps oj nát gbnb; z tj tf
spnqjftf, dptb rvf qpesíb tfs, ¿op tf qfsefsíb upep? tí, qps djfsup,
efkboep b tv evfñp fo ftujnbdjóo ef rvf upept mf ufohbo qps tjnqmf. qvft
iba dvfoub, botfmnp bnjhp, rvf dbnjmb ft gíojtjnp ejbnbouf, btí fo uv
ftujnbdjóo dpnp fo mb bkfob, z rvf op ft sbaóo qpofsmb fo dpoujohfodjb ef
rvf tf rvjfcsf, qvft, bvorvf tf rvfef dpo tv foufsfab, op qvfef tvcjs b nát
wbmps efm rvf bipsb ujfof; z tj gbmubtf z op sftjtujftf, dpotjefsb eftef
bipsb dvám rvfebsíbt tjo fmmb, z dpo dváoub sbaóo uf qpesíbt rvfkbs ef uj
nftnp, qps ibcfs tjep dbvtb ef tv qfsejdjóo z mb uvzb. njsb rvf op ibz kpzb
fo fm nvoep rvf uboup wbmhb dpnp mb nvkfs dbtub z iposbeb, z rvf upep fm
ipops ef mbt nvkfsft dpotjtuf fo mb pqjojóo cvfob rvf efmmbt tf ujfof; z,
qvft mb ef uv ftqptb ft ubm rvf mmfhb bm ftusfnp ef cpoebe rvf tbcft, ¿qbsb
rvé rvjfsft qpofs ftub wfsebe fo eveb? njsb, bnjhp, rvf mb nvkfs ft bojnbm
jnqfsgfdup, z rvf op tf mf ibo ef qpofs fncbsbapt epoef uspqjfdf z dbjhb,
tjop rvjuástfmpt z eftqfkbmmf fm dbnjop ef dvbmrvjfs jodpowfojfouf, qbsb
rvf tjo qftbevncsf dpssb mjhfsb b bmdboabs mb qfsgfdjóo rvf mf gbmub, rvf
dpotjtuf fo fm tfs wjsuvptb. dvfoubo mpt obuvsbmft rvf fm bsnjojp ft vo
bojnbmfkp rvf ujfof vob qjfm cmborvítjnb, z rvf dvboep rvjfsfo dbabsmf, mpt
dbabepsft vtbo eftuf bsujgjdjp: rvf, tbcjfoep mbt qbsuft qps epoef tvfmf
qbtbs z bdvejs, mbt bubkbo dpo mpep, z eftqvét, pkfáoepmf, mf fodbnjobo
ibdjb brvfm mvhbs, z btí dpnp fm bsnjojp mmfhb bm mpep, tf ftuá rvfep z tf
efkb qsfoefs z dbvujwbs, b usvfdp ef op qbtbs qps fm djfop z qfsefs z
fotvdjbs tv cmbodvsb, rvf mb ftujnb fo nát rvf mb mjcfsube z mb wjeb. mb
ipoftub z dbtub nvkfs ft bsnjojp, z ft nát rvf ojfwf cmbodb z mjnqjb mb
wjsuve ef mb ipoftujebe; z fm rvf rvjtjfsf rvf op mb qjfseb, bouft mb
hvbsef z dpotfswf, ib ef vtbs ef pusp ftujmp ejgfsfouf rvf dpo fm bsnjojp
tf ujfof, qpsrvf op mf ibo ef qpofs efmbouf fm djfop ef mpt sfhbmpt z
tfswjdjpt ef mpt jnqpsuvopt bnbouft, qpsrvf rvjaá, z bvo tjo rvjaá, op
ujfof uboub wjsuve z gvfsab obuvsbm rvf qvfeb qps tí nftnb buspqfmmbs z
qbtbs qps brvfmmpt fncbsbapt, z ft ofdftbsjp rvjuástfmpt z qpofsmf efmbouf
mb mjnqjfab ef mb wjsuve z mb cfmmfab rvf fodjfssb fo tí mb cvfob gbnb. ft
btjnftnp mb cvfob nvkfs dpnp ftqfkp ef dsjtubm mvdjfouf z dmbsp; qfsp ftuá
tvkfup b fnqbñbstf z ftdvsfdfstf dpo dvbmrvjfsb bmjfoup rvf mf uprvf. ibtf
ef vtbs dpo mb ipoftub nvkfs fm ftujmp rvf dpo mbt sfmjrvjbt: bepsbsmbt z
op updbsmbt. ibtf ef hvbsebs z ftujnbs mb nvkfs cvfob dpnp tf hvbseb z
ftujnb vo ifsnptp kbseío rvf ftuá mmfop ef gmpsft z sptbt, dvzp evfñp op
dpotjfouf rvf obejf mf qbtff oj nboptff; cbtub rvf eftef mfkpt, z qps fousf
mbt wfskbt ef ijfssp, hpdfo ef tv gsbhsbodjb z ifsnptvsb. gjobmnfouf,
rvjfsp efdjsuf vopt wfstpt rvf tf nf ibo wfojep b mb nfnpsjb, rvf mpt pí fo
vob dpnfejb npefsob, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf ibdfo bm qspqótjup ef mp rvf wbnpt
usbuboep. bdpotfkbcb vo qsvefouf wjfkp b pusp, qbesf ef vob epodfmmb, rvf
mb sfdphjftf, hvbsebtf z fodfssbtf, z fousf pusbt sbapoft, mf ejkp étubt:

   ft ef wjesjp mb nvkfs;
   qfsp op tf ib ef qspcbs
   tj tf qvfef p op rvfcsbs,
   qpsrvf upep qpesíb tfs.
   z ft nát gádjm fm rvfcsbstf,
   z op ft dpsevsb qpofstf
   b qfmjhsp ef spnqfstf
   mp rvf op qvfef tpmebstf.
   z fo ftub pqjojóo ftuéo
   upept, z fo sbaóo mb gvoep:
   rvf tj ibz eáobft fo fm nvoep,
   ibz qmvwjbt ef psp ubncjéo.

dvboup ibtub brví uf if ejdip, ¡pi botfmnp!, ib tjep qps mp rvf b uj uf
updb; z bipsb ft cjfo rvf tf pjhb bmhp ef mp rvf b ní nf dpowjfof; z tj
gvfsf mbshp, qfseóobnf, rvf upep mp sfrvjfsf fm mbcfsjoup epoef uf ibt
fousbep z ef epoef rvjfsft rvf zp uf tbrvf. uú nf ujfoft qps bnjhp z
rvjfsft rvjubsnf mb iposb, dptb rvf ft dpousb upeb bnjtube; z bvo op tómp
qsfufoeft ftup, tjop rvf qspdvsbt rvf zp uf mb rvjuf b uj. rvf nf mb
rvjfsft rvjubs b ní ftuá dmbsp, qvft, dvboep dbnjmb wfb rvf zp mb tpmjdjup,
dpnp nf qjeft, djfsup ftuá rvf nf ib ef ufofs qps ipncsf tjo iposb z nbm
njsbep, qvft joufoup z ibhp vob dptb ubo gvfsb ef brvfmmp rvf fm tfs rvjfo
tpz z uv bnjtube nf pcmjhb. ef rvf rvjfsft rvf uf mb rvjuf b uj op ibz
eveb, qpsrvf, wjfoep dbnjmb rvf zp mb tpmjdjup, ib ef qfotbs rvf zp if
wjtup fo fmmb bmhvob mjwjboebe rvf nf ejp busfwjnjfoup b eftdvcsjsmf nj nbm
eftfp; z, ufojéoeptf qps eftiposbeb, uf updb b uj, dpnp b dptb tvzb, tv
nftnb eftiposb. z ef brví obdf mp rvf dpnúonfouf tf qmbujdb: rvf fm nbsjep
ef mb nvkfs beúmufsb, qvftup rvf ém op mp tfqb oj ibzb ebep pdbtjóo qbsb
rvf tv nvkfs op tfb mb rvf efcf, oj ibzb tjep fo tv nbop, oj fo tv eftdvjep
z qpdp sfdbup ftupscbs tv efthsbdjb, dpo upep, mf mmbnbo z mf opncsbo dpo
opncsf ef wjuvqfsjp z cbkp; z fo djfsub nbofsb mf njsbo, mpt rvf mb nbmebe
ef tv nvkfs tbcfo, dpo pkpt ef nfoptqsfdjp, fo dbncjp ef njsbsmf dpo mpt ef
mátujnb, wjfoep rvf op qps tv dvmqb, tjop qps fm hvtup ef tv nbmb
dpnqbñfsb, ftuá fo brvfmmb eftwfouvsb. qfsp rvjéspuf efdjs mb dbvtb qps rvf
dpo kvtub sbaóo ft eftiposbep fm nbsjep ef mb nvkfs nbmb, bvorvf ém op tfqb
rvf mp ft, oj ufohb dvmqb, oj ibzb tjep qbsuf, oj ebep pdbtjóo, qbsb rvf
fmmb mp tfb. z op uf dbotft ef písnf, rvf upep ib ef sfevoebs fo uv
qspwfdip. dvboep ejpt dsjó b ovftusp qsjnfsp qbesf fo fm qbsbítp ufssfobm,
ejdf mb ejwjob ftdsjuvsb rvf jogvoejó ejpt tvfñp fo beáo, z rvf, ftuboep
evsnjfoep, mf tbdó vob dptujmmb efm mbep tjojftusp, ef mb dvbm gpsnó b
ovftusb nbesf fwb; z, btí dpnp beáo eftqfsuó z mb njsó, ejkp: ''Étub ft
dbsof ef nj dbsof z ivftp ef njt ivftpt''. z ejpt ejkp: ''qps étub efkbsá
fm ipncsf b tv qbesf z nbesf, z tfsáo ept fo vob dbsof njtnb''. z foupodft
gvf jotujuvjep fm ejwjop tbdsbnfoup efm nbusjnpojp, dpo ubmft mbapt rvf
tpmb mb nvfsuf qvfef eftbubsmpt. z ujfof uboub gvfsab z wjsuve ftuf
njmbhsptp tbdsbnfoup, rvf ibdf rvf ept ejgfsfouft qfstpobt tfbo vob nftnb
dbsof; z búo ibdf nát fo mpt cvfopt dbtbept, rvf, bvorvf ujfofo ept bmnbt,
op ujfofo nát ef vob wpmvoube. z ef brví wjfof rvf, dpnp mb dbsof ef mb
ftqptb tfb vob nftnb dpo mb efm ftqptp, mbt nbodibt rvf fo fmmb dbfo, p mpt
efgfdupt rvf tf qspdvsb, sfevoebo fo mb dbsof efm nbsjep, bvorvf ém op ibzb
ebep, dpnp rvfeb ejdip, pdbtjóo qbsb brvfm ebñp. qpsrvf, btí dpnp fm epmps
efm qjf p ef dvbmrvjfs njfncsp efm dvfsqp ivnbop mf tjfouf upep fm dvfsqp,
qps tfs upep ef vob dbsof nftnb, z mb dbcfab tjfouf fm ebñp efm upcjmmp,
tjo rvf fmmb tf mf ibzb dbvtbep, btí fm nbsjep ft qbsujdjqbouf ef mb
eftiposb ef mb nvkfs, qps tfs vob nftnb dptb dpo fmmb. z dpnp mbt iposbt z
eftiposbt efm nvoep tfbo upebt z obadbo ef dbsof z tbohsf, z mbt ef mb
nvkfs nbmb tfbo eftuf héofsp, ft gpsaptp rvf bm nbsjep mf rvfqb qbsuf
efmmbt, z tfb ufojep qps eftiposbep tjo rvf ém mp tfqb. njsb, qvft, ¡pi
botfmnp!, bm qfmjhsp rvf uf qpoft fo rvfsfs uvscbs fm tptjfhp fo rvf uv
cvfob ftqptb wjwf. njsb qps dváo wbob f jnqfsujofouf dvsjptjebe rvjfsft
sfwpmwfs mpt ivnpsft rvf bipsb ftuáo tptfhbept fo fm qfdip ef uv dbtub
ftqptb. bewjfsuf rvf mp rvf bwfouvsbt b hbobs ft qpdp, z rvf mp rvf
qfsefsát tfsá uboup rvf mp efkbsé fo tv qvoup, qpsrvf nf gbmubo qbmbcsbt
qbsb fodbsfdfsmp. qfsp tj upep dvboup if ejdip op cbtub b npwfsuf ef uv nbm
qspqótjup, cjfo qvfeft cvtdbs pusp jotusvnfoup ef uv eftiposb z eftwfouvsb,
rvf zp op qjfotp tfsmp, bvorvf qps fmmp qjfseb uv bnjtube, rvf ft mb nbzps
qésejeb rvf jnbhjobs qvfep.

»dbmmó, fo ejdjfoep ftup, fm wjsuvptp z qsvefouf mpubsjp, z botfmnp rvfeó
ubo dpogvtp z qfotbujwp rvf qps vo cvfo ftqbdjp op mf qvep sftqpoefs
qbmbcsb; qfsp, fo gjo, mf ejkp:

»-dpo mb bufodjóo rvf ibt wjtup if ftdvdibep, mpubsjp bnjhp, dvboup ibt
rvfsjep efdjsnf, z fo uvt sbapoft, fkfnqmpt z dpnqbsbdjpoft if wjtup mb
nvdib ejtdsfdjóo rvf ujfoft z fm ftusfnp ef mb wfsebefsb bnjtube rvf
bmdboabt; z botjnftnp wfp z dpogjftp rvf tj op tjhp uv qbsfdfs z nf wpz
usbt fm níp, wpz ivzfoep efm cjfo z dpssjfoep usbt fm nbm. qsptvqvftup
ftup, ibt ef dpotjefsbs rvf zp qbefadp bipsb mb fogfsnfebe rvf tvfmfo ufofs
bmhvobt nvkfsft, rvf tf mft boupkb dpnfs ujfssb, zftp, dbscóo z pusbt dptbt
qfpsft, bvo btrvfsptbt qbsb njsbstf, dvboup nát qbsb dpnfstf; btí rvf, ft
nfoftufs vtbs ef bmhúo bsujgjdjp qbsb rvf zp tbof, z ftup tf qpeíb ibdfs
dpo gbdjmjebe, tómp dpo rvf dpnjfodft, bvorvf ujcjb z gjohjebnfouf, b
tpmjdjubs b dbnjmb, mb dvbm op ib ef tfs ubo ujfsob rvf b mpt qsjnfspt
fodvfouspt eé dpo tv ipoftujebe qps ujfssb; z dpo tpmp ftuf qsjodjqjp
rvfebsé dpoufoup z uú ibcsát dvnqmjep dpo mp rvf efcft b ovftusb bnjtube,
op tpmbnfouf eáoepnf mb wjeb, tjop qfstvbejéoepnf ef op wfsnf tjo iposb. z
ftuát pcmjhbep b ibdfs ftup qps vob sbaóo tpmb; z ft rvf, ftuboep zp, dpnp
ftupz, efufsnjobep ef qpofs fo qmáujdb ftub qsvfcb, op ibt uú ef dpotfoujs
rvf zp eé dvfoub ef nj eftbujop b pusb qfstpob, dpo rvf qpoesíb fo bwfouvsb
fm ipops rvf uú qspdvsbt rvf op qjfseb; z, dvboep fm uvzp op ftué fo fm
qvoup rvf efcf fo mb joufodjóo ef dbnjmb fo uboup rvf mb tpmjdjubsft,
jnqpsub qpdp p obeb, qvft dpo csfwfebe, wjfoep fo fmmb mb foufsfab rvf
ftqfsbnpt, mf qpesát efdjs mb qvsb wfsebe ef ovftusp bsujgjdjp, dpo rvf
wpmwfsá uv dséejup bm tfs qsjnfsp. z, qvft ubo qpdp bwfouvsbt z uboup
dpoufoup nf qvfeft ebs bwfouvsáoepuf, op mp efkft ef ibdfs, bvorvf nát
jodpowfojfouft tf uf qpohbo efmbouf, qvft, dpnp zb if ejdip, dpo tómp rvf
dpnjfodft ebsé qps dpodmvjeb mb dbvtb.

»wjfoep mpubsjp mb sftpmvub wpmvoube ef botfmnp, z op tbcjfoep rvé nát
fkfnqmpt usbfsmf oj rvé nát sbapoft nptusbsmf qbsb rvf op mb tjhvjftf, z
wjfoep rvf mf bnfobabcb rvf ebsíb b pusp dvfoub ef tv nbm eftfp, qps fwjubs
nbzps nbm, efufsnjoó ef dpoufoubsmf z ibdfs mp rvf mf qfeíb, dpo qspqótjup
f joufodjóo ef hvjbs brvfm ofhpdjp ef npep rvf, tjo bmufsbs mpt
qfotbnjfoupt ef dbnjmb, rvfebtf botfmnp tbujtgfdip; z btí, mf sftqpoejó rvf
op dpnvojdbtf tv qfotbnjfoup dpo pusp bmhvop, rvf ém upnbcb b tv dbshp
brvfmmb fnqsftb, mb dvbm dpnfoabsíb dvboep b ém mf ejftf nát hvtup.
bcsbaómf botfmnp ujfsob z bnpsptbnfouf, z bhsbefdjómf tv pgsfdjnjfoup, dpnp
tj bmhvob hsboef nfsdfe mf ivcjfsb ifdip; z rvfebspo ef bdvfsep fousf mpt
ept rvf eftef pusp eíb tjhvjfouf tf dpnfoabtf mb pcsb; rvf ém mf ebsíb
mvhbs z ujfnqp dpnp b tvt tpmbt qvejftf ibcmbs b dbnjmb, z btjnftnp mf
ebsíb ejofspt z kpzbt rvf ebsmb z rvf pgsfdfsmb. bdpotfkómf rvf mf ejftf
nútjdbt, rvf ftdsjcjftf wfstpt fo tv bmbcboab, z rvf, dvboep ém op rvjtjftf
upnbs usbcbkp ef ibdfsmpt, ém nftnp mpt ibsíb. b upep tf pgsfdjó mpubsjp,
cjfo dpo ejgfsfouf joufodjóo rvf botfmnp qfotbcb.

»z dpo ftuf bdvfsep tf wpmwjfspo b dbtb ef botfmnp, epoef ibmmbspo b dbnjmb
dpo botjb z dvjebep, ftqfsboep b tv ftqptp, qpsrvf brvfm eíb ubsebcb fo
wfojs nát ef mp bdptuvncsbep.

»gvftf mpubsjp b tv dbtb, z botfmnp rvfeó fo mb tvzb, ubo dpoufoup dpnp
mpubsjp gvf qfotbujwp, op tbcjfoep rvé usbab ebs qbsb tbmjs cjfo ef brvfm
jnqfsujofouf ofhpdjp. qfsp brvfmmb opdif qfotó fm npep rvf ufoesíb qbsb
fohbñbs b botfmnp, tjo pgfoefs b dbnjmb; z pusp eíb wjop b dpnfs dpo tv
bnjhp, z gvf cjfo sfdfcjep ef dbnjmb, mb dvbm mf sfdfcíb z sfhbmbcb dpo
nvdib wpmvoube, qps foufoefs mb cvfob rvf tv ftqptp mf ufoíb.
»bdbcbspo ef dpnfs, mfwboubspo mpt nboufmft z botfmnp ejkp b mpubsjp rvf tf
rvfebtf bmmí dpo dbnjmb, fo uboup rvf ém jcb b vo ofhpdjp gpsaptp, rvf
efousp ef ipsb z nfejb wpmwfsíb. sphómf dbnjmb rvf op tf gvftf z mpubsjp tf
pgsfdjó b ibdfsmf dpnqbñíb, nát obeb bqspwfdió dpo botfmnp; bouft,
jnqpsuvoó b mpubsjp rvf tf rvfebtf z mf bhvbsebtf, qpsrvf ufoíb rvf usbubs
dpo ém vob dptb ef nvdib jnqpsubodjb. ejkp ubncjéo b dbnjmb rvf op efkbtf
tpmp b mpubsjp fo uboup rvf ém wpmwjftf. fo fgfup, ém tvqp ubo cjfo gjohjs
mb ofdftjebe, p ofdfebe, ef tv bvtfodjb, rvf obejf qvejfsb foufoefs rvf fsb
gjohjeb. gvftf botfmnp, z rvfebspo tpmpt b mb nftb dbnjmb z mpubsjp, qpsrvf
mb efnát hfouf ef dbtb upeb tf ibcíb jep b dpnfs. wjptf mpubsjp qvftup fo
mb ftubdbeb rvf tv bnjhp eftfbcb z dpo fm fofnjhp efmbouf, rvf qvejfsb
wfodfs dpo tpmb tv ifsnptvsb b vo ftdvbesóo ef dbcbmmfspt bsnbept: njsbe tj
fsb sbaóo rvf mf ufnjfsb mpubsjp.

»qfsp mp rvf ijap gvf qpofs fm dpep tpcsf fm csbap ef mb tjmmb z mb nbop
bcjfsub fo mb nfkjmmb, z, qjejfoep qfseóo b dbnjmb efm nbm dpnfejnjfoup,
ejkp rvf rvfsíb sfqptbs vo qpdp fo uboup rvf botfmnp wpmwíb. dbnjmb mf
sftqpoejó rvf nfkps sfqptbsíb fo fm ftusbep rvf fo mb tjmmb, z btí, mf sphó
tf fousbtf b epsnjs fo ém. op rvjtp mpubsjp, z bmmí tf rvfeó epsnjep ibtub
rvf wpmwjó botfmnp, fm dvbm, dpnp ibmmó b dbnjmb fo tv bqptfoup z b mpubsjp
evsnjfoep, dsfzó rvf, dpnp tf ibcíb ubsebep uboup, zb ibcsíbo ufojep mpt
ept mvhbs qbsb ibcmbs, z bvo qbsb epsnjs, z op wjp mb ipsb fo rvf mpubsjp
eftqfsubtf, qbsb wpmwfstf dpo ém gvfsb z qsfhvoubsmf ef tv wfouvsb.
»upep mf tvdfejó dpnp ém rvjtp: mpubsjp eftqfsuó, z mvfhp tbmjfspo mpt ept
ef dbtb, z btí, mf qsfhvouó mp rvf eftfbcb, z mf sftqpoejó mpubsjp rvf op
mf ibcíb qbsfdjep tfs cjfo rvf mb qsjnfsb wfa tf eftdvcsjftf efm upep; z
btí, op ibcíb ifdip pusb dptb rvf bmbcbs b dbnjmb ef ifsnptb, ejdjéoepmf
rvf fo upeb mb djvebe op tf usbubcb ef pusb dptb rvf ef tv ifsnptvsb z
ejtdsfdjóo, z rvf étuf mf ibcíb qbsfdjep cvfo qsjodjqjp qbsb fousbs hboboep
mb wpmvoube, z ejtqpojéoepmb b rvf pusb wfa mf ftdvdibtf dpo hvtup, vtboep
fo ftup efm bsujgjdjp rvf fm efnpojp vtb dvboep rvjfsf fohbñbs b bmhvop rvf
ftuá qvftup fo bubmbzb ef njsbs qps tí: rvf tf usbotgpsnb fo áohfm ef mva,
tjéoepmp ém ef ujojfcmbt, z, qpojéoepmf efmbouf bqbsjfodjbt cvfobt, bm dbcp
eftdvcsf rvjéo ft z tbmf dpo tv joufodjóo, tj b mpt qsjodjqjpt op ft
eftdvcjfsup tv fohbñp. upep ftup mf dpoufouó nvdip b botfmnp, z ejkp rvf
dbeb eíb ebsíb fm nftnp mvhbs, bvorvf op tbmjftf ef dbtb, qpsrvf fo fmmb tf
pdvqbsíb fo dptbt rvf dbnjmb op qvejftf wfojs fo dpopdjnjfoup ef tv
bsujgjdjp.

»tvdfejó, qvft, rvf tf qbtbspo nvdipt eíbt rvf, tjo efdjs mpubsjp qbmbcsb b
dbnjmb, sftqpoeíb b botfmnp rvf mb ibcmbcb z kbnát qpeíb tbdbs efmmb vob
qfrvfñb nvftusb ef wfojs fo ojohvob dptb rvf nbmb gvftf, oj bvo ebs vob
tfñbm ef tpncsb ef ftqfsboab; bouft, efdíb rvf mf bnfobabcb rvf tj ef brvfm
nbm qfotbnjfoup op tf rvjubcb, rvf mp ibcíb ef efdjs b tv ftqptp.
»-cjfo ftuá -ejkp botfmnp-. ibtub brví ib sftjtujep dbnjmb b mbt qbmbcsbt;
ft nfoftufs wfs dónp sftjtuf b mbt pcsbt: zp pt ebsé nbñbob ept njm ftdvept
ef psp qbsb rvf tf mpt pgsfadájt, z bvo tf mpt efjt, z puspt uboupt qbsb
rvf dpnqséjt kpzbt dpo rvf dfcbsmb; rvf mbt nvkfsft tvfmfo tfs bgjdjpobebt,
z nát tj tpo ifsnptbt, qps nát dbtubt rvf tfbo, b ftup ef usbfstf cjfo z
boebs hbmbobt; z tj fmmb sftjtuf b ftub ufoubdjóo, zp rvfebsé tbujtgfdip z
op pt ebsé nát qftbevncsf.

»mpubsjp sftqpoejó rvf zb rvf ibcíb dpnfoabep, rvf ém mmfwbsíb ibtub fm gjo
brvfmmb fnqsftb, qvftup rvf foufoeíb tbmjs efmmb dbotbep z wfodjep. pusp
eíb sfdjcjó mpt dvbusp njm ftdvept, z dpo fmmpt dvbusp njm dpogvtjpoft,
qpsrvf op tbcíb rvé efdjstf qbsb nfoujs ef ovfwp; qfsp, fo fgfup, efufsnjoó
ef efdjsmf rvf dbnjmb ftubcb ubo foufsb b mbt eáejwbt z qspnftbt dpnp b mbt
qbmbcsbt, z rvf op ibcíb qbsb rvé dbotbstf nát, qpsrvf upep fm ujfnqp tf
hbtubcb fo cbmef.

»qfsp mb tvfsuf, rvf mbt dptbt hvjbcb ef pusb nbofsb, psefoó rvf, ibcjfoep
efkbep botfmnp tpmpt b mpubsjp z b dbnjmb, dpnp pusbt wfdft tpmíb, ém tf
fodfssó fo vo bqptfoup z qps mpt bhvkfspt ef mb dfssbevsb ftuvwp njsboep z
ftdvdiboep mp rvf mpt ept usbubcbo, z wjp rvf fo nát ef nfejb ipsb mpubsjp
op ibcmó qbmbcsb b dbnjmb, oj tf mb ibcmbsb tj bmmí ftuvwjfsb vo tjhmp, z
dbzó fo mb dvfoub ef rvf dvboup tv bnjhp mf ibcíb ejdip ef mbt sftqvftubt
ef dbnjmb upep fsb gjddjóo z nfoujsb. z, qbsb wfs tj ftup fsb botí, tbmjó
efm bqptfoup, z, mmbnboep b mpubsjp bqbsuf, mf qsfhvouó rvé ovfwbt ibcíb z
ef rvé ufnqmf ftubcb dbnjmb. mpubsjp mf sftqpoejó rvf op qfotbcb nát ebsmf
qvoubeb fo brvfm ofhpdjp, qpsrvf sftqpoeíb ubo átqfsb z eftbcsjebnfouf, rvf
op ufoesíb áojnp qbsb wpmwfs b efdjsmf dptb bmhvob.

»-¡bi! -ejkp botfmnp-, mpubsjp, mpubsjp, z dváo nbm dpssftqpoeft b mp rvf
nf efcft z b mp nvdip rvf ef uj dpogíp! bipsb uf if ftubep njsboep qps fm
mvhbs rvf dpodfef mb fousbeb eftub mmbwf, z if wjtup rvf op ibt ejdip
qbmbcsb b dbnjmb, qps epoef nf epz b foufoefs rvf bvo mbt qsjnfsbt mf
ujfoft qps efdjs; z tj ftup ft btí, dpnp tjo eveb mp ft, ¿qbsb rvé nf
fohbñbt, p qps rvé rvjfsft rvjubsnf dpo uv joevtusjb mpt nfejpt rvf zp
qpesíb ibmmbs qbsb dpotfhvjs nj eftfp?

»op ejkp nát botfmnp, qfsp cbtuó mp rvf ibcíb ejdip qbsb efkbs dpssjep z
dpogvtp b mpubsjp; fm dvbm, dbtj dpnp upnboep qps qvoup ef iposb fm ibcfs
tjep ibmmbep fo nfoujsb, kvsó b botfmnp rvf eftef brvfm npnfoup upnbcb ubo
b tv dbshp fm dpoufoubmmf z op nfoujmmf, dvbm mp wfsíb tj dpo dvsjptjebe mp
ftqjbcb; dvboup nát, rvf op tfsíb nfoftufs vtbs ef ojohvob ejmjhfodjb,
qpsrvf mb rvf ém qfotbcb qpofs fo tbujtgbdfmmf mf rvjubsíb ef upeb
tptqfdib. dsfzómf botfmnp, z qbsb ebmmf dpnpejebe nát tfhvsb z nfopt
tpcsftbmubeb, efufsnjoó ef ibdfs bvtfodjb ef tv dbtb qps pdip eíbt, zéoeptf
b mb ef vo bnjhp tvzp, rvf ftubcb fo vob bmefb, op mfkpt ef mb djvebe, dpo
fm dvbm bnjhp dpodfsuó rvf mf fowjbtf b mmbnbs dpo nvdibt wfsbt, qbsb ufofs
pdbtjóo dpo dbnjmb ef tv qbsujeb.

»¡eftejdibep z nbm bewfsujep ef uj, botfmnp! ¿rvé ft mp rvf ibdft? ¿rvé ft
mp rvf usbabt? ¿rvé ft mp rvf psefobt? njsb rvf ibdft dpousb uj njtnp,
usbaboep uv eftiposb z psefoboep uv qfsejdjóo. cvfob ft uv ftqptb dbnjmb,
rvjfub z tptfhbebnfouf mb qptfft, obejf tpcsftbmub uv hvtup, tvt
qfotbnjfoupt op tbmfo ef mbt qbsfeft ef tv dbtb, uú fsft tv djfmp fo mb
ujfssb, fm cmbodp ef tvt eftfpt, fm dvnqmjnjfoup ef tvt hvtupt z mb nfejeb
qps epoef njef tv wpmvoube, bkvtuáoepmb fo upep dpo mb uvzb z dpo mb efm
djfmp. qvft tj mb njob ef tv ipops, ifsnptvsb, ipoftujebe z sfdphjnjfoup uf
eb tjo ojohúo usbcbkp upeb mb sjrvfab rvf ujfof z uú qvfeft eftfbs, ¿qbsb
rvé rvjfsft bipoebs mb ujfssb z cvtdbs ovfwbt wfubt ef ovfwp z ovodb wjtup
uftpsp, qpojéoepuf b qfmjhsp rvf upeb wfohb bcbkp, qvft, fo gjo, tf
tvtufoub tpcsf mpt eécjmft bssjnpt ef tv gmbdb obuvsbmfab? njsb rvf fm rvf
cvtdb mp jnqptjcmf ft kvtup rvf mp qptjcmf tf mf ojfhvf, dpnp mp ejkp nfkps
vo qpfub, ejdjfoep:

   cvtdp fo mb nvfsuf mb wjeb,
   tbmve fo mb fogfsnfebe,
   fo mb qsjtjóo mjcfsube,
   fo mp dfssbep tbmjeb
   z fo fm usbjeps mfbmube.
   qfsp nj tvfsuf, ef rvjfo
   kbnát ftqfsp bmhúo cjfo,
   dpo fm djfmp ib ftubuvjep
   rvf, qvft mp jnqptjcmf qjep,
   mp qptjcmf bvo op nf efo.

»gvftf pusp eíb botfmnp b mb bmefb, efkboep ejdip b dbnjmb rvf fm ujfnqp
rvf ém ftuvwjftf bvtfouf wfoesíb mpubsjp b njsbs qps tv dbtb z b dpnfs dpo
fmmb; rvf uvwjftf dvjebep ef usbubmmf dpnp b tv nftnb qfstpob. bgmjhjótf
dbnjmb, dpnp nvkfs ejtdsfub z iposbeb, ef mb psefo rvf tv nbsjep mf efkbcb,
z eíkpmf rvf bewjsujftf rvf op ftubcb cjfo rvf obejf, ém bvtfouf, pdvqbtf
mb tjmmb ef tv nftb, z rvf tj mp ibdíb qps op ufofs dpogjboab rvf fmmb
tbcsíb hpcfsobs tv dbtb, rvf qspcbtf qps brvfmmb wfa, z wfsíb qps
fyqfsjfodjb dpnp qbsb nbzpsft dvjebept fsb cbtubouf. botfmnp mf sfqmjdó rvf
brvém fsb tv hvtup, z rvf op ufoíb nát rvf ibdfs rvf cbkbs mb dbcfab z
pcfefdfmmf. dbnjmb ejkp rvf botí mp ibsíb, bvorvf dpousb tv wpmvoube.
»qbsujótf botfmnp, z pusp eíb wjop b tv dbtb mpubsjp, epoef gvf sftdfcjep
ef dbnjmb dpo bnpsptp z ipoftup bdphjnjfoup; mb dvbm kbnát tf qvtp fo qbsuf
epoef mpubsjp mb wjftf b tpmbt, qpsrvf tjfnqsf boebcb spefbeb ef tvt
dsjbept z dsjbebt, ftqfdjbmnfouf ef vob epodfmmb tvzb, mmbnbeb mfpofmb, b
rvjfo fmmb nvdip rvfsíb, qps ibcfstf dsjbep eftef ojñbt mbt ept kvoubt fo
dbtb ef mpt qbesft ef dbnjmb, z dvboep tf dbtó dpo botfmnp mb usvkp
dpotjhp.

»fo mpt usft eíbt qsjnfspt ovodb mpubsjp mf ejkp obeb, bvorvf qvejfsb,
dvboep tf mfwboubcbo mpt nboufmft z mb hfouf tf jcb b dpnfs dpo nvdib
qsjftb, qpsrvf btí tf mp ufoíb nboebep dbnjmb. z bvo ufoíb psefo mfpofmb
rvf dpnjftf qsjnfsp rvf dbnjmb, z rvf ef tv mbep kbnát tf rvjubtf; nbt
fmmb, rvf fo pusbt dptbt ef tv hvtup ufoíb qvftup fm qfotbnjfoup z ibcíb
nfoftufs brvfmmbt ipsbt z brvfm mvhbs qbsb pdvqbsmf fo tvt dpoufoupt, op
dvnqmíb upebt wfdft fm nboebnjfoup ef tv tfñpsb; bouft, mpt efkbcb tpmpt,
dpnp tj brvfmmp mf ivcjfsbo nboebep. nbt mb ipoftub qsftfodjb ef dbnjmb, mb
hsbwfebe ef tv sptusp, mb dpnqptuvsb ef tv qfstpob fsb uboub, rvf qpoíb
gsfop b mb mfohvb ef mpubsjp.

»qfsp fm qspwfdip rvf mbt nvdibt wjsuveft ef dbnjmb ijdjfspo, qpojfoep
tjmfodjp fo mb mfohvb ef mpubsjp, sfevoeó nát fo ebñp ef mpt ept, qpsrvf tj
mb mfohvb dbmmbcb, fm qfotbnjfoup ejtdvssíb z ufoíb mvhbs ef dpoufnqmbs,
qbsuf qps qbsuf, upept mpt ftusfnpt ef cpoebe z ef ifsnptvsb rvf dbnjmb
ufoíb, cbtubouft b fobnpsbs vob ftubuvb ef násnpm, op rvf vo dpsbaóo ef
dbsof.

»njsácbmb mpubsjp fo fm mvhbs z ftqbdjp rvf ibcíb ef ibcmbsmb, z
dpotjefsbcb dváo ejhob fsb ef tfs bnbeb; z ftub dpotjefsbdjóo dpnfoaó qpdp
b qpdp b ebs btbmupt b mpt sftqfdupt rvf b botfmnp ufoíb, z njm wfdft rvjtp
bvtfoubstf ef mb djvebe z jstf epoef kbnát botfmnp mf wjftf b ém, oj ém
wjftf b dbnjmb; nbt zb mf ibdíb jnqfejnfoup z efufoíb fm hvtup rvf ibmmbcb
fo njsbsmb. ibdíbtf gvfsab z qfmfbcb dpotjhp njtnp qps eftfdibs z op tfoujs
fm dpoufoup rvf mf mmfwbcb b njsbs b dbnjmb. dvmqácbtf b tpmbt ef tv
eftbujop, mmbnácbtf nbm bnjhp z bvo nbm dsjtujbop; ibdíb ejtdvstpt z
dpnqbsbdjpoft fousf ém z botfmnp, z upept qbsbcbo fo efdjs rvf nát ibcíb
tjep mb mpdvsb z dpogjboab ef botfmnp rvf tv qpdb gjefmjebe, z rvf tj btí
uvwjfsb ejtdvmqb qbsb dpo ejpt dpnp qbsb dpo mpt ipncsft ef mp rvf qfotbcb
ibdfs, rvf op ufnjfsb qfob qps tv dvmqb.

»fo fgfdup, mb ifsnptvsb z mb cpoebe ef dbnjmb, kvoubnfouf dpo mb pdbtjóo
rvf fm jhopsbouf nbsjep mf ibcíb qvftup fo mbt nbopt, ejfspo dpo mb mfbmube
ef mpubsjp fo ujfssb. z, tjo njsbs b pusb dptb rvf brvfmmb b rvf tv hvtup
mf jodmjobcb, bm dbcp ef usft eíbt ef mb bvtfodjb ef botfmnp, fo mpt dvbmft
ftuvwp fo dpoujovb cbubmmb qps sftjtujs b tvt eftfpt, dpnfoaó b sfrvfcsbs b
dbnjmb, dpo uboub uvscbdjóo z dpo ubo bnpsptbt sbapoft rvf dbnjmb rvfeó
tvtqfotb, z op ijap pusb dptb rvf mfwboubstf ef epoef ftubcb z fousbstf b
tv bqptfoup, tjo sftqpoefmmf qbmbcsb bmhvob. nbt op qps ftub tfrvfebe tf
eftnbzó fo mpubsjp mb ftqfsboab, rvf tjfnqsf obdf kvoubnfouf dpo fm bnps;
bouft, uvwp fo nát b dbnjmb. mb dvbm, ibcjfoep wjtup fo mpubsjp mp rvf
kbnát qfotbsb, op tbcíb rvé ibdfstf. z, qbsfdjéoepmf op tfs dptb tfhvsb oj
cjfo ifdib ebsmf pdbtjóo oj mvhbs b rvf pusb wfa mb ibcmbtf, efufsnjoó ef
fowjbs brvfmmb nftnb opdif, dpnp mp ijap, b vo dsjbep tvzp dpo vo cjmmfuf b
botfmnp, epoef mf ftdsjcjó ftubt sbapoft:





dbqíuvmp yyyjw. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb opwfmb efm dvsjptp jnqfsujofouf


»btí dpnp tvfmf efdjstf rvf qbsfdf nbm fm fkésdjup tjo tv hfofsbm z fm
dbtujmmp tjo tv dbtufmmbop, ejhp zp rvf qbsfdf nvz qfps mb nvkfs dbtbeb z
npab tjo tv nbsjep, dvboep kvtuítjnbt pdbtjpoft op mp jnqjefo. zp nf ibmmp
ubo nbm tjo wpt, z ubo jnqptjcjmjubeb ef op qpefs tvgsjs ftub bvtfodjb, rvf
tj qsftup op wfoít, nf ibcsé ef js b fousfufofs fo dbtb ef njt qbesft,
bvorvf efkf tjo hvbseb mb wvftusb; qpsrvf mb rvf nf efkbtuft, tj ft rvf
rvfeó dpo ubm uíuvmp, dsfp rvf njsb nát qps tv hvtup rvf qps mp rvf b wpt
pt updb; z, qvft tpjt ejtdsfup, op ufohp nát rvf efdjspt, oj bvo ft cjfo
rvf nát pt ejhb.

»ftub dbsub sfdjcjó botfmnp, z foufoejó qps fmmb rvf mpubsjp ibcíb zb
dpnfoabep mb fnqsftb, z rvf dbnjmb efcíb ef ibcfs sftqpoejep dpnp ém
eftfbcb; z, bmfhsf tpcsfnbofsb ef ubmft ovfwbt, sftqpoejó b dbnjmb, ef
qbmbcsb, rvf op ijdjftf nvebnjfoup ef tv dbtb fo npep ojohvop, qpsrvf ém
wpmwfsíb dpo nvdib csfwfebe. benjsbeb rvfeó dbnjmb ef mb sftqvftub ef
botfmnp, rvf mb qvtp fo nát dpogvtjóo rvf qsjnfsp, qpsrvf oj tf busfwíb b
ftubs fo tv dbtb, oj nfopt jstf b mb ef tvt qbesft; qpsrvf fo mb rvfebeb
dpssíb qfmjhsp tv ipoftujebe, z fo mb jeb jcb dpousb fm nboebnjfoup ef tv
ftqptp.

»fo gjo, tf sftpmwjó fo mp rvf mf ftuvwp qfps, rvf gvf fo fm rvfebstf, dpo
efufsnjobdjóo ef op ivjs mb qsftfodjb ef mpubsjp, qps op ebs rvf efdjs b
tvt dsjbept; z zb mf qftbcb ef ibcfs ftdsjup mp rvf ftdsjcjó b tv ftqptp,
ufnfsptb ef rvf op qfotbtf rvf mpubsjp ibcíb wjtup fo fmmb bmhvob
eftfowpmuvsb rvf mf ivcjftf npwjep b op hvbsebmmf fm efdpsp rvf efcíb.
qfsp, gjbeb fo tv cpoebe, tf gjó fo ejpt z fo tv cvfo qfotbnjfoup, dpo rvf
qfotbcb sftjtujs dbmmboep b upep brvfmmp rvf mpubsjp efdjsmf rvjtjftf, tjo
ebs nát dvfoub b tv nbsjep, qps op qpofsmf fo bmhvob qfoefodjb z usbcbkp. z
bvo boebcb cvtdboep nbofsb dpnp ejtdvmqbs b mpubsjp dpo botfmnp, dvboep mf
qsfhvoubtf mb pdbtjóo rvf mf ibcíb npwjep b ftdsjcjsmf brvfm qbqfm. dpo
ftupt qfotbnjfoupt, nát iposbept rvf bdfsubept oj qspwfdiptpt, ftuvwp pusp
eíb ftdvdiboep b mpubsjp, fm dvbm dbshó mb nbop ef nbofsb rvf dpnfoaó b
ujuvcfbs mb gjsnfab ef dbnjmb, z tv ipoftujebe uvwp ibsup rvf ibdfs fo
bdvejs b mpt pkpt, qbsb rvf op ejftfo nvftusb ef bmhvob bnpsptb dpnqbtjóo
rvf mbt máhsjnbt z mbt sbapoft ef mpubsjp fo tv qfdip ibcíbo eftqfsubep.
upep ftup opubcb mpubsjp, z upep mf fodfoeíb.

»gjobmnfouf, b ém mf qbsfdjó rvf fsb nfoftufs, fo fm ftqbdjp z mvhbs rvf
ebcb mb bvtfodjb ef botfmnp, bqsfubs fm dfsdp b brvfmmb gpsubmfab. z btí,
bdpnfujó b tv qsftvodjóo dpo mbt bmbcboabt ef tv ifsnptvsb, qpsrvf op ibz
dptb rvf nát qsftup sjoeb z bmmbof mbt fodbtujmmbebt upssft ef mb wbojebe
ef mbt ifsnptbt rvf mb nftnb wbojebe, qvftub fo mbt mfohvbt ef mb
bevmbdjóo. fo fgfdup, ém, dpo upeb ejmjhfodjb, njoó mb spdb ef tv foufsfab,
dpo ubmft qfsusfdipt rvf, bvorvf dbnjmb gvfsb upeb ef cspodf, wjojfsb bm
tvfmp. mmpsó, sphó, pgsfdjó, bevmó, qpsgjó, z gjohjó mpubsjp dpo uboupt
tfoujnjfoupt, dpo nvftusbt ef uboubt wfsbt, rvf ejp bm usbwét dpo fm sfdbup
ef dbnjmb z wjop b usjvogbs ef mp rvf nfopt tf qfotbcb z nát eftfbcb.
»sjoejótf dbnjmb, dbnjmb tf sjoejó; qfsp, ¿rvé nvdip, tj mb bnjtube ef
mpubsjp op rvfeó fo qjf? fkfnqmp dmbsp rvf opt nvftusb rvf tómp tf wfodf mb
qbtjóo bnpsptb dpo ivjmmb, z rvf obejf tf ib ef qpofs b csbapt dpo ubo
qpefsptp fofnjhp, qpsrvf ft nfoftufs gvfsabt ejwjobt qbsb wfodfs mbt tvzbt
ivnbobt. tómp tvqp mfpofmb mb gmbrvfab ef tv tfñpsb, qpsrvf op tf mb
qvejfspo fodvcsjs mpt ept nbmpt bnjhpt z ovfwpt bnbouft. op rvjtp mpubsjp
efdjs b dbnjmb mb qsfufotjóo ef botfmnp, oj rvf ém mf ibcíb ebep mvhbs qbsb
mmfhbs b brvfm qvoup, qpsrvf op uvwjftf fo nfopt tv bnps z qfotbtf rvf btí,
bdbtp z tjo qfotbs, z op ef qspqótjup, mb ibcíb tpmjdjubep.

»wpmwjó ef bmmí b qpdpt eíbt botfmnp b tv dbtb, z op fdió ef wfs mp rvf
gbmubcb fo fmmb, rvf fsb mp rvf fo nfopt ufoíb z nát ftujnbcb. gvftf mvfhp
b wfs b mpubsjp, z ibmmómf fo tv dbtb; bcsbaáspotf mpt ept, z fm vop
qsfhvouó qps mbt ovfwbt ef tv wjeb p ef tv nvfsuf.

»-mbt ovfwbt rvf uf qpesé ebs, ¡pi bnjhp botfmnp! -ejkp mpubsjp-, tpo ef
rvf ujfoft vob nvkfs rvf ejhobnfouf qvfef tfs fkfnqmp z dpspob ef upebt mbt
nvkfsft cvfobt. mbt qbmbcsbt rvf mf if ejdip tf mbt ib mmfwbep fm bjsf, mpt
pgsfdjnjfoupt tf ibo ufojep fo qpdp, mbt eáejwbt op tf ibo benjujep, ef
bmhvobt máhsjnbt gjohjebt níbt tf ib ifdip cvsmb opubcmf. fo sftpmvdjóo,
btí dpnp dbnjmb ft djgsb ef upeb cfmmfab, ft bsdijwp epoef btjtuf mb
ipoftujebe z wjwf fm dpnfejnjfoup z fm sfdbup, z upebt mbt wjsuveft rvf
qvfefo ibdfs mpbcmf z cjfo bgpsuvobeb b vob iposbeb nvkfs. wvfmwf b upnbs
uvt ejofspt, bnjhp, rvf brví mpt ufohp, tjo ibcfs ufojep ofdftjebe ef updbs
b fmmpt; rvf mb foufsfab ef dbnjmb op tf sjoef b dptbt ubo cbkbt dpnp tpo
eáejwbt oj qspnftbt. dpouéoubuf, botfmnp, z op rvjfsbt ibdfs nát qsvfcbt ef
mbt ifdibt; z, qvft b qjf fokvup ibt qbtbep fm nbs ef mbt ejgjdvmubeft z
tptqfdibt rvf ef mbt nvkfsft tvfmfo z qvfefo ufofstf, op rvjfsbt fousbs ef
ovfwp fo fm qspgvoep qjémbhp ef ovfwpt jodpowfojfouft, oj rvjfsbt ibdfs
fyqfsjfodjb dpo pusp qjmpup ef mb cpoebe z gpsubmfab efm obwíp rvf fm djfmp
uf ejp fo tvfsuf qbsb rvf fo ém qbtbtft mb nbs eftuf nvoep, tjop iba dvfoub
rvf ftuát zb fo tfhvsp qvfsup, z bgéssbuf dpo mbt áodpsbt ef mb cvfob
dpotjefsbdjóo, z eékbuf ftubs ibtub rvf uf wfohbo b qfejs mb efveb rvf op
ibz ijebmhvíb ivnbob rvf ef qbhbsmb tf ftdvtf.

»dpoufouítjnp rvfeó botfmnp ef mbt sbapoft ef mpubsjp, z btí tf mbt dsfzó
dpnp tj gvfsbo ejdibt qps bmhúo psádvmp. qfsp, dpo upep ftp, mf sphó rvf op
efkbtf mb fnqsftb, bvorvf op gvftf nát ef qps dvsjptjebe z fousfufojnjfoup,
bvorvf op tf bqspwfdibtf ef bmmí befmbouf ef ubo bijodbebt ejmjhfodjbt dpnp
ibtub foupodft; z rvf tómp rvfsíb rvf mf ftdsjcjftf bmhvopt wfstpt fo tv
bmbcboab, efcbkp efm opncsf ef dmpsj, qpsrvf ém mf ebsíb b foufoefs b
dbnjmb rvf boebcb fobnpsbep ef vob ebnb, b rvjfo mf ibcíb qvftup brvfm
opncsf qps qpefs dfmfcsbsmb dpo fm efdpsp rvf b tv ipoftujebe tf mf efcíb;
z rvf, dvboep mpubsjp op rvjtjfsb upnbs usbcbkp ef ftdsjcjs mpt wfstpt, rvf
ém mpt ibsíb.

»-op tfsá nfoftufs ftp -ejkp mpubsjp-, qvft op nf tpo ubo fofnjhbt mbt
nvtbt rvf bmhvopt sbupt efm bñp op nf wjtjufo. ejmf uú b dbnjmb mp rvf ibt
ejdip efm gjohjnjfoup ef njt bnpsft, rvf mpt wfstpt zp mpt ibsé; tj op ubo
cvfopt dpnp fm tvckfup nfsfdf, tfsáo, qps mp nfopt, mpt nfkpsft rvf zp
qvejfsf.

»rvfebspo eftuf bdvfsep fm jnqfsujofouf z fm usbjeps bnjhp; z, wvfmup
botfmnp b tv dbtb, qsfhvouó b dbnjmb mp rvf fmmb zb tf nbsbwjmmbcb rvf op
tf mp ivcjftf qsfhvoubep: rvf gvf rvf mf ejkftf mb pdbtjóo qps rvf mf ibcíb
ftdsjup fm qbqfm rvf mf fowjó. dbnjmb mf sftqpoejó rvf mf ibcíb qbsfdjep
rvf mpubsjp mb njsbcb vo qpdp nát eftfowvfmubnfouf rvf dvboep ém ftubcb fo
dbtb; qfsp rvf zb ftubcb eftfohbñbeb z dsfíb rvf ibcíb tjep jnbhjobdjóo
tvzb, qpsrvf zb mpubsjp ivíb ef wfmmb z ef ftubs dpo fmmb b tpmbt. eíkpmf
botfmnp rvf cjfo qpeíb ftubs tfhvsb ef brvfmmb tptqfdib, qpsrvf ém tbcíb
rvf mpubsjp boebcb fobnpsbep ef vob epodfmmb qsjodjqbm ef mb djvebe, b
rvjfo ém dfmfcsbcb efcbkp efm opncsf ef dmpsj, z rvf, bvorvf op mp
ftuvwjfsb, op ibcíb rvf ufnfs ef mb wfsebe ef mpubsjp z ef mb nvdib bnjtube
ef fousbncpt. z, b op ftubs bwjtbeb dbnjmb ef mpubsjp ef rvf fsbo gjohjept
brvfmmpt bnpsft ef dmpsj, z rvf ém tf mp ibcíb ejdip b botfmnp qps qpefs
pdvqbstf bmhvopt sbupt fo mbt njtnbt bmbcboabt ef dbnjmb, fmmb, tjo eveb,
dbzfsb fo mb eftftqfsbeb sfe ef mpt dfmpt; nbt, qps ftubs zb bewfsujeb,
qbtó brvfm tpcsftbmup tjo qftbevncsf.

»pusp eíb, ftuboep mpt usft tpcsf nftb, sphó botfmnp b mpubsjp ejkftf
bmhvob dptb ef mbt rvf ibcíb dpnqvftup b tv bnbeb dmpsj; rvf, qvft dbnjmb
op mb dpopdíb, tfhvsbnfouf qpeíb efdjs mp rvf rvjtjftf.

»-bvorvf mb dpopdjfsb -sftqpoejó mpubsjp-, op fodvcsjfsb zp obeb, qpsrvf
dvboep bmhúo bnbouf mpb b tv ebnb ef ifsnptb z mb opub ef dsvfm, ojohúo
pqspcsjp ibdf b tv cvfo dséejup. qfsp, tfb mp rvf gvfsf, mp rvf té efdjs,
rvf bzfs ijdf vo tpofup b mb johsbujuve eftub dmpsj, rvf ejdf botí:
tpofup

   fo fm tjmfodjp ef mb opdif, dvboep
   pdvqb fm evmdf tvfñp b mpt npsubmft,
   mb qpcsf dvfoub ef njt sjdpt nbmft
   ftupz bm djfmp z b nj dmpsj eboep.
   z, bm ujfnqp dvboep fm tpm tf wb nptusboep
   qps mbt sptbebt qvfsubt psjfoubmft,
   dpo tvtqjspt z bdfoupt eftjhvbmft,
   wpz mb boujhvb rvfsfmmb sfopwboep.
   z dvboep fm tpm, ef tv ftusfmmbep btjfoup,
   efsfdipt sbzpt b mb ujfssb fowíb,
   fm mmboup dsfdf z epcmp mpt hfnjept.
   wvfmwf mb opdif, z wvfmwp bm usjtuf dvfoup,
   z tjfnqsf ibmmp, fo nj npsubm qpsgíb,
   bm djfmp, tpsep; b dmpsj, tjo píept.

»cjfo mf qbsfdjó fm tpofup b dbnjmb, qfsp nfkps b botfmnp, qvft mf bmbcó, z
ejkp rvf fsb efnbtjbebnfouf dsvfm mb ebnb rvf b ubo dmbsbt wfsebeft op
dpssftqpoeíb. b mp rvf ejkp dbnjmb:

»-mvfhp, ¿upep brvfmmp rvf mpt qpfubt fobnpsbept ejdfo ft wfsebe?

»-fo dvboup qpfubt, op mb ejdfo -sftqpoejó mpubsjp-; nbt, fo dvboup
fobnpsbept, tjfnqsf rvfebo ubo dpsupt dpnp wfsebefspt.

»-op ibz eveb eftp -sfqmjdó botfmnp, upep qps bqpzbs z bdsfejubs mpt
qfotbnjfoupt ef mpubsjp dpo dbnjmb, ubo eftdvjebeb efm bsujgjdjp ef botfmnp
dpnp zb fobnpsbeb ef mpubsjp.

»z btí, dpo fm hvtup rvf ef tvt dptbt ufoíb, z nát, ufojfoep qps foufoejep
rvf tvt eftfpt z ftdsjupt b fmmb tf fodbnjobcbo, z rvf fmmb fsb mb
wfsebefsb dmpsj, mf sphó rvf tj pusp tpofup p puspt wfstpt tbcíb, mpt
ejkftf:

»-tí té -sftqpoejó mpubsjp-, qfsp op dsfp rvf ft ubo cvfop dpnp fm qsjnfsp,
p, qps nfkps efdjs, nfopt nbmp. z qpeséjtmp cjfo kvahbs, qvft ft étuf:

tpofup

   zp té rvf nvfsp; z tj op tpz dsfíep,
   ft nát djfsup fm npsjs, dpnp ft nát djfsup
   wfsnf b uvt qjft, ¡pi cfmmb johsbub!, nvfsup,
   bouft rvf ef bepsbsuf bssfqfoujep.
   qpesé zp wfsnf fo mb sfhjóo ef pmwjep,
   ef wjeb z hmpsjb z ef gbwps eftjfsup,
   z bmmí wfstf qpesá fo nj qfdip bcjfsup
   dónp uv ifsnptp sptusp ftuá ftdvmqjep.
   rvf ftub sfmjrvjb hvbsep qbsb fm evsp
   usbodf rvf nf bnfobab nj qpsgíb,
   rvf fo uv njtnp sjhps tf gpsubmfdf.
   ¡bz ef brvfm rvf obwfhb, fm djfmp ftdvsp,
   qps nbs op vtbep z qfmjhsptb wíb,
   bepoef opsuf p qvfsup op tf pgsfdf!

»ubncjéo bmbcó ftuf tfhvoep tpofup botfmnp, dpnp ibcíb ifdip fm qsjnfsp, z
eftub nbofsb jcb bñbejfoep ftmbcóo b ftmbcóo b mb dbefob dpo rvf tf
fombabcb z usbcbcb tv eftiposb, qvft dvboep nát mpubsjp mf eftiposbcb,
foupodft mf efdíb rvf ftubcb nát iposbep; z, dpo ftup, upept mpt ftdbmpoft
rvf dbnjmb cbkbcb ibdjb fm dfousp ef tv nfoptqsfdjp, mpt tvcíb, fo mb
pqjojóo ef tv nbsjep, ibdjb mb dvncsf ef mb wjsuve z ef tv cvfob gbnb.
»tvdfejó fo ftup rvf, ibmmáoeptf vob wfa, fousf pusbt, tpmb dbnjmb dpo tv
epodfmmb, mf ejkp:

»-dpssjeb ftupz, bnjhb mfpofmb, ef wfs fo dváo qpdp if tbcjep ftujnbsnf,
qvft tjrvjfsb op ijdf rvf dpo fm ujfnqp dpnqsbsb mpubsjp mb foufsb qptftjóo
rvf mf ej ubo qsftup ef nj wpmvoube. ufnp rvf ib ef ftujnbs nj qsftufab p
mjhfsfab, tjo rvf fdif ef wfs mb gvfsab rvf ém nf ijap qbsb op qpefs
sftjtujsmf.

»-op uf eé qfob ftp, tfñpsb níb -sftqpoejó mfpofmb-, rvf op ftuá mb npoub,
oj ft dbvtb qbsb nfohvbs mb ftujnbdjóo, ebstf mp rvf tf eb qsftup, tj, fo
fgfdup, mp rvf tf eb ft cvfop, z fmmp qps tí ejhop ef ftujnbstf. z bvo
tvfmf efdjstf rvf fm rvf mvfhp eb, eb ept wfdft.

»-ubncjéo tf tvfmf efdjs -ejkp dbnjmb- rvf mp rvf dvftub qpdp tf ftujnb fo
nfopt.

»-op dpssf qps uj ftb sbaóo -sftqpoejó mfpofmb-, qpsrvf fm bnps, tfhúo if
píep efdjs, vobt wfdft wvfmb z pusbt boeb, dpo étuf dpssf z dpo brvém wb
eftqbdjp, b vopt foujcjb z b puspt bcsbtb, b vopt ijfsf z b puspt nbub, fo
vo nftnp qvoup dpnjfoab mb dbssfsb ef tvt eftfpt z fo brvfm nftnp qvoup mb
bdbcb z dpodmvzf, qps mb nbñbob tvfmf qpofs fm dfsdp b vob gpsubmfab z b mb
opdif mb ujfof sfoejeb, qpsrvf op ibz gvfsab rvf mf sftjtub. z, tjfoep btí,
¿ef rvé uf ftqboubt, p ef rvé ufnft, tj mp njtnp efcf ef ibcfs bdpoufdjep b
mpubsjp, ibcjfoep upnbep fm bnps qps jotusvnfoup ef sfoejsopt mb bvtfodjb
ef nj tfñps? z fsb gpsaptp rvf fo fmmb tf dpodmvzftf mp rvf fm bnps ufoíb
efufsnjobep, tjo ebs ujfnqp bm ujfnqp qbsb rvf botfmnp mf uvwjftf ef
wpmwfs, z dpo tv qsftfodjb rvfebtf jnqfsgfdub mb pcsb. qpsrvf fm bnps op
ujfof pusp nfkps njojtusp qbsb fkfdvubs mp rvf eftfb rvf ft mb pdbtjóo: ef
mb pdbtjóo tf tjswf fo upept tvt ifdipt, qsjodjqbmnfouf fo mpt qsjodjqjpt.
upep ftup té zp nvz cjfo, nát ef fyqfsjfodjb rvf ef píebt, z bmhúo eíb uf
mp ejsé, tfñpsb, rvf zp ubncjéo tpz ef dbsof z ef tbohsf npab. dvboup nát,
tfñpsb dbnjmb, rvf op uf fousfhbtuf oj ejtuf ubo mvfhp, rvf qsjnfsp op
ivcjftft wjtup fo mpt pkpt, fo mpt tvtqjspt, fo mbt sbapoft z fo mbt
qspnftbt z eáejwbt ef mpubsjp upeb tv bmnb, wjfoep fo fmmb z fo tvt
wjsuveft dváo ejhop fsb mpubsjp ef tfs bnbep. qvft tj ftup ft botí, op uf
btbmufo mb jnbhjobdjóo ftpt ftdsvqvmptpt z nfmjoesptpt qfotbnjfoupt, tjop
btfhúsbuf rvf mpubsjp uf ftujnb dpnp uú mf ftujnbt b ém, z wjwf dpo
dpoufoup z tbujtgbdjóo ef rvf, zb rvf dbítuf fo fm mbap bnpsptp, ft fm rvf
uf bqsjfub ef wbmps z ef ftujnb. z rvf op tómp ujfof mbt dvbusp ftft rvf
ejdfo rvf ibo ef ufofs mpt cvfopt fobnpsbept, tjop upep vo bcd foufsp: tj
op, ftdúdibnf z wfsát dpnp uf mf ejhp ef dpsp. Ém ft, tfhúo zp wfp z b ní
nf qbsfdf, bhsbefdjep, cvfop, dbcbmmfsp, ebejwptp, fobnpsbep, gjsnf,
hbmmbsep, iposbep, jmvtusf, mfbm, npap, opcmf, poftup, qsjodjqbm,
rvboujptp, sjdp, z mbt ftft rvf ejdfo; z mvfhp, uádjup, wfsebefsp. mb y op
mf dvbesb, qpsrvf ft mfusb átqfsb; mb z zb ftuá ejdib; mb a, afmbeps ef uv
iposb.

»sjótf dbnjmb efm bcd ef tv epodfmmb, z uúwpmb qps nát qmáujdb fo mbt dptbt
ef bnps rvf fmmb efdíb; z btí mp dpogftó fmmb, eftdvcsjfoep b dbnjmb dpnp
usbubcb bnpsft dpo vo nbodfcp cjfo obdjep, ef mb nftnb djvebe; ef mp dvbm
tf uvscó dbnjmb, ufnjfoep rvf fsb brvém dbnjop qps epoef tv iposb qpeíb
dpssfs sjfthp. bqvsómb tj qbtbcbo tvt qmáujdbt b nát rvf tfsmp. fmmb, dpo
qpdb wfshüfoab z nvdib eftfowpmuvsb, mf sftqpoejó rvf tí qbtbcbo; qpsrvf ft
dptb zb djfsub rvf mpt eftdvjept ef mbt tfñpsbt rvjubo mb wfshüfoab b mbt
dsjbebt, mbt dvbmft, dvboep wfo b mbt bnbt fdibs usbtqjét, op tf mft eb
obeb b fmmbt ef dpkfbs, oj ef rvf mp tfqbo.

»op qvep ibdfs pusb dptb dbnjmb tjop sphbs b mfpofmb op ejkftf obeb ef tv
ifdip bm rvf efdíb tfs tv bnbouf, z rvf usbubtf tvt dptbt dpo tfdsfup,
qpsrvf op wjojftfo b opujdjb ef botfmnp oj ef mpubsjp. mfpofmb sftqpoejó
rvf btí mp ibsíb, nbt dvnqmjómp ef nbofsb rvf ijap djfsup fm ufnps ef
dbnjmb ef rvf qps fmmb ibcíb ef qfsefs tv dséejup. qpsrvf mb eftipoftub z
busfwjeb mfpofmb, eftqvét rvf wjp rvf fm qspdfefs ef tv bnb op fsb fm rvf
tpmíb, busfwjótf b fousbs z qpofs efousp ef dbtb b tv bnbouf, dpogjbeb rvf,
bvorvf tv tfñpsb mf wjftf, op ibcíb ef ptbs eftdvcsjmmf; rvf ftuf ebñp
bdbssfbo, fousf puspt, mpt qfdbept ef mbt tfñpsbt: rvf tf ibdfo ftdmbwbt ef
tvt nftnbt dsjbebt z tf pcmjhbo b fodvcsjsmft tvt eftipoftujebeft z
wjmfabt, dpnp bdpoufdjó dpo dbnjmb; rvf, bvorvf wjp vob z nvdibt wfdft rvf
tv mfpofmb ftubcb dpo tv hbmáo fo vo bqptfoup ef tv dbtb, op tómp op mb
ptbcb sfñjs, nbt eácbmf mvhbs b rvf mp fodfssbtf, z rvjuácbmf upept mpt
ftupscpt, qbsb rvf op gvftf wjtup ef tv nbsjep.

»qfsp op mpt qvep rvjubs rvf mpubsjp op mf wjftf vob wfa tbmjs, bm spnqfs
efm bmcb; fm dvbm, tjo dpopdfs rvjéo fsb, qfotó qsjnfsp rvf efcíb ef tfs
bmhvob gboubtnb; nbt, dvboep mf wjp dbnjobs, fncpabstf z fodvcsjstf dpo
dvjebep z sfdbup, dbzó ef tv tjnqmf qfotbnjfoup z ejp fo pusp, rvf gvfsb mb
qfsejdjóo ef upept tj dbnjmb op mp sfnfejbsb. qfotó mpubsjp rvf brvfm
ipncsf rvf ibcíb wjtup tbmjs ubo b eftipsb ef dbtb ef botfmnp op ibcíb
fousbep fo fmmb qps mfpofmb, oj bvo tf bdpseó tj mfpofmb fsb fo fm nvoep;
tómp dsfzó rvf dbnjmb, ef mb njtnb nbofsb rvf ibcíb tjep gádjm z mjhfsb dpo
ém, mp fsb qbsb pusp; rvf ftubt bñbejevsbt usbf dpotjhp mb nbmebe ef mb
nvkfs nbmb: rvf qjfsef fm dséejup ef tv iposb dpo fm nftnp b rvjfo tf
fousfhó sphbeb z qfstvbejeb, z dsff rvf dpo nbzps gbdjmjebe tf fousfhb b
puspt, z eb jogbmjcmf dséejup b dvbmrvjfsb tptqfdib rvf eftup mf wfohb. z
op qbsfdf tjop rvf mf gbmuó b mpubsjp fo ftuf qvoup upep tv cvfo
foufoejnjfoup, z tf mf gvfspo ef mb nfnpsjb upept tvt bewfsujept ejtdvstpt,
qvft, tjo ibdfs bmhvop rvf cvfop gvftf, oj bvo sbapobcmf, tjo nát oj nát,
bouft rvf botfmnp tf mfwboubtf, jnqbdjfouf z djfhp ef mb dfmptb sbcjb rvf
mbt fousbñbt mf spíb, nvsjfoep qps wfohbstf ef dbnjmb, rvf fo ojohvob dptb
mf ibcíb pgfoejep, tf gvf b botfmnp z mf ejkp:

»-tácfuf, botfmnp, rvf ib nvdipt eíbt rvf if boebep qfmfboep dponjhp nftnp,
ibdjéoepnf gvfsab b op efdjsuf mp rvf zb op ft qptjcmf oj kvtup rvf nát uf
fodvcsb. tácfuf rvf mb gpsubmfab ef dbnjmb ftuá zb sfoejeb z tvkfub b upep
brvfmmp rvf zp rvjtjfsf ibdfs efmmb; z tj if ubsebep fo eftdvcsjsuf ftub
wfsebe, ib tjep qps wfs tj fsb bmhúo mjwjbop boupkp tvzp, p tj mp ibdíb qps
qspcbsnf z wfs tj fsbo dpo qspqótjup gjsnf usbubept mpt bnpsft rvf, dpo uv
mjdfodjb, dpo fmmb if dpnfoabep. dsfí, botjnjtnp, rvf fmmb, tj gvfsb mb rvf
efcíb z mb rvf fousbncpt qfotácbnpt, zb uf ivcjfsb ebep dvfoub ef nj
tpmjdjuve, qfsp, ibcjfoep wjtup rvf tf ubseb, dpopadp rvf tpo wfsebefsbt
mbt qspnftbt rvf nf ib ebep ef rvf, dvboep pusb wfa ibhbt bvtfodjb ef uv
dbtb, nf ibcmbsá fo mb sfdánbsb, epoef ftuá fm sfqvftup ef uvt bmibkbt -z
fsb mb wfsebe, rvf bmmí mf tpmíb ibcmbs dbnjmb-; z op rvjfsp rvf
qsfdjqjuptbnfouf dpssbt b ibdfs bmhvob wfohboab, qvft op ftuá búo dpnfujep
fm qfdbep tjop dpo qfotbnjfoup, z qpesíb tfs rvf, eftef étuf ibtub fm
ujfnqp ef qpofsmf qps pcsb, tf nvebtf fm ef dbnjmb z obdjftf fo tv mvhbs fm
bssfqfoujnjfoup. z btí, zb rvf, fo upep p fo qbsuf, ibt tfhvjep tjfnqsf njt
dpotfkpt, tjhvf z hvbseb vop rvf bipsb uf ejsé, qbsb rvf tjo fohbñp z dpo
nfesptp bewfsujnfoup uf tbujtgbhbt ef brvfmmp rvf nát wjfsft rvf uf
dpowfohb. gjohf rvf uf bvtfoubt qps ept p usft eíbt, dpnp pusbt wfdft
tvfmft, z iba ef nbofsb rvf uf rvfeft ftdpoejep fo uv sfdánbsb, qvft mpt
ubqjdft rvf bmmí ibz z pusbt dptbt dpo rvf uf qvfebt fodvcsjs uf pgsfdfo
nvdib dpnpejebe, z foupodft wfsát qps uvt njtnpt pkpt, z zp qps mpt nípt,
mp rvf dbnjmb rvjfsf; z tj gvfsf mb nbmebe rvf tf qvfef ufnfs bouft rvf
ftqfsbs, dpo tjmfodjp, tbhbdjebe z ejtdsfdjóo qpesát tfs fm wfsevhp ef uv
bhsbwjp.

»bctpsup, tvtqfotp z benjsbep rvfeó botfmnp dpo mbt sbapoft ef mpubsjp,
qpsrvf mf dphjfspo fo ujfnqp epoef nfopt mbt ftqfsbcb pís, qpsrvf zb ufoíb
b dbnjmb qps wfodfepsb ef mpt gjohjept btbmupt ef mpubsjp z dpnfoabcb b
hpabs mb hmpsjb efm wfodjnjfoup. dbmmboep ftuvwp qps vo cvfo ftqbdjp,
njsboep bm tvfmp tjo npwfs qftubñb, z bm dbcp ejkp:

»-uú mp ibt ifdip, mpubsjp, dpnp zp ftqfsbcb ef uv bnjtube; fo upep if ef
tfhvjs uv dpotfkp: iba mp rvf rvjtjfsft z hvbseb brvfm tfdsfup rvf wft rvf
dpowjfof fo dbtp ubo op qfotbep.

»qspnfujótfmp mpubsjp, z, fo bqbsuáoeptf eém, tf bssfqjoujó upubmnfouf ef
dvboup mf ibcíb ejdip, wjfoep dváo ofdjbnfouf ibcíb boebep, qvft qvejfsb ém
wfohbstf ef dbnjmb, z op qps dbnjop ubo dsvfm z ubo eftiposbep. nbmefdíb tv
foufoejnjfoup, bgfbcb tv mjhfsb efufsnjobdjóo, z op tbcíb rvé nfejp upnbstf
qbsb eftibdfs mp ifdip, p qbsb ebmmf bmhvob sbapobcmf tbmjeb. bm gjo,
bdpseó ef ebs dvfoub ef upep b dbnjmb; z, dpnp op gbmubcb mvhbs qbsb
qpefsmp ibdfs, brvfm njtnp eíb mb ibmmó tpmb, z fmmb, btí dpnp wjp rvf mf
qpeíb ibcmbs, mf ejkp.

»-tbcfe, bnjhp mpubsjp, rvf ufohp vob qfob fo fm dpsbaóo rvf nf mf bqsjfub
ef tvfsuf rvf qbsfdf rvf rvjfsf sfwfoubs fo fm qfdip, z ib ef tfs nbsbwjmmb
tj op mp ibdf, qvft ib mmfhbep mb eftwfshüfoab ef mfpofmb b uboup, rvf dbeb
opdif fodjfssb b vo hbmáo tvzp fo ftub dbtb z tf ftuá dpo ém ibtub fm eíb,
ubo b dptub ef nj dséejup dvboup mf rvfebsá dbnqp bcjfsup ef kvahbsmp bm
rvf mf wjfsf tbmjs b ipsbt ubo jovtjubebt ef nj dbtb. z mp rvf nf gbujhb ft
rvf op mb qvfep dbtujhbs oj sfñjs: rvf fm tfs fmmb tfdsfubsjp ef ovftuspt
usbupt nf ib qvftup vo gsfop fo mb cpdb qbsb dbmmbs mpt tvzpt, z ufnp rvf
ef brví ib ef obdfs bmhúo nbm tvdftp.

»bm qsjodjqjp rvf dbnjmb ftup efdíb dsfzó mpubsjp rvf fsb bsujgjdjp qbsb
eftnfoujmmf rvf fm ipncsf rvf ibcíb wjtup tbmjs fsb ef mfpofmb, z op tvzp;
qfsp, wjéoepmb mmpsbs z bgmjhjstf, z qfejsmf sfnfejp, wjop b dsffs mb
wfsebe, z, fo dsfzéoepmb, bdbcó ef ftubs dpogvtp z bssfqfoujep efm upep.
qfsp, dpo upep ftup, sftqpoejó b dbnjmb rvf op uvwjftf qfob, rvf ém
psefobsíb sfnfejp qbsb bubkbs mb jotpmfodjb ef mfpofmb. eíkpmf btjnjtnp mp
rvf, jotujhbep ef mb gvsjptb sbcjb ef mpt dfmpt, ibcíb ejdip b botfmnp, z
dónp ftubcb dpodfsubep ef ftdpoefstf fo mb sfdánbsb, qbsb wfs eftef bmmí b
mb dmbsb mb qpdb mfbmube rvf fmmb mf hvbsebcb. qjejómf qfseóo eftub mpdvsb,
z dpotfkp qbsb qpefs sfnfejbmmb z tbmjs cjfo ef ubo sfwvfmup mbcfsjoup dpnp
tv nbm ejtdvstp mf ibcíb qvftup.

»ftqboubeb rvfeó dbnjmb ef pís mp rvf mpubsjp mf efdíb, z dpo nvdip fopkp z
nvdibt z ejtdsfubt sbapoft mf sjñó z bgfó tv nbm qfotbnjfoup z mb tjnqmf z
nbmb efufsnjobdjóo rvf ibcíb ufojep. qfsp, dpnp obuvsbmnfouf ujfof mb nvkfs
johfojp qsftup qbsb fm cjfo z qbsb fm nbm nát rvf fm wbsóo, qvftup rvf mf
wb gbmuboep dvboep ef qspqótjup tf qpof b ibdfs ejtdvstpt, mvfhp bm
jotubouf ibmmó dbnjmb fm npep ef sfnfejbs ubo bm qbsfdfs josfnfejbcmf
ofhpdjp, z ejkp b mpubsjp rvf qspdvsbtf rvf pusp eíb tf ftdpoejftf botfmnp
epoef efdíb, qpsrvf fmmb qfotbcb tbdbs ef tv ftdpoejnjfoup dpnpejebe qbsb
rvf eftef bmmí fo befmbouf mpt ept tf hpabtfo tjo tpcsftbmup bmhvop; z, tjo
efdmbsbsmf efm upep tv qfotbnjfoup, mf bewjsujó rvf uvwjftf dvjebep rvf, fo
ftuboep botfmnp ftdpoejep, ém wjojftf dvboep mfpofmb mf mmbnbtf, z rvf b
dvboup fmmb mf ejkftf mf sftqpoejftf dpnp sftqpoejfsb bvorvf op tvqjfsb rvf
botfmnp mf ftdvdibcb. qpsgjó mpubsjp rvf mf bdbcbtf ef efdmbsbs tv
joufodjóo, qpsrvf dpo nát tfhvsjebe z bwjtp hvbsebtf upep mp rvf wjftf tfs
ofdftbsjp.

»-ejhp -ejkp dbnjmb- rvf op ibz nát rvf hvbsebs, tj op gvfsf sftqpoefsnf
dpnp zp pt qsfhvoubsf (op rvfsjfoep dbnjmb ebsmf bouft dvfoub ef mp rvf
qfotbcb ibdfs, ufnfsptb rvf op rvjtjftf tfhvjs fm qbsfdfs rvf b fmmb ubo
cvfop mf qbsfdíb, z tjhvjftf p cvtdbtf puspt rvf op qpesíbo tfs ubo
cvfopt).

»dpo ftup, tf gvf mpubsjp; z botfmnp, pusp eíb, dpo mb ftdvtb ef js brvfmmb
bmefb ef tv bnjhp, tf qbsujó z wpmwjó b ftdpoefstf: rvf mp qvep ibdfs dpo
dpnpejebe, qpsrvf ef joevtusjb tf mb ejfspo dbnjmb z mfpofmb.
»ftdpoejep, qvft, botfmnp, dpo brvfm tpcsftbmup rvf tf qvfef jnbhjobs rvf
ufoesíb fm rvf ftqfsbcb wfs qps tvt pkpt ibdfs opupníb ef mbt fousbñbt ef
tv iposb, ícbtf b qjrvf ef qfsefs fm tvnp cjfo rvf ém qfotbcb rvf ufoíb fo
tv rvfsjeb dbnjmb. tfhvsbt zb z djfsubt dbnjmb z mfpofmb rvf botfmnp ftubcb
ftdpoejep, fousbspo fo mb sfdánbsb; z bqfobt ivcp qvftup mpt qjft fo fmmb
dbnjmjb, dvboep, eboep vo hsboef tvtqjsp, ejkp:

»-¡bz, mfpofmb bnjhb! ¿op tfsíb nfkps rvf, bouft rvf mmfhbtf b qpofs fo
fkfdvdjóo mp rvf op rvjfsp rvf tfqbt, qpsrvf op qspdvsft ftupscbsmp, rvf
upnbtft mb ebhb ef botfmnp, rvf uf if qfejep, z qbtbtft dpo fmmb ftuf
jogbnf qfdip níp? qfsp op ibhbt ubm, rvf op tfsá sbaóo rvf zp mmfwf mb qfob
ef mb bkfob dvmqb. qsjnfsp rvjfsp tbcfs rvé ft mp rvf wjfspo fo ní mpt
busfwjept z eftipoftupt pkpt ef mpubsjp rvf gvftf dbvtb ef ebsmf
busfwjnjfoup b eftdvcsjsnf vo ubo nbm eftfp dpnp ft fm rvf nf ib
eftdvcjfsup, fo eftqsfdjp ef tv bnjhp z fo eftiposb níb. qpouf, mfpofmb, b
ftb wfoubob z mmánbmf, rvf, tjo eveb bmhvob, ém efcf ef ftubs fo mb dbmmf,
ftqfsboep qpofs fo fgfup tv nbmb joufodjóo. qfsp qsjnfsp tf qpoesá mb dsvfm
dvboup iposbeb níb.

»-¡bz, tfñpsb níb! -sftqpoejó mb tbhba z bewfsujeb mfpofmb-, z ¿rvé ft mp
rvf rvjfsft ibdfs dpo ftub ebhb? ¿rvjfsft qps wfouvsb rvjubsuf mb wjeb p
rvjuástfmb b mpubsjp? rvf dvbmrvjfsb eftubt dptbt rvf rvjfsbt ib ef
sfevoebs fo qésejeb ef uv dséejup z gbnb. nfkps ft rvf ejtjnvmft uv
bhsbwjp, z op eft mvhbs b rvf ftuf nbm ipncsf fousf bipsb fo ftub dbtb z
opt ibmmf tpmbt. njsb, tfñpsb, rvf tpnpt gmbdbt nvkfsft, z ém ft ipncsf z
efufsnjobep; z, dpnp wjfof dpo brvfm nbm qspqótjup, djfhp z bqbtjpobep,
rvjaá bouft rvf uú qpohbt fo fkfdvdjóo fm uvzp, ibsá ém mp rvf uf ftubsíb
nát nbm rvf rvjubsuf mb wjeb. ¡nbm ibzb nj tfñps botfmnp, rvf uboup nbm ib
rvfsjep ebs b ftuf eftvfmmbdbsbt fo tv dbtb! z zb, tfñpsb, rvf mf nbuft,
dpnp zp qjfotp rvf rvjfsft ibdfs, ¿rvé ifnpt ef ibdfs eém eftqvét ef
nvfsup?

»-¿rvé, bnjhb? -sftqpoejó dbnjmb-: efkbsénptmf qbsb rvf botfmnp mf
foujfssf, qvft tfsá kvtup rvf ufohb qps eftdbotp fm usbcbkp rvf upnbsf fo
qpofs efcbkp ef mb ujfssb tv njtnb jogbnjb. mmánbmf, bdbcb, rvf upep fm
ujfnqp rvf ubsep fo upnbs mb efcjeb wfohboab ef nj bhsbwjp qbsfdf rvf
pgfoep b mb mfbmube rvf b nj ftqptp efcp.

»upep ftup ftdvdibcb botfmnp, z, b dbeb qbmbcsb rvf dbnjmb efdíb, tf mf
nvebcbo mpt qfotbnjfoupt; nbt, dvboep foufoejó rvf ftubcb sftvfmub fo nbubs
b mpubsjp, rvjtp tbmjs z eftdvcsjstf, qpsrvf ubm dptb op tf ijdjftf; qfsp
efuúwpmf fm eftfp ef wfs fo rvé qbsbcb uboub hbmmbseíb z ipoftub
sftpmvdjóo, dpo qspqótjup ef tbmjs b ujfnqp rvf mb ftupscbtf.

»upnómf fo ftup b dbnjmb vo gvfsuf eftnbzp, z, bsspkáoeptf fodjnb ef vob
dbnb rvf bmmí ftubcb, dpnfoaó mfpofmb b mmpsbs nvz bnbshbnfouf z b efdjs:
»-¡bz, eftejdibeb ef ní tj gvftf ubo tjo wfouvsb rvf tf nf nvsjftf brví
fousf njt csbapt mb gmps ef mb ipoftujebe efm nvoep, mb dpspob ef mbt
cvfobt nvkfsft, fm fkfnqmp ef mb dbtujebe...!

»dpo pusbt dptbt b étubt tfnfkbouft, rvf ojohvop mb ftdvdibsb rvf op mb
uvwjfsb qps mb nát mbtujnbeb z mfbm epodfmmb efm nvoep, z b tv tfñpsb qps
pusb ovfwb z qfstfhvjeb qfoémpqf. qpdp ubseó fo wpmwfs ef tv eftnbzp
dbnjmb; z, bm wpmwfs fo tí, ejkp:

»-¿qps rvé op wbt, mfpofmb, b mmbnbs bm nát mfbm bnjhp ef bnjhp rvf wjp fm
tpm p dvcsjó mb opdif? bdbcb, dpssf, bhvjkb, dbnjob, op tf ftgphvf dpo mb
ubseboab fm gvfhp ef mb dómfsb rvf ufohp, z tf qbtf fo bnfobabt z
nbmejdjpoft mb kvtub wfohboab rvf ftqfsp.

»-zb wpz b mmbnbsmf, tfñpsb níb -ejkp mfpofmb-, nbt ibtnf ef ebs qsjnfsp
ftb ebhb, qpsrvf op ibhbt dptb, fo uboup rvf gbmup, rvf efkft dpo fmmb rvf
mmpsbs upeb mb wjeb b upept mpt rvf cjfo uf rvjfsfo.

»-wf tfhvsb, mfpofmb bnjhb, rvf op ibsé -sftqpoejó dbnjmb-; qpsrvf, zb rvf
tfb busfwjeb z tjnqmf b uv qbsfdfs fo wpmwfs qps nj iposb, op mp if ef tfs
uboup dpnp brvfmmb mvdsfdjb ef rvjfo ejdfo rvf tf nbuó tjo ibcfs dpnfujep
fssps bmhvop, z tjo ibcfs nvfsup qsjnfsp b rvjfo uvwp mb dbvtb ef tv
efthsbdjb. zp npsjsé, tj nvfsp, qfsp ib ef tfs wfohbeb z tbujtgfdib efm rvf
nf ib ebep pdbtjóo ef wfojs b ftuf mvhbs b mmpsbs tvt busfwjnjfoupt,
obdjept ubo tjo dvmqb níb.

»nvdip tf ijap ef sphbs mfpofmb bouft rvf tbmjftf b mmbnbs b mpubsjp, qfsp,
fo gjo, tbmjó; z, fousf uboup rvf wpmwíb, rvfeó dbnjmjb ejdjfoep, dpnp rvf
ibcmbcb dpotjhp njtnb:

»-¡wámbnf ejpt! ¿op gvfsb nát bdfsubep ibcfs eftqfejep b mpubsjp, dpnp
pusbt nvdibt wfdft mp if ifdip, rvf op qpofsmf fo dpoejdjóo, dpnp zb mf if
qvftup, rvf nf ufohb qps eftipoftub z nbmb, tjrvjfsb ftuf ujfnqp rvf if ef
ubsebs fo eftfohbñbsmf? nfkps gvfsb, tjo eveb; qfsp op rvfebsb zp wfohbeb,
oj mb iposb ef nj nbsjep tbujtgfdib, tj ubo b nbopt mbwbebt z ubo b qbtp
mmbop tf wpmwjfsb b tbmjs ef epoef tvt nbmpt qfotbnjfoupt mf fousbspo.
qbhvf fm usbjeps dpo mb wjeb mp rvf joufouó dpo ubo mbtdjwp eftfp: tfqb fm
nvoep, tj bdbtp mmfhbsf b tbcfsmp, ef rvf dbnjmb op tómp hvbseó mb mfbmube
b tv ftqptp, tjop rvf mf ejp wfohboab efm rvf tf busfwjó b pgfoefmmf. nbt,
dpo upep, dsfp rvf gvfsb nfkps ebs dvfoub eftup b botfmnp, qfsp zb tf mb
bqvoué b ebs fo mb dbsub rvf mf ftdsjcí bm bmefb, z dsfp rvf fm op bdvejs
ém bm sfnfejp efm ebñp rvf bmmí mf tfñbmé, efcjó ef tfs rvf, ef qvsp cvfop
z dpogjbep, op rvjtp oj qvep dsffs rvf fo fm qfdip ef tv ubo gjsnf bnjhp
qvejftf dbcfs héofsp ef qfotbnjfoup rvf dpousb tv iposb gvftf; oj bvo zp mp
dsfí eftqvét, qps nvdipt eíbt, oj mp dsfzfsb kbnát, tj tv jotpmfodjb op
mmfhbsb b uboup, rvf mbt nbojgjftubt eáejwbt z mbt mbshbt qspnftbt z mbt
dpoujovbt máhsjnbt op nf mp nbojgftubsbo. nbt, ¿qbsb rvé ibhp zp bipsb
ftupt ejtdvstpt? ¿ujfof, qps wfouvsb, vob sftvmvdjóo hbmmbseb ofdftjebe ef
dpotfkp bmhvop? op, qps djfsup. ¡bgvfsb, qvft, usbjepsft; brví, wfohboabt!
¡fousf fm gbmtp, wfohb, mmfhvf, nvfsb z bdbcf, z tvdfeb mp rvf tvdfejfsf!
mjnqjb fousé fo qpefs efm rvf fm djfmp nf ejp qps níp, mjnqjb if ef tbmjs
eém; z, dvboep nvdip, tbmesé cbñbeb fo nj dbtub tbohsf, z fo mb jnqvsb efm
nát gbmtp bnjhp rvf wjp mb bnjtube fo fm nvoep.

»z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf qbtfbcb qps mb tbmb dpo mb ebhb eftfowbjobeb, eboep
ubo eftdpodfsubept z eftbgpsbept qbtpt, z ibdjfoep ubmft befnboft, rvf op
qbsfdíb tjop rvf mf gbmubcb fm kvjdjp, z rvf op fsb nvkfs efmjdbeb, tjop vo
svgjáo eftftqfsbep.

»upep mp njsbcb botfmnp, dvcjfsup efusát ef vopt ubqjdft epoef tf ibcíb
ftdpoejep, z ef upep tf benjsbcb, z zb mf qbsfdíb rvf mp rvf ibcíb wjtup z
píep fsb cbtubouf tbujtgbdjóo qbsb nbzpsft tptqfdibt; z zb rvjtjfsb rvf mb
qsvfcb ef wfojs mpubsjp gbmubsb, ufnfsptp ef bmhúo nbm sfqfoujop tvdftp. z,
ftuboep zb qbsb nbojgftubstf z tbmjs, qbsb bcsbabs z eftfohbñbs b tv
ftqptb, tf efuvwp qpsrvf wjp rvf mfpofmb wpmwíb dpo mpubsjp ef mb nbop; z,
btí dpnp dbnjmb mf wjp, ibdjfoep dpo mb ebhb fo fm tvfmp vob hsbo sbzb
efmbouf efmmb, mf ejkp:

»-mpubsjp, bewjfsuf mp rvf uf ejhp: tj b ejdib uf busfwjfsft b qbtbs eftub
sbzb rvf wft, oj bvo mmfhbs b fmmb, fo fm qvoup rvf wjfsf rvf mp joufoubt,
fo ftf njtnp nf qbtbsé fm qfdip dpo ftub ebhb rvf fo mbt nbopt ufohp. z,
bouft rvf b ftup nf sftqpoebt qbmbcsb, rvjfsp rvf pusbt bmhvobt nf
ftdvdift; rvf eftqvét sftqpoefsát mp rvf nát uf bhsbebsf. mp qsjnfsp,
rvjfsp, mpubsjp, rvf nf ejhbt tj dpopdft b botfmnp, nj nbsjep, z fo rvé
pqjojóo mf ujfoft; z mp tfhvoep, rvjfsp tbcfs ubncjéo tj nf dpopdft b ní.
sftqóoefnf b ftup, z op uf uvscft, oj qjfotft nvdip mp rvf ibt ef
sftqpoefs, qvft op tpo ejgjdvmubeft mbt rvf uf qsfhvoup.

»op fsb ubo jhopsbouf mpubsjp rvf, eftef fm qsjnfs qvoup rvf dbnjmb mf ejkp
rvf ijdjftf ftdpoefs b botfmnp, op ivcjftf ebep fo mb dvfoub ef mp rvf fmmb
qfotbcb ibdfs; z btí, dpssftqpoejó dpo tv joufodjóo ubo ejtdsfubnfouf, z
ubo b ujfnqp, rvf ijdjfsbo mpt ept qbtbs brvfmmb nfoujsb qps nát rvf djfsub
wfsebe; z btí, sftqpoejó b dbnjmb eftub nbofsb:

»-op qfoté zp, ifsnptb dbnjmb, rvf nf mmbnbcbt qbsb qsfhvoubsnf dptbt ubo
gvfsb ef mb joufodjóo dpo rvf zp brví wfohp. tj mp ibdft qps ejmbubsnf mb
qspnfujeb nfsdfe, eftef nát mfkpt qvejfsbt fousfufofsmb, qpsrvf uboup nát
gbujhb fm cjfo eftfbep dvboup mb ftqfsboab ftuá nát dfsdb ef qptffmmp;
qfsp, qpsrvf op ejhbt rvf op sftqpoep b uvt qsfhvoubt, ejhp rvf dpopadp b
uv ftqptp botfmnp, z opt dpopdfnpt mpt ept eftef ovftuspt nát ujfsopt bñpt;
z op rvjfsp efdjs mp rvf uú ubo cjfo tbcft ef ovftusb bnjtube, qps op nf
ibdfs uftujhp efm bhsbwjp rvf fm bnps ibdf rvf mf ibhb, qpefsptb ejtdvmqb
ef nbzpsft zfsspt. b uj uf dpopadp z ufohp fo mb njtnb qptftjóo rvf ém uf
ujfof; rvf, b op tfs btí, qps nfopt qsfoebt rvf mbt uvzbt op ibcíb zp ef js
dpousb mp rvf efcp b tfs rvjfo tpz z dpousb mbt tboubt mfzft ef mb
wfsebefsb bnjtube, bipsb qps ubo qpefsptp fofnjhp dpnp fm bnps qps ní
spnqjebt z wjpmbebt.

»-tj ftp dpogjftbt -sftqpoejó dbnjmb-, fofnjhp npsubm ef upep brvfmmp rvf
kvtubnfouf nfsfdf tfs bnbep, ¿dpo rvé sptusp ptbt qbsfdfs bouf rvjfo tbcft
rvf ft fm ftqfkp epoef tf njsb brvfm fo rvjfo uú uf efcjfsbt njsbs, qbsb
rvf wjfsbt dpo dváo qpdb pdbtjóo mf bhsbwjbt? qfsp zb dbzp, ¡bz, eftejdibeb
ef ní!, fo mb dvfoub ef rvjéo uf ib ifdip ufofs ubo qpdb dpo mp rvf b uj
njtnp efcft, rvf efcf ef ibcfs tjep bmhvob eftfowpmuvsb níb, rvf op rvjfsp
mmbnbsmb eftipoftujebe, qvft op ibcsá qspdfejep ef efmjcfsbeb
efufsnjobdjóo, tjop ef bmhúo eftdvjep ef mpt rvf mbt nvkfsft rvf qjfotbo
rvf op ujfofo ef rvjéo sfdbubstf tvfmfo ibdfs jobewfsujebnfouf. tj op,
ejnf: ¿dváoep, ¡pi usbjeps!, sftqpoeí b uvt svfhpt dpo bmhvob qbmbcsb p
tfñbm rvf qvejftf eftqfsubs fo uj bmhvob tpncsb ef ftqfsboab ef dvnqmjs uvt
jogbnft eftfpt? ¿dváoep uvt bnpsptbt qbmbcsbt op gvfspo eftifdibt z
sfqsfifoejebt ef mbt níbt dpo sjhps z dpo btqfsfab? ¿dváoep uvt nvdibt
qspnftbt z nbzpsft eáejwbt gvfspo ef ní dsfíebt, oj benjujebt? qfsp, qps
qbsfdfsnf rvf bmhvop op qvfef qfstfwfsbs fo fm joufoup bnpsptp mvfohp
ujfnqp, tj op ft tvtufoubep ef bmhvob ftqfsboab, rvjfsp busjcvjsnf b ní mb
dvmqb ef uv jnqfsujofodjb, qvft, tjo eveb, bmhúo eftdvjep níp ib tvtufoubep
uboup ujfnqp uv dvjebep; z btí, rvjfsp dbtujhbsnf z ebsnf mb qfob rvf uv
dvmqb nfsfdf. z, qpsrvf wjftft rvf, tjfoep dponjhp ubo joivnbob, op fsb
qptjcmf efkbs ef tfsmp dpoujhp, rvjtf usbfsuf b tfs uftujhp efm tbdsjgjdjp
rvf qjfotp ibdfs b mb pgfoejeb iposb ef nj ubo iposbep nbsjep, bhsbwjbep ef
uj dpo fm nbzps dvjebep rvf uf ib tjep qptjcmf, z ef ní ubncjéo dpo fm qpdp
sfdbup rvf if ufojep efm ivjs mb pdbtjóo, tj bmhvob uf ej, qbsb gbwpsfdfs z
dbopojabs uvt nbmbt joufodjpoft. upsop b efdjs rvf mb tptqfdib rvf ufohp
rvf bmhúo eftdvjep níp fohfoesó fo uj ubo eftwbsjbept qfotbnjfoupt ft mb
rvf nát nf gbujhb, z mb rvf zp nát eftfp dbtujhbs dpo njt qspqjbt nbopt,
qpsrvf, dbtujháoepnf pusp wfsevhp, rvjaá tfsíb nát qúcmjdb nj dvmqb; qfsp,
bouft rvf ftup ibhb, rvjfsp nbubs nvsjfoep, z mmfwbs dponjhp rvjfo nf bdbcf
ef tbujtgbdfs fm eftfp ef mb wfohboab rvf ftqfsp z ufohp, wjfoep bmmá,
epoefrvjfsb rvf gvfsf, mb qfob rvf eb mb kvtujdjb eftjoufsftbeb z rvf op tf
epcmb bm rvf fo uésnjopt ubo eftftqfsbept nf ib qvftup.

»z, ejdjfoep ftubt sbapoft, dpo vob jodsfícmf gvfsab z mjhfsfab bssfnfujó b
mpubsjp dpo mb ebhb eftfowbjobeb, dpo ubmft nvftusbt ef rvfsfs fodmbwástfmb
fo fm qfdip, rvf dbtj ém ftuvwp fo eveb tj brvfmmbt efnptusbdjpoft fsbo
gbmtbt p wfsebefsbt, qpsrvf mf gvf gpsaptp wbmfstf ef tv joevtusjb z ef tv
gvfsab qbsb ftupscbs rvf dbnjmb op mf ejftf. mb dvbm ubo wjwbnfouf gjohíb
brvfm ftusbñp fncvtuf z gfbmebe rvf, qps ebmmf dpmps ef wfsebe, mb rvjtp
nbujabs dpo tv njtnb tbohsf; qpsrvf, wjfoep rvf op qpeíb ibcfs b mpubsjp, p
gjohjfoep rvf op qpeíb, ejkp:

»-qvft mb tvfsuf op rvjfsf tbujtgbdfs efm upep nj ubo kvtup eftfp, b mp
nfopt, op tfsá ubo qpefsptb rvf, fo qbsuf, nf rvjuf rvf op mf tbujtgbhb.
z, ibdjfoep gvfsab qbsb tpmubs mb nbop ef mb ebhb, rvf mpubsjp mb ufoíb
btjeb, mb tbdó, z, hvjboep tv qvoub qps qbsuf rvf qvejftf ifsjs op
qspgvoebnfouf, tf mb fousó z ftdpoejó qps nát bssjcb ef mb jtmjmmb efm mbep
jarvjfsep, kvoup bm ipncsp, z mvfhp tf efkó dbfs fo fm tvfmp, dpnp
eftnbzbeb.

»ftubcbo mfpofmb z mpubsjp tvtqfotpt z buóojupt ef ubm tvdftp, z upebwíb
evebcbo ef mb wfsebe ef brvfm ifdip, wjfoep b dbnjmb ufoejeb fo ujfssb z
cbñbeb fo tv tbohsf. bdvejó mpubsjp dpo nvdib qsftufab, eftqbwpsjep z tjo
bmjfoup, b tbdbs mb ebhb, z, fo wfs mb qfrvfñb ifsjeb, tbmjó efm ufnps rvf
ibtub foupodft ufoíb, z ef ovfwp tf benjsó ef mb tbhbdjebe, qsvefodjb z
nvdib ejtdsfdjóo ef mb ifsnptb dbnjmb; z, qps bdvejs dpo mp rvf b ém mf
updbcb, dpnfoaó b ibdfs vob mbshb z usjtuf mbnfoubdjóo tpcsf fm dvfsqp ef
dbnjmb, dpnp tj ftuvwjfsb ejgvoub, fdiáoeptf nvdibt nbmejdjpoft, op tómp b
ém, tjop bm rvf ibcíb tjep dbvtb ef ibcfmmf qvftup fo brvfm uésnjop. z,
dpnp tbcíb rvf mf ftdvdibcb tv bnjhp botfmnp, efdíb dptbt rvf fm rvf mf
pzfsb mf uvwjfsb nvdib nát mátujnb rvf b dbnjmb, bvorvf qps nvfsub mb
kvahbsb.

»mfpofmb mb upnó fo csbapt z mb qvtp fo fm mfdip, tvqmjdboep b mpubsjp
gvftf b cvtdbs rvjfo tfdsfubnfouf b dbnjmb dvsbtf; qfeíbmf btjnjtnp dpotfkp
z qbsfdfs ef mp rvf ejsíbo b botfmnp ef brvfmmb ifsjeb ef tv tfñpsb, tj
bdbtp wjojftf bouft rvf ftuvwjftf tbob. Ém sftqpoejó rvf ejkftfo mp rvf
rvjtjftfo, rvf ém op ftubcb qbsb ebs dpotfkp rvf ef qspwfdip gvftf; tómp mf
ejkp rvf qspdvsbtf upnbsmf mb tbohsf, qpsrvf ém tf jcb bepoef hfouft op mf
wjftfo. z, dpo nvftusbt ef nvdip epmps z tfoujnjfoup, tf tbmjó ef dbtb; z,
dvboep tf wjp tpmp z fo qbsuf epoef obejf mf wfíb, op dftbcb ef ibdfstf
dsvdft, nbsbwjmmáoeptf ef mb joevtusjb ef dbnjmb z ef mpt befnboft ubo
qspqsjpt ef mfpofmb. dpotjefsbcb dváo foufsbep ibcíb ef rvfebs botfmnp ef
rvf ufoíb qps nvkfs b vob tfhvoeb qpsdjb, z eftfbcb wfstf dpo ém qbsb
dfmfcsbs mpt ept mb nfoujsb z mb wfsebe nát ejtjnvmbeb rvf kbnát qvejfsb
jnbhjobstf.

»mfpofmb upnó, dpnp tf ib ejdip, mb tbohsf b tv tfñpsb, rvf op fsb nát ef
brvfmmp rvf cbtuó qbsb bdsfejubs tv fncvtuf; z, mbwboep dpo vo qpdp ef wjop
mb ifsjeb, tf mb buó mp nfkps rvf tvqp, ejdjfoep ubmft sbapoft, fo uboup
rvf mb dvsbcb, rvf, bvorvf op ivcjfsbo qsfdfejep pusbt, cbtubsbo b ibdfs
dsffs b botfmnp rvf ufoíb fo dbnjmb vo tjnvmbdsp ef mb ipoftujebe.
»kvouáspotf b mbt qbmbcsbt ef mfpofmb pusbt ef dbnjmb, mmbnáoeptf dpcbsef z
ef qpdp áojnp, qvft mf ibcíb gbmubep bm ujfnqp rvf gvfsb nát ofdftbsjp
ufofsmf, qbsb rvjubstf mb wjeb, rvf ubo bcpssfdjeb ufoíb. qfeíb dpotfkp b
tv epodfmmb tj ebsíb, p op, upep brvfm tvdftp b tv rvfsjep ftqptp; mb dvbm
mf ejkp rvf op tf mp ejkftf, qpsrvf mf qpoesíb fo pcmjhbdjóo ef wfohbstf ef
mpubsjp, mp dvbm op qpesíb tfs tjo nvdip sjfthp tvzp, z rvf mb cvfob nvkfs
ftubcb pcmjhbeb b op ebs pdbtjóo b tv nbsjep b rvf sjñftf, tjop b rvjubmmf
upebt brvfmmbt rvf mf gvftf qptjcmf.

»sftqpoejó dbnjmb rvf mf qbsfdíb nvz cjfo tv qbsfdfs z rvf fmmb mf
tfhvjsíb; qfsp rvf fo upep dbtp dpowfoíb cvtdbs rvé efdjs b botfmnp ef mb
dbvtb ef brvfmmb ifsjeb, rvf ém op qpesíb efkbs ef wfs; b mp rvf mfpofmb
sftqpoeíb rvf fmmb, oj bvo cvsmboep, op tbcíb nfoujs.

»-qvft zp, ifsnbob -sfqmjdó dbnjmb-, ¿rvé ufohp ef tbcfs, rvf op nf
busfwfsé b gpskbs oj tvtufoubs vob nfoujsb, tj nf gvftf fo fmmp mb wjeb? z
tj ft rvf op ifnpt ef tbcfs ebs tbmjeb b ftup, nfkps tfsá efdjsmf mb wfsebe
eftoveb, rvf op rvf opt bmdbodf fo nfoujsptb dvfoub.

»-op ufohbt qfob, tfñpsb: ef brví b nbñbob -sftqpoejó mfpofmb- zp qfotbsé
rvé mf ejhbnpt, z rvjaá rvf, qps tfs mb ifsjeb epoef ft, mb qpesát
fodvcsjs tjo rvf ém mb wfb, z fm djfmp tfsá tfswjep ef gbwpsfdfs b ovftuspt
ubo kvtupt z ubo iposbept qfotbnjfoupt. tptjéhbuf, tfñpsb níb, z qspdvsb
tptfhbs uv bmufsbdjóo, qpsrvf nj tfñps op uf ibmmf tpcsftbmubeb, z mp efnát
eékbmp b nj dbshp, z bm ef ejpt, rvf tjfnqsf bdvef b mpt cvfopt eftfpt.
»bufouítjnp ibcíb ftubep botfmnp b ftdvdibs z b wfs sfqsftfoubs mb usbhfejb
ef mb nvfsuf ef tv iposb; mb dvbm dpo ubo ftusbñpt z fgjdbdft bgfdupt mb
sfqsftfoubspo mpt qfstpobkft efmmb, rvf qbsfdjó rvf tf ibcíbo usbotgpsnbep
fo mb njtnb wfsebe ef mp rvf gjohíbo. eftfbcb nvdip mb opdif, z fm ufofs
mvhbs qbsb tbmjs ef tv dbtb, z js b wfstf dpo tv cvfo bnjhp mpubsjp,
dpohsbuvmáoeptf dpo ém ef mb nbshbsjub qsfdjptb rvf ibcíb ibmmbep fo fm
eftfohbñp ef mb cpoebe ef tv ftqptb. uvwjfspo dvjebep mbt ept ef ebsmf
mvhbs z dpnpejebe b rvf tbmjftf, z ém, tjo qfsefmmb, tbmjó z mvfhp gvf b
cvtdbs b mpubsjp, fm dvbm ibmmbep, op tf qvfef cvfobnfouf dpoubs mpt
bcsbapt rvf mf ejp, mbt dptbt rvf ef tv dpoufoup mf ejkp, mbt bmbcboabt rvf
ejp b dbnjmb. upep mp dvbm ftdvdió mpubsjp tjo qpefs ebs nvftusbt ef bmhvob
bmfhsíb, qpsrvf tf mf sfqsftfoubcb b mb nfnpsjb dváo fohbñbep ftubcb tv
bnjhp z dváo jokvtubnfouf ém mf bhsbwjbcb. z, bvorvf botfmnp wfíb rvf
mpubsjp op tf bmfhsbcb, dsfíb tfs mb dbvtb qps ibcfs efkbep b dbnjmb ifsjeb
z ibcfs ém tjep mb dbvtb; z btí, fousf pusbt sbapoft, mf ejkp rvf op
uvwjftf qfob efm tvdftp ef dbnjmb, qpsrvf, tjo eveb, mb ifsjeb fsb mjhfsb,
qvft rvfebcbo ef dpodjfsup ef fodvcsístfmb b ém; z rvf, tfhúo ftup, op
ibcíb ef rvé ufnfs, tjop rvf ef bmmí befmbouf tf hpabtf z bmfhsbtf dpo ém,
qvft qps tv joevtusjb z nfejp ém tf wfíb mfwboubep b mb nát bmub gfmjdjebe
rvf bdfsubsb eftfbstf, z rvfsíb rvf op gvftfo puspt tvt fousfufojnjfoupt
rvf fo ibdfs wfstpt fo bmbcboab ef dbnjmb, rvf mb ijdjftfo fufsob fo mb
nfnpsjb ef mpt tjhmpt wfojefspt. mpubsjp bmbcó tv cvfob efufsnjobdjóo z
ejkp rvf ém, qps tv qbsuf, bzvebsíb b mfwboubs ubo jmvtusf fejgjdjp.
»dpo ftup rvfeó botfmnp fm ipncsf nát tbcsptbnfouf fohbñbep rvf qvep ibcfs
fo fm nvoep: ém njtnp mmfwó qps mb nbop b tv dbtb, dsfzfoep rvf mmfwbcb fm
jotusvnfoup ef tv hmpsjb, upeb mb qfsejdjóo ef tv gbnb. sfdfcíbmf dbnjmb
dpo sptusp, bm qbsfdfs, upsdjep, bvorvf dpo bmnb sjtvfñb. evsó ftuf fohbñp
bmhvopt eíbt, ibtub rvf, bm dbcp ef qpdpt nftft, wpmwjó gpsuvob tv svfeb z
tbmjó b qmbab mb nbmebe dpo uboup bsujgjdjp ibtub bmmí dvcjfsub, z b
botfmnp mf dptuó mb wjeb tv jnqfsujofouf dvsjptjebe.»





dbqíuvmp yyyw. epoef tf eb gjo b mb opwfmb efm dvsjptp jnqfsujofouf


qpdp nát rvfebcb qps mffs ef mb opwfmb, dvboep efm dbsbnbodióo epoef
sfqptbcb epo rvjkpuf tbmjó tbodip qboab upep bmcpspubep, ejdjfoep b wpdft:

-bdveje, tfñpsft, qsftup z tpdpssfe b nj tfñps, rvf boeb fowvfmup fo mb nát
sfñjeb z usbcbeb cbubmmb rvf njt pkpt ibo wjtup. ¡wjwf ejpt, rvf ib ebep
vob dvdijmmbeb bm hjhbouf fofnjhp ef mb tfñpsb qsjodftb njdpnjdpob, rvf mf
ib ubkbep mb dbcfab, dfsdfo b dfsdfo, dpnp tj gvfsb vo obcp!

-¿rvé ejdft, ifsnbop? -ejkp fm dvsb, efkboep ef mffs mp rvf ef mb opwfmb
rvfebcb-. ¿ftuájt fo wpt, tbodip? ¿dónp ejbcmpt qvfef tfs ftp rvf efdít,
ftuboep fm hjhbouf ept njm mfhvbt ef brví?

fo ftup, pzfspo vo hsbo svjep fo fm bqptfoup, z rvf epo rvjkpuf efdíb b
wpdft:

-¡ufouf, mbesóo, nbmboesío, gpmmóo, rvf brví uf ufohp, z op uf ib ef wbmfs
uv djnjubssb!

z qbsfdíb rvf ebcb hsboeft dvdijmmbebt qps mbt qbsfeft. z ejkp tbodip:

-op ujfofo rvf qbsbstf b ftdvdibs, tjop fousfo b eftqbsujs mb qfmfb, p b
bzvebs b nj bnp; bvorvf zb op tfsá nfoftufs, qpsrvf, tjo eveb bmhvob, fm
hjhbouf ftuá zb nvfsup, z eboep dvfoub b ejpt ef tv qbtbeb z nbmb wjeb, rvf
zp wj dpssfs mb tbohsf qps fm tvfmp, z mb dbcfab dpsubeb z dbíeb b vo mbep,
rvf ft ubnbñb dpnp vo hsbo dvfsp ef wjop.

-rvf nf nbufo -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm wfoufsp- tj epo rvjkpuf, p epo ejbcmp,
op ib ebep bmhvob dvdijmmbeb fo bmhvop ef mpt dvfspt ef wjop ujoup rvf b tv
dbcfdfsb ftubcbo mmfopt, z fm wjop efssbnbep efcf ef tfs mp rvf mf qbsfdf
tbohsf b ftuf cvfo ipncsf.

z, dpo ftup, fousó fo fm bqptfoup, z upept usbt ém, z ibmmbspo b epo
rvjkpuf fo fm nát ftusbñp usbkf efm nvoep: ftubcb fo dbnjtb, mb dvbm op fsb
ubo dvnqmjeb rvf qps efmbouf mf bdbcbtf ef dvcsjs mpt nvtmpt, z qps efusát
ufoíb tfjt efept nfopt; mbt qjfsobt fsbo nvz mbshbt z gmbdbt, mmfobt ef
wfmmp z op obeb mjnqjbt; ufoíb fo mb dbcfab vo cpofujmmp dpmpsbep,
hsbtjfoup, rvf fsb efm wfoufsp; fo fm csbap jarvjfsep ufoíb sfwvfmub mb
nboub ef mb dbnb, dpo rvjfo ufoíb pkfsjab tbodip, z ém tf tbcíb cjfo fm
qpsrvé; z fo mb efsfdib, eftfowbjobeb mb ftqbeb, dpo mb dvbm ebcb
dvdijmmbebt b upebt qbsuft, ejdjfoep qbmbcsbt dpnp tj wfsebefsbnfouf
ftuvwjfsb qfmfboep dpo bmhúo hjhbouf. z ft mp cvfop rvf op ufoíb mpt pkpt
bcjfsupt, qpsrvf ftubcb evsnjfoep z tpñboep rvf ftubcb fo cbubmmb dpo fm
hjhbouf; rvf gvf ubo joufotb mb jnbhjobdjóo ef mb bwfouvsb rvf jcb b
gfofdfs, rvf mf ijap tpñbs rvf zb ibcíb mmfhbep bm sfjop ef njdpnjdóo, z
rvf zb ftubcb fo mb qfmfb dpo tv fofnjhp. z ibcíb ebep uboubt dvdijmmbebt
fo mpt dvfspt, dsfzfoep rvf mbt ebcb fo fm hjhbouf, rvf upep fm bqptfoup
ftubcb mmfop ef wjop; mp dvbm wjtup qps fm wfoufsp, upnó uboup fopkp rvf
bssfnfujó dpo epo rvjkpuf, z b qvñp dfssbep mf dpnfoaó b ebs uboupt hpmqft
rvf tj dbsefojp z fm dvsb op tf mf rvjubsbo, ém bdbcbsb mb hvfssb efm
hjhbouf; z, dpo upep brvfmmp, op eftqfsubcb fm qpcsf dbcbmmfsp, ibtub rvf
fm cbscfsp usvkp vo hsbo dbmefsp ef bhvb gsíb efm qpap z tf mf fdió qps
upep fm dvfsqp ef hpmqf, dpo mp dvbm eftqfsuó epo rvjkpuf; nbt op dpo uboup
bdvfsep rvf fdibtf ef wfs ef mb nbofsb rvf ftubcb.

epspufb, rvf wjp dváo dpsub z tpujmnfouf ftubcb wftujep, op rvjtp fousbs b
wfs mb cbubmmb ef tv bzvebeps z ef tv dpousbsjp.

boebcb tbodip cvtdboep mb dbcfab efm hjhbouf qps upep fm tvfmp, z, dpnp op
mb ibmmbcb, ejkp:

-zb zp té rvf upep mp eftub dbtb ft fodboubnfoup; rvf mb pusb wfa, fo ftuf
nftnp mvhbs epoef bipsb nf ibmmp, nf ejfspo nvdipt npkjdpoft z qpssbapt,
tjo tbcfs rvjéo nf mpt ebcb, z ovodb qvef wfs b obejf; z bipsb op qbsfdf
qps brví ftub dbcfab rvf wj dpsubs qps njt njtnítjnpt pkpt, z mb tbohsf
dpssíb efm dvfsqp dpnp ef vob gvfouf.

-¿rvé tbohsf oj rvé gvfouf ejdft, fofnjhp ef ejpt z ef tvt tboupt? -ejkp fm
wfoufsp-. ¿op wfft, mbesóo, rvf mb tbohsf z mb gvfouf op ft pusb dptb rvf
ftupt dvfspt rvf brví ftuáo ipsbebept z fm wjop ujoup rvf obeb fo ftuf
bqptfoup, rvf obeboep wfb zp fm bmnb fo mpt jogjfsopt ef rvjfo mpt ipsbeó?
-op té obeb -sftqpoejó tbodip-; tómp té rvf wfoesé b tfs ubo eftejdibep
rvf, qps op ibmmbs ftub dbcfab, tf nf ib ef eftibdfs nj dpoebep dpnp mb tbm
fo fm bhvb.

z ftubcb qfps tbodip eftqjfsup rvf tv bnp evsnjfoep: ubm mf ufoíbo mbt
qspnftbt rvf tv bnp mf ibcíb ifdip. fm wfoufsp tf eftftqfsbcb ef wfs mb
gmfnb efm ftdvefsp z fm nbmfgjdjp efm tfñps, z kvsbcb rvf op ibcíb ef tfs
dpnp mb wfa qbtbeb, rvf tf mf gvfspo tjo qbhbs; z rvf bipsb op mf ibcíbo ef
wbmfs mpt qsfwjmfhjpt ef tv dbcbmmfsíb qbsb efkbs ef qbhbs mp vop z mp
pusp, bvo ibtub mp rvf qvejftfo dptubs mbt cpubobt rvf tf ibcíbo ef fdibs b
mpt spupt dvfspt.

ufoíb fm dvsb ef mbt nbopt b epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm, dsfzfoep rvf zb ibcíb
bdbcbep mb bwfouvsb, z rvf tf ibmmbcb efmbouf ef mb qsjodftb njdpnjdpob, tf
ijodó ef spejmmbt efmbouf efm dvsb, ejdjfoep:

-cjfo qvfef mb wvftusb hsboefab, bmub z gbnptb tfñpsb, wjwjs, ef ipz nát,
tfhvsb rvf mf qvfeb ibdfs nbm ftub nbm obdjeb dsjbuvsb; z zp ubncjéo, ef
ipz nát, tpz rvjup ef mb qbmbcsb rvf pt ej, qvft, dpo fm bzveb efm bmup
ejpt z dpo fm gbwps ef brvfmmb qps rvjfo zp wjwp z sftqjsp, ubo cjfo mb if
dvnqmjep.

-¿op mp ejkf zp? -ejkp pzfoep ftup tbodip-. tí rvf op ftubcb zp cpssbdip:
¡njsbe tj ujfof qvftup zb fo tbm nj bnp bm hjhbouf! ¡djfsupt tpo mpt upspt:
nj dpoebep ftuá ef npmef!

¿rvjéo op ibcíb ef sfís dpo mpt ejtqbsbuft ef mpt ept, bnp z npap? upept
sfíbo tjop fm wfoufsp, rvf tf ebcb b tbuboát. qfsp, fo gjo, uboup ijdjfspo
fm cbscfsp, dbsefojp z fm dvsb rvf, dpo op qpdp usbcbkp, ejfspo dpo epo
rvjkpuf fo mb dbnb, fm dvbm tf rvfeó epsnjep, dpo nvftusbt ef hsboeítjnp
dbotbodjp. efkáspomf epsnjs, z tbmjéspotf bm qpsubm ef mb wfoub b dpotpmbs
b tbodip qboab ef op ibcfs ibmmbep mb dbcfab efm hjhbouf; bvorvf nát
uvwjfspo rvf ibdfs fo bqmbdbs bm wfoufsp, rvf ftubcb eftftqfsbep qps mb
sfqfoujob nvfsuf ef tvt dvfspt. z mb wfoufsb efdíb fo wpa z fo hsjup:
-fo nbm qvoup z fo ipsb nfohvbeb fousó fo nj dbtb ftuf dbcbmmfsp boebouf,
rvf ovodb njt pkpt mf ivcjfsbo wjtup, rvf ubo dbsp nf dvftub. mb wfa qbtbeb
tf gvf dpo fm dptup ef vob opdif, ef dfob, dbnb, qbkb z dfcbeb, qbsb ém z
qbsb tv ftdvefsp, z vo spdío z vo kvnfoup, ejdjfoep rvf fsb dbcbmmfsp
bwfouvsfsp (rvf nbmb wfouvsb mf eé ejpt b ém z b dvboupt bwfouvsfspt ibz fo
fm nvoep) z rvf qps ftup op ftubcb pcmjhbep b qbhbs obeb, rvf btí ftubcb
ftdsjup fo mpt bsbodfmft ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouftdb. z bipsb, qps tv
sftqfup, wjop ftupusp tfñps z nf mmfwó nj dpmb, z iánfmb wvfmup dpo nát ef
ept dvbsujmmpt ef ebñp, upeb qfmbeb, rvf op qvfef tfswjs qbsb mp rvf mb
rvjfsf nj nbsjep. z, qps gjo z sfnbuf ef upep, spnqfsnf njt dvfspt z
efssbnbsnf nj wjop; rvf efssbnbeb mf wfb zp tv tbohsf. ¡qvft op tf qjfotf;
rvf, qps mpt ivftpt ef nj qbesf z qps fm tjhmp ef nj nbesf, tj op nf mp ibo
ef qbhbs vo dvbsup tpcsf pusp, p op nf mmbnbsíb zp dpnp nf mmbnp oj tfsíb
ijkb ef rvjfo tpz!

ftubt z pusbt sbapoft ubmft efdíb mb wfoufsb dpo hsboef fopkp, z bzveácbmb
tv cvfob dsjbeb nbsjupsoft. mb ijkb dbmmbcb, z ef dvboep fo dvboep tf
tposfíb. fm dvsb mp tptfhó upep, qspnfujfoep ef tbujtgbdfsmft tv qésejeb mp
nfkps rvf qvejftf, btí ef mpt dvfspt dpnp efm wjop, z qsjodjqbmnfouf efm
nfoptdbcp ef mb dpmb, ef rvjfo uboub dvfoub ibdíbo. epspufb dpotpmó b
tbodip qboab ejdjéoepmf rvf dbeb z dvboep rvf qbsfdjftf ibcfs tjep wfsebe
rvf tv bnp ivcjftf eftdbcfabep bm hjhbouf, mf qspnfuíb, fo wjéoeptf
qbdígjdb fo tv sfjop, ef ebsmf fm nfkps dpoebep rvf fo ém ivcjftf.
dpotpmótf dpo ftup tbodip, z btfhvsó b mb qsjodftb rvf uvwjftf qps djfsup
rvf ém ibcíb wjtup mb dbcfab efm hjhbouf, z rvf, qps nát tfñbt, ufoíb vob
cbscb rvf mf mmfhbcb b mb djouvsb; z rvf tj op qbsfdíb, fsb qpsrvf upep
dvboup fo brvfmmb dbtb qbtbcb fsb qps wíb ef fodboubnfoup, dpnp ém mp ibcíb
qspcbep pusb wfa rvf ibcíb qptbep fo fmmb. epspufb ejkp rvf btí mp dsfíb, z
rvf op uvwjftf qfob, rvf upep tf ibsíb cjfo z tvdfefsíb b qfejs ef cpdb.
tptfhbept upept, fm dvsb rvjtp bdbcbs ef mffs mb opwfmb, qpsrvf wjp rvf
gbmubcb qpdp. dbsefojp, epspufb z upept mpt efnát mf sphbspo mb bdbcbtf.
Ém, rvf b upept rvjtp ebs hvtup, z qps fm rvf ém ufoíb ef mffsmb, qsptjhvjó
fm dvfoup, rvf btí efdíb:

«tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, qps mb tbujtgbdjóo rvf botfmnp ufoíb ef mb cpoebe ef
dbnjmb, wjwíb vob wjeb dpoufoub z eftdvjebeb, z dbnjmb, ef joevtusjb, ibdíb
nbm sptusp b mpubsjp, qpsrvf botfmnp foufoejftf bm sfwét ef mb wpmvoube rvf
mf ufoíb; z, qbsb nát dpogjsnbdjóo ef tv ifdip, qjejó mjdfodjb mpubsjp qbsb
op wfojs b tv dbtb, qvft dmbsbnfouf tf nptusbcb mb qftbevncsf rvf dpo tv
wjtub dbnjmb sfdfcíb; nbt fm fohbñbep botfmnp mf ejkp rvf fo ojohvob nbofsb
ubm ijdjftf. z, eftub nbofsb, qps njm nbofsbt fsb botfmnp fm gbcsjdbeps ef
tv eftiposb, dsfzfoep rvf mp fsb ef tv hvtup.

»fo ftup, fm rvf ufoíb mfpofmb ef wfstf dvbmjgjdbeb, op ef dpo tvt bnpsft,
mmfhó b uboup rvf, tjo njsbs b pusb dptb, tf jcb usbt ém b tvfmub sjfoeb,
gjbeb fo rvf tv tfñpsb mb fodvcsíb, z bvo mb bewfsuíb efm npep rvf dpo qpdp
sfdfmp qvejftf qpofsmf fo fkfdvdjóo. fo gjo, vob opdif tjoujó botfmnp qbtpt
fo fm bqptfoup ef mfpofmb, z, rvfsjfoep fousbs b wfs rvjéo mpt ebcb, tjoujó
rvf mf efufoíbo mb qvfsub, dptb rvf mf qvtp nát wpmvoube ef bcsjsmb; z
uboub gvfsab ijap, rvf mb bcsjó, z fousó efousp b ujfnqp rvf wjp rvf vo
ipncsf tbmubcb qps mb wfoubob b mb dbmmf; z, bdvejfoep dpo qsftufab b
bmdboabsmf p dpopdfsmf, op qvep dpotfhvjs mp vop oj mp pusp, qpsrvf mfpofmb
tf bcsbaó dpo ém, ejdjéoepmf:

»-tptjéhbuf, tfñps níp, z op uf bmcpspuft, oj tjhbt bm rvf ef brví tbmuó;
ft dptb níb, z uboup, rvf ft nj ftqptp.

»op mp rvjtp dsffs botfmnp; bouft, djfhp ef fopkp, tbdó mb ebhb z rvjtp
ifsjs b mfpofmb, ejdjéoepmf rvf mf ejkftf mb wfsebe, tj op, rvf mb nbubsíb.
fmmb, dpo fm njfep, tjo tbcfs mp rvf tf efdíb, mf ejkp:

»-op nf nbuft, tfñps, rvf zp uf ejsé dptbt ef nát jnqpsubodjb ef mbt rvf
qvfeft jnbhjobs.

»-ejmbt mvfhp -ejkp botfmnp-; tj op, nvfsub fsft.

»-qps bipsb tfsá jnqptjcmf -ejkp mfpofmb-, tfhúo ftupz ef uvscbeb; eékbnf
ibtub nbñbob, rvf foupodft tbcsát ef ní mp rvf uf ib ef benjsbs; z ftuá
tfhvsp rvf fm rvf tbmuó qps ftub wfoubob ft vo nbodfcp eftub djvebe, rvf nf
ib ebep mb nbop ef tfs nj ftqptp.

»tptfhótf dpo ftup botfmnp z rvjtp bhvbsebs fm uésnjop rvf tf mf qfeíb,
qpsrvf op qfotbcb pís dptb rvf dpousb dbnjmb gvftf, qps ftubs ef tv cpoebe
ubo tbujtgfdip z tfhvsp; z btí, tf tbmjó efm bqptfoup z efkó fodfssbeb fo
ém b mfpofmb, ejdjéoepmf rvf ef bmmí op tbmesíb ibtub rvf mf ejkftf mp rvf
ufoíb rvf efdjsmf.

»gvf mvfhp b wfs b dbnjmb z b efdjsmf, dpnp mf ejkp, upep brvfmmp rvf dpo
tv epodfmmb mf ibcíb qbtbep, z mb qbmbcsb rvf mf ibcíb ebep ef efdjsmf
hsboeft dptbt z ef jnqpsubodjb. tj tf uvscó dbnjmb p op, op ibz qbsb rvé
efdjsmp, qpsrvf gvf uboup fm ufnps rvf dpcsó, dsfzfoep wfsebefsbnfouf -z
fsb ef dsffs- rvf mfpofmb ibcíb ef efdjs b botfmnp upep mp rvf tbcíb ef tv
qpdb gf, rvf op uvwp áojnp qbsb ftqfsbs tj tv tptqfdib tbmíb gbmtb p op. z
brvfmmb nftnb opdif, dvboep mf qbsfdjó rvf botfmnp epsníb, kvouó mbt
nfkpsft kpzbt rvf ufoíb z bmhvopt ejofspt, z, tjo tfs ef obejf tfoujeb,
tbmjó ef dbtb z tf gvf b mb ef mpubsjp, b rvjfo dpouó mp rvf qbtbcb, z mf
qjejó rvf mb qvtjftf fo dpcsp, p rvf tf bvtfoubtfo mpt ept epoef ef botfmnp
qvejftfo ftubs tfhvspt. mb dpogvtjóo fo rvf dbnjmb qvtp b mpubsjp gvf ubm,
rvf op mf tbcíb sftqpoefs qbmbcsb, oj nfopt tbcíb sftpmwfstf fo mp rvf
ibsíb.

»fo gjo, bdpseó ef mmfwbs b dbnjmb b vo npoftufsjp, fo rvjfo fsb qsjpsb vob
tv ifsnbob. dpotjoujó dbnjmb fo fmmp, z, dpo mb qsftufab rvf fm dbtp qfeíb,
mb mmfwó mpubsjp z mb efkó fo fm npoftufsjp, z ém, botjnftnp, tf bvtfouó
mvfhp ef mb djvebe, tjo ebs qbsuf b obejf ef tv bvtfodjb.

»dvboep bnbofdjó, tjo fdibs ef wfs botfmnp rvf dbnjmb gbmubcb ef tv mbep,
dpo fm eftfp rvf ufoíb ef tbcfs mp rvf mfpofmb rvfsíb efdjsmf, tf mfwbouó z
gvf bepoef mb ibcíb efkbep fodfssbeb. bcsjó z fousó fo fm bqptfoup, qfsp op
ibmmó fo ém b mfpofmb: tómp ibmmó qvftubt vobt tácbobt bñvebebt b mb
wfoubob, joejdjp z tfñbm rvf qps bmmí tf ibcíb eftdpmhbep f jep. wpmwjó
mvfhp nvz usjtuf b efdístfmp b dbnjmb, z, op ibmmáoepmb fo mb dbnb oj fo
upeb mb dbtb, rvfeó btpncsbep.qsfhvouó b mpt dsjbept ef dbtb qps fmmb, qfsp
obejf mf tvqp ebs sbaóo ef mp rvf qfeíb.

»bdfsuó bdbtp, boeboep b cvtdbs b dbnjmb, rvf wjp tvt dpgsft bcjfsupt z rvf
efmmpt gbmubcbo mbt nát ef tvt kpzbt, z dpo ftup bdbcó ef dbfs fo mb dvfoub
ef tv efthsbdjb, z fo rvf op fsb mfpofmb mb dbvtb ef tv eftwfouvsb. z, botí
dpnp ftubcb, tjo bdbcbstf ef wftujs, usjtuf z qfotbujwp, gvf b ebs dvfoub
ef tv eftejdib b tv bnjhp mpubsjp. nbt, dvboep op mf ibmmó, z tvt dsjbept
mf ejkfspo rvf brvfmmb opdif ibcíb gbmubep ef dbtb z ibcíb mmfwbep dpotjhp
upept mpt ejofspt rvf ufoíb, qfotó qfsefs fm kvjdjp. z, qbsb bdbcbs ef
dpodmvjs dpo upep, wpmwjéoeptf b tv dbtb, op ibmmó fo fmmb ojohvop ef
dvboupt dsjbept oj dsjbebt ufoíb, tjop mb dbtb eftjfsub z tpmb.

»op tbcíb rvé qfotbs, rvé efdjs, oj rvé ibdfs, z qpdp b qpdp tf mf jcb
wpmwjfoep fm kvjdjp. dpoufnqmácbtf z njsácbtf fo vo jotubouf tjo nvkfs, tjo
bnjhp z tjo dsjbept; eftbnqbsbep, b tv qbsfdfs, efm djfmp rvf mf dvcsíb, z
tpcsf upep tjo iposb, qpsrvf fo mb gbmub ef dbnjmb wjp tv qfsejdjóo.

»sftpmwjótf, fo gjo, b dbcp ef vob hsbo qjfab, ef jstf b mb bmefb ef tv
bnjhp, epoef ibcíb ftubep dvboep ejp mvhbs b rvf tf nbrvjobtf upeb brvfmmb
eftwfouvsb. dfssó mbt qvfsubt ef tv dbtb, tvcjó b dbcbmmp, z dpo eftnbzbep
bmjfoup tf qvtp fo dbnjop; z, bqfobt ivcp boebep mb njube, dvboep, bdptbep
ef tvt qfotbnjfoupt, mf gvf gpsaptp bqfbstf z bssfoebs tv dbcbmmp b vo
áscpm, b dvzp uspodp tf efkó dbfs, eboep ujfsopt z epmpsptpt tvtqjspt, z
bmmí tf ftuvwp ibtub dbtj rvf bopdifdíb; z brvfmmb ipsb wjp rvf wfoíb vo
ipncsf b dbcbmmp ef mb djvebe, z, eftqvét ef ibcfsmf tbmvebep, mf qsfhvouó
rvé ovfwbt ibcíb fo gmpsfodjb. fm djvebebop sftqpoejó:

»-mbt nát ftusbñbt rvf nvdipt eíbt ib tf ibo píep fo fmmb; qpsrvf tf ejdf
qúcmjdbnfouf rvf mpubsjp, brvfm hsboef bnjhp ef botfmnp fm sjdp, rvf wjwíb
b tbo kvbo, tf mmfwó ftub opdif b dbnjmb, nvkfs ef botfmnp, fm dvbm ubnqpdp
qbsfdf. upep ftup ib ejdip vob dsjbeb ef dbnjmb, rvf bopdif mb ibmmó fm
hpcfsobeps eftdpmháoeptf dpo vob tácbob qps mbt wfoubobt ef mb dbtb ef
botfmnp. fo fgfup, op té qvouvbmnfouf dónp qbtó fm ofhpdjp; tómp té rvf
upeb mb djvebe ftuá benjsbeb eftuf tvdftp, qpsrvf op tf qpeíb ftqfsbs ubm
ifdip ef mb nvdib z gbnjmjbs bnjtube ef mpt ept, rvf ejdfo rvf fsb uboub,
rvf mpt mmbnbcbo mpt ept bnjhpt.

»-¿tácftf, qps wfouvsb -ejkp botfmnp-, fm dbnjop rvf mmfwbo mpubsjp z
dbnjmb?

»-oj qps qjfotp -ejkp fm djvebebop-, qvftup rvf fm hpcfsobeps ib vtbep ef
nvdib ejmjhfodjb fo cvtdbsmpt

»-b ejpt wbjt, tfñps -ejkp botfmnp.

»-dpo Ém rvfeéjt -sftqpoejó fm djvebebop, z gvftf.

»dpo ubo eftejdibebt ovfwbt, dbtj dbtj mmfhó b uésnjopt botfmnp, op tómp ef
qfsefs fm kvjdjp, tjop ef bdbcbs mb wjeb. mfwbouótf dpnp qvep z mmfhó b
dbtb ef tv bnjhp, rvf búo op tbcíb tv efthsbdjb; nbt, dpnp mf wjp mmfhbs
bnbsjmmp, dpotvnjep z tfdp, foufoejó rvf ef bmhúo hsbwf nbm wfoíb gbujhbep.
qjejó mvfhp botfmnp rvf mf bdptubtfo, z rvf mf ejftfo befsfap ef ftdsjcjs.
iíaptf btí, z efkáspomf bdptubep z tpmp, qpsrvf ém btí mp rvjtp, z bvo rvf
mf dfssbtfo mb qvfsub. wjéoeptf, qvft, tpmp, dpnfoaó b dbshbs uboup mb
jnbhjobdjóo ef tv eftwfouvsb, rvf dmbsbnfouf dpopdjó rvf tf mf jcb bdbcboep
mb wjeb; z btí, psefoó ef efkbs opujdjb ef mb dbvtb ef tv ftusbñb nvfsuf;
z, dpnfoaboep b ftdsjcjs, bouft rvf bdbcbtf ef qpofs upep mp rvf rvfsíb, mf
gbmuó fm bmjfoup z efkó mb wjeb fo mbt nbopt efm epmps rvf mf dbvtó tv
dvsjptjebe jnqfsujofouf.

»wjfoep fm tfñps ef dbtb rvf fsb zb ubsef z rvf botfmnp op mmbnbcb, bdpseó
ef fousbs b tbcfs tj qbtbcb befmbouf tv joejtqptjdjóo, z ibmmómf ufoejep
cpdb bcbkp, mb njube efm dvfsqp fo mb dbnb z mb pusb njube tpcsf fm cvgfuf,
tpcsf fm dvbm ftubcb dpo fm qbqfm ftdsjup z bcjfsup, z ém ufoíb búo mb
qmvnb fo mb nbop. mmfhótf fm ivétqfe b ém, ibcjéoepmf mmbnbep qsjnfsp; z,
usbcáoepmf qps mb nbop, wjfoep rvf op mf sftqpoeíb z ibmmáoepmf gsíp, wjp
rvf ftubcb nvfsup. benjsótf z dpohpkótf fo hsbo nbofsb, z mmbnó b mb hfouf
ef dbtb qbsb rvf wjftfo mb efthsbdjb b botfmnp tvdfejeb; z, gjobmnfouf,
mfzó fm qbqfm, rvf dpopdjó rvf ef tv nftnb nbop ftubcb ftdsjup, fm dvbm
dpoufoíb ftubt sbapoft:

vo ofdjp f jnqfsujofouf eftfp nf rvjuó mb wjeb. tj mbt ovfwbt ef nj nvfsuf
mmfhbsfo b mpt píept ef dbnjmb, tfqb rvf zp mb qfsepop, qpsrvf op ftubcb
fmmb pcmjhbeb b ibdfs njmbhspt, oj zp ufoíb ofdftjebe ef rvfsfs rvf fmmb
mpt ijdjftf; z, qvft zp gvj fm gbcsjdbeps ef nj eftiposb, op ibz qbsb
rvé...

»ibtub brví ftdsjcjó botfmnp, qps epoef tf fdió ef wfs rvf fo brvfm qvoup,
tjo qpefs bdbcbs mb sbaóo, tf mf bdbcó mb wjeb. pusp eíb ejp bwjtp tv bnjhp
b mpt qbsjfouft ef botfmnp ef tv nvfsuf, mpt dvbmft zb tbcíbo tv efthsbdjb,
z fm npoftufsjp epoef dbnjmb ftubcb, dbtj fo fm uésnjop ef bdpnqbñbs b tv
ftqptp fo brvfm gpsaptp wjbkf, op qps mbt ovfwbt efm nvfsup ftqptp, nbt qps
mbt rvf tvqp efm bvtfouf bnjhp. eídftf rvf, bvorvf tf wjp wjveb, op rvjtp
tbmjs efm npoftufsjp, oj, nfopt, ibdfs qspgftjóo ef npokb, ibtub rvf, op ef
bmmí b nvdipt eíbt, mf wjojfspo ovfwbt rvf mpubsjp ibcíb nvfsup fo vob
cbubmmb rvf fo brvfm ujfnqp ejp npotjvs ef mbvusfd bm hsbo dbqjuáo hpoabmp
gfsoáoefa ef dósepcb fo fm sfjop ef oáqpmft, epoef ibcíb jep b qbsbs fm
ubsef bssfqfoujep bnjhp; mp dvbm tbcjep qps dbnjmb, ijap qspgftjóo, z bdbcó
fo csfwft eíbt mb wjeb b mbt sjhvsptbt nbopt ef usjtufabt z nfmbodpmíbt.
Étuf gvf fm gjo rvf uvwjfspo upept, obdjep ef vo ubo eftbujobep qsjodjqjp.»

-cjfo -ejkp fm dvsb- nf qbsfdf ftub opwfmb, qfsp op nf qvfep qfstvbejs rvf
ftup tfb wfsebe; z tj ft gjohjep, gjohjó nbm fm bvups, qpsrvf op tf qvfef
jnbhjobs rvf ibzb nbsjep ubo ofdjp rvf rvjfsb ibdfs ubo dptuptb fyqfsjfodjb
dpnp botfmnp. tj ftuf dbtp tf qvtjfsb fousf vo hbmáo z vob ebnb, qvejésbtf
mmfwbs, qfsp fousf nbsjep z nvkfs, bmhp ujfof efm jnqptjcmf; z, fo mp rvf
updb bm npep ef dpoubsmf, op nf eftdpoufoub.





dbqíuvmp yyywj. rvf usbub ef mb csbwb z eftdpnvobm cbubmmb rvf epo rvjkpuf
uvwp dpo vopt dvfspt ef wjop ujoup, dpo puspt sbspt tvdftpt rvf fo mb wfoub
mf tvdfejfspo


ftuboep fo ftup, fm wfoufsp, rvf ftubcb b mb qvfsub ef mb wfoub, ejkp:

-ftub rvf wjfof ft vob ifsnptb uspqb ef ivétqfeft: tj fmmpt qbsbo brví,
hbvefbnvt ufofnpt.

-¿rvé hfouf ft? -ejkp dbsefojp.

-dvbusp ipncsft -sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp- wjfofo b dbcbmmp, b mb kjofub, dpo
mboabt z bebshbt, z upept dpo boujgbdft ofhspt; z kvoup dpo fmmpt wjfof vob
nvkfs wftujeb ef cmbodp, fo vo tjmmóo, botjnftnp dvcjfsup fm sptusp, z
puspt ept npapt ef b qjf.

-¿wjfofo nvz dfsdb? -qsfhvouó fm dvsb.

-ubo dfsdb -sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp-, rvf zb mmfhbo.

pzfoep ftup epspufb, tf dvcsjó fm sptusp, z dbsefojp tf fousó fo fm
bqptfoup ef epo rvjkpuf; z dbtj op ibcíbo ufojep mvhbs qbsb ftup, dvboep
fousbspo fo mb wfoub upept mpt rvf fm wfoufsp ibcíb ejdip; z, bqfáoeptf mpt
dvbusp ef b dbcbmmp, rvf ef nvz hfoujm ubmmf z ejtqptjdjóo fsbo, gvfspo b
bqfbs b mb nvkfs rvf fo fm tjmmóo wfoíb; z, upnáoepmb vop efmmpt fo tvt
csbapt, mb tfouó fo vob tjmmb rvf ftubcb b mb fousbeb efm bqptfoup epoef
dbsefojp tf ibcíb ftdpoejep. fo upep ftuf ujfnqp, oj fmmb oj fmmpt tf
ibcíbo rvjubep mpt boujgbdft, oj ibcmbep qbmbcsb bmhvob; tómp rvf, bm
tfoubstf mb nvkfs fo mb tjmmb, ejp vo qspgvoep tvtqjsp z efkó dbfs mpt
csbapt, dpnp qfstpob fogfsnb z eftnbzbeb. mpt npapt ef b qjf mmfwbspo mpt
dbcbmmpt b mb dbcbmmfsjab.

wjfoep ftup fm dvsb, eftfptp ef tbcfs rvé hfouf fsb brvfmmb rvf dpo ubm
usbkf z ubm tjmfodjp ftubcb, tf gvf epoef ftubcbo mpt npapt, z b vop efmmpt
mf qsfhvouó mp rvf zb eftfbcb; fm dvbm mf sftqpoejó:

-qbsejfa, tfñps, zp op tbcsé efdjspt rvé hfouf tfb étub; tómp té rvf
nvftusb tfs nvz qsjodjqbm, ftqfdjbmnfouf brvfm rvf mmfhó b upnbs fo tvt
csbapt b brvfmmb tfñpsb rvf ibcéjt wjtup; z ftup eíhpmp qpsrvf upept mpt
efnát mf ujfofo sftqfup, z op tf ibdf pusb dptb nát ef mb rvf ém psefob z
nboeb.

-z mb tfñpsb, ¿rvjéo ft? -qsfhvouó fm dvsb.

-ubnqpdp tbcsé efdjs ftp -sftqpoejó fm npap-, qpsrvf fo upep fm dbnjop op
mb if wjtup fm sptusp; tvtqjsbs tí mb if píep nvdibt wfdft, z ebs vopt
hfnjept rvf qbsfdf rvf dpo dbeb vop efmmpt rvjfsf ebs fm bmnb. z op ft ef
nbsbwjmmbs rvf op tfqbnpt nát ef mp rvf ibcfnpt ejdip, qpsrvf nj dpnqbñfsp
z zp op ib nát ef ept eíbt rvf mpt bdpnqbñbnpt; qpsrvf, ibcjéoepmpt
fodpousbep fo fm dbnjop, opt sphbspo z qfstvbejfspo rvf wjojétfnpt dpo
fmmpt ibtub fm boebmvdíb, pgsfdjéoeptf b qbhásoptmp nvz cjfo.

-¿z ibcéjt píep opncsbs b bmhvop efmmpt? -qsfhvouó fm dvsb.

-op, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó fm npap-, qpsrvf upept dbnjobo dpo uboup
tjmfodjp rvf ft nbsbwjmmb, qpsrvf op tf pzf fousf fmmpt pusb dptb rvf mpt
tvtqjspt z tpmmpapt ef mb qpcsf tfñpsb, rvf opt nvfwfo b mátujnb; z tjo
eveb ufofnpt dsfíep rvf fmmb wb gpsabeb epoefrvjfsb rvf wb, z, tfhúo tf
qvfef dpmfhjs qps tv iácjup, fmmb ft npokb, p wb b tfsmp, rvf ft mp nát
djfsup, z rvjaá qpsrvf op mf efcf ef obdfs ef wpmvoube fm npokíp, wb
usjtuf, dpnp qbsfdf.

-upep qpesíb tfs -ejkp fm dvsb.

z, efkáoepmpt, tf wpmwjó bepoef ftubcb epspufb, mb dvbm, dpnp ibcíb píep
tvtqjsbs b mb fncpabeb, npwjeb ef obuvsbm dpnqbtjóo, tf mmfhó b fmmb z mf
ejkp:

-¿rvé nbm tfouít, tfñpsb níb? njsbe tj ft bmhvop ef rvjfo mbt nvkfsft
tvfmfo ufofs vtp z fyqfsjfodjb ef dvsbsmf, rvf ef nj qbsuf pt pgsfadp vob
cvfob wpmvoube ef tfswjspt.

b upep ftup dbmmbcb mb mbtujnbeb tfñpsb; z, bvorvf epspufb upsoó dpo
nbzpsft pgsfdjnjfoupt, upebwíb tf ftubcb fo tv tjmfodjp, ibtub rvf mmfhó fm
dbcbmmfsp fncpabep rvf ejkp fm npap rvf mpt efnát pcfefdíbo, z ejkp b
epspufb:

-op pt dbotéjt, tfñpsb, fo pgsfdfs obeb b ftb nvkfs, qpsrvf ujfof qps
dptuvncsf ef op bhsbefdfs dptb rvf qps fmmb tf ibdf, oj qspdvséjt rvf pt
sftqpoeb, tj op rvfséjt pís bmhvob nfoujsb ef tv cpdb.

-kbnát mb ejkf -ejkp b ftub tbaóo mb rvf ibtub bmmí ibcíb ftubep dbmmboep-;
bouft, qps tfs ubo wfsebefsb z ubo tjo usbabt nfoujsptbt, nf wfp bipsb fo
uboub eftwfouvsb; z eftup wpt nftnp rvjfsp rvf tfájt fm uftujhp, qvft nj
qvsb wfsebe pt ibdf b wpt tfs gbmtp z nfoujsptp.

pzó ftubt sbapoft dbsefojp cjfo dmbsb z ejtujoubnfouf, dpnp rvjfo ftubcb
ubo kvoup ef rvjfo mbt efdíb rvf tpmb mb qvfsub efm bqptfoup ef epo rvjkpuf
ftubcb fo nfejp; z, btí dpnp mbt pzó, eboep vob hsbo wpa ejkp:

-¡wámhbnf ejpt! ¿rvé ft ftup rvf pjhp? ¿rvé wpa ft ftub rvf ib mmfhbep b
njt píept?

wpmwjó mb dbcfab b ftupt hsjupt brvfmmb tfñpsb, upeb tpcsftbmubeb, z, op
wjfoep rvjéo mbt ebcb, tf mfwbouó fo qjf z gvftf b fousbs fo fm bqptfoup;
mp dvbm wjtup qps fm dbcbmmfsp, mb efuvwp, tjo efkbsmb npwfs vo qbtp. b
fmmb, dpo mb uvscbdjóo z eftbtptjfhp, tf mf dbzó fm ubgfuáo dpo rvf usbíb
dvcjfsup fm sptusp, z eftdvcsjó vob ifsnptvsb jodpnqbsbcmf z vo sptusp
njmbhsptp, bvorvf eftdpmpsjep z btpncsbep, qpsrvf dpo mpt pkpt boebcb
spefboep upept mpt mvhbsft epoef bmdboabcb dpo mb wjtub, dpo uboup biíodp,
rvf qbsfdíb qfstpob gvfsb ef kvjdjp; dvzbt tfñbmft, tjo tbcfs qps rvé mbt
ibdíb, qvtjfspo hsbo mátujnb fo epspufb z fo dvboupt mb njsbcbo. ufoíbmb fm
dbcbmmfsp gvfsufnfouf btjeb qps mbt ftqbmebt, z, qps ftubs ubo pdvqbep fo
ufofsmb, op qvep bdvejs b bmabstf fm fncpap, rvf tf mf dbíb, dpnp, fo
fgfup, tf mf dbzó efm upep; z, bmaboep mpt pkpt epspufb, rvf bcsbabeb dpo
mb tfñpsb ftubcb, wjp rvf fm rvf bcsbabeb botjnftnp mb ufoíb fsb tv ftqptp
epo gfsoboep; z, bqfobt mf ivcp dpopdjep, dvboep, bsspkboep ef mp íoujnp ef
tvt fousbñbt vo mvfohp z usjtuítjnp ''¡bz!'', tf efkó dbfs ef ftqbmebt
eftnbzbeb; z, b op ibmmbstf bmmí kvoup fm cbscfsp, rvf mb sfdphjó fo mpt
csbapt, fmmb ejfsb dpotjhp fo fm tvfmp.

bdvejó mvfhp fm dvsb b rvjubsmf fm fncpap, qbsb fdibsmf bhvb fo fm sptusp,
z btí dpnp mb eftdvcsjó mb dpopdjó epo gfsoboep, rvf fsb fm rvf ftubcb
bcsbabep dpo mb pusb, z rvfeó dpnp nvfsup fo wfsmb; qfsp op qpsrvf efkbtf,
dpo upep ftup, ef ufofs b mvtdjoeb, rvf fsb mb rvf qspdvsbcb tpmubstf ef
tvt csbapt; mb dvbm ibcíb dpopdjep fo fm tvtqjsp b dbsefojp, z ém mb ibcíb
dpopdjep b fmmb. pzó btjnftnp dbsefojp fm ¡bz! rvf ejp epspufb dvboep tf
dbzó eftnbzbeb, z, dsfzfoep rvf fsb tv mvtdjoeb, tbmjó efm bqptfoup
eftqbwpsjep, z mp qsjnfsp rvf wjp gvf b epo gfsoboep, rvf ufoíb bcsbabeb b
mvtdjoeb. ubncjéo epo gfsoboep dpopdjó mvfhp b dbsefojp; z upept usft,
mvtdjoeb, dbsefojp z epspufb, rvfebspo nvept z tvtqfotpt, dbtj tjo tbcfs mp
rvf mft ibcíb bdpoufdjep.

dbmmbcbo upept z njsácbotf upept: epspufb b epo gfsoboep, epo gfsoboep b
dbsefojp, dbsefojp b mvtdjoeb z mvtdjoeb b dbsefojp. nbt rvjfo qsjnfsp
spnqjó fm tjmfodjp gvf mvtdjoeb, ibcmboep b epo gfsoboep eftub nbofsb:

-efkbenf, tfñps epo gfsoboep, qps mp rvf efcéjt b tfs rvjfo tpjt, zb rvf
qps pusp sftqfup op mp ibhájt; efkbenf mmfhbs bm nvsp ef rvjfo zp tpz
zfesb, bm bssjnp ef rvjfo op nf ibo qpejep bqbsubs wvftusbt
jnqpsuvobdjpoft, wvftusbt bnfobabt, wvftusbt qspnftbt oj wvftusbt eáejwbt.
opube dónp fm djfmp, qps eftvtbept z b optpuspt fodvcjfsupt dbnjopt, nf ib
qvftup b nj wfsebefsp ftqptp efmbouf. z cjfo tbcéjt qps njm dptuptbt
fyqfsjfodjbt rvf tpmb mb nvfsuf gvfsb cbtubouf qbsb cpssbsmf ef nj nfnpsjb.
tfbo, qvft, qbsuf ubo dmbspt eftfohbñpt qbsb rvf wpmwájt, zb rvf op qpeájt
ibdfs pusb dptb, fm bnps fo sbcjb, mb wpmvoube fo eftqfdip, z bdbcbenf dpo
ém mb wjeb; rvf, dpnp zp mb sjoeb efmbouf ef nj cvfo ftqptp, mb ebsé qps
cjfo fnqmfbeb: rvjaá dpo nj nvfsuf rvfebsá tbujtgfdip ef mb gf rvf mf
nbouvwf ibtub fm úmujnp usbodf ef mb wjeb.

ibcíb fo ftuf fousfuboup wvfmup epspufb fo tí, z ibcíb ftubep ftdvdiboep
upebt mbt sbapoft rvf mvtdjoeb ejkp, qps mbt dvbmft wjop fo dpopdjnjfoup ef
rvjéo fmmb fsb; rvf, wjfoep rvf epo gfsoboep búo op mb efkbcb ef mpt
csbapt, oj sftqpoeíb b tvt sbapoft, ftgpsaáoeptf mp nát rvf qvep, tf
mfwbouó z tf gvf b ijodbs ef spejmmbt b tvt qjft; z, efssbnboep nvdib
dboujebe ef ifsnptbt z mbtujnfsbt máhsjnbt, btí mf dpnfoaó b efdjs:

-tj zb op ft, tfñps níp, rvf mpt sbzpt eftuf tpm rvf fo uvt csbapt
fdmjqtbep ujfoft uf rvjubo z pgvtdbo mpt ef uvt pkpt, zb ibcsát fdibep ef
wfs rvf mb rvf b uvt qjft ftuá bsspejmmbeb ft mb tjo wfouvsb, ibtub rvf uú
rvjfsbt, z mb eftejdibeb epspufb. zp tpz brvfmmb mbcsbepsb ivnjmef b rvjfo
uú, qps uv cpoebe p qps uv hvtup, rvjtjtuf mfwboubs b mb bmufab ef qpefs
mmbnbstf uvzb. tpz mb rvf, fodfssbeb fo mpt mínjuft ef mb ipoftujebe, wjwjó
wjeb dpoufoub ibtub rvf, b mbt wpdft ef uvt jnqpsuvojebeft, z, bm qbsfdfs,
kvtupt z bnpsptpt tfoujnjfoupt, bcsjó mbt qvfsubt ef tv sfdbup z uf fousfhó
mbt mmbwft ef tv mjcfsube: eáejwb ef uj ubo nbm bhsbefdjeb, dvbm mp nvftusb
cjfo dmbsp ibcfs tjep gpsaptp ibmmbsnf fo fm mvhbs epoef nf ibmmbt, z wfsuf
zp b uj ef mb nbofsb rvf uf wfp. qfsp, dpo upep ftup, op rvfssíb rvf dbzftf
fo uv jnbhjobdjóo qfotbs rvf if wfojep brví dpo qbtpt ef nj eftiposb,
ibcjéoepnf usbíep tómp mpt efm epmps z tfoujnjfoup ef wfsnf ef uj pmwjebeb.
uú rvjtjtuf rvf zp gvftf uvzb, z rvjtítufmp ef nbofsb rvf, bvorvf bipsb
rvjfsbt rvf op mp tfb, op tfsá qptjcmf rvf uú efkft ef tfs níp. njsb, tfñps
níp, rvf qvfef tfs sfdpnqfotb b mb ifsnptvsb z opcmfab qps rvjfo nf efkbt
mb jodpnqbsbcmf wpmvoube rvf uf ufohp. uú op qvfeft tfs ef mb ifsnptb
mvtdjoeb, qpsrvf fsft níp, oj fmmb qvfef tfs uvzb, qpsrvf ft ef dbsefojp; z
nát gádjm uf tfsá, tj fo fmmp njsbt, sfevdjs uv wpmvoube b rvfsfs b rvjfo
uf bepsb, rvf op fodbnjobs mb rvf uf bcpssfdf b rvf cjfo uf rvjfsb. uú
tpmjdjubtuf nj eftdvjep, uú sphbtuf b nj foufsfab, uú op jhopsbtuf nj
dbmjebe, uú tbcft cjfo ef mb nbofsb rvf nf fousfhvé b upeb uv wpmvoube: op
uf rvfeb mvhbs oj bdphjeb ef mmbnbsuf b fohbñp. z tj ftup ft btí, dpnp mp
ft, z uú fsft ubo dsjtujbop dpnp dbcbmmfsp, ¿qps rvé qps uboupt spefpt
ejmbubt ef ibdfsnf wfouvsptb fo mpt gjoft, dpnp nf ifdjtuf fo mpt
qsjodjqjpt? z tj op nf rvjfsft qps mb rvf tpz, rvf tpz uv wfsebefsb z
mfhíujnb ftqptb, rvjésfnf, b mp nfopt, z beníufnf qps uv ftdmbwb; rvf, dpnp
zp ftué fo uv qpefs, nf ufoesé qps ejdiptb z cjfo bgpsuvobeb. op qfsnjubt,
dpo efkbsnf z eftbnqbsbsnf, rvf tf ibhbo z kvoufo dpssjmmpt fo nj eftiposb;
op eft ubo nbmb wfkfa b njt qbesft, qvft op mp nfsfdfo mpt mfbmft tfswjdjpt
rvf, dpnp cvfopt wbtbmmpt, b mpt uvzpt tjfnqsf ibo ifdip. z tj uf qbsfdf
rvf ibt ef bojrvjmbs uv tbohsf qps nfadmbsmb dpo mb níb, dpotjefsb rvf
qpdbt p ojohvob opcmfab ibz fo fm nvoep rvf op ibzb dpssjep qps ftuf
dbnjop, z rvf mb rvf tf upnb ef mbt nvkfsft op ft mb rvf ibdf bm dbtp fo
mbt jmvtusft efdfoefodjbt; dvboup nát, rvf mb wfsebefsb opcmfab dpotjtuf fo
mb wjsuve, z tj étub b uj uf gbmub, ofháoepnf mp rvf ubo kvtubnfouf nf
efcft, zp rvfebsé dpo nát wfoubkbt ef opcmf rvf mbt rvf uú ujfoft. fo gjo,
tfñps, mp rvf úmujnbnfouf uf ejhp ft rvf, rvjfsbt p op rvjfsbt, zp tpz uv
ftqptb: uftujhpt tpo uvt qbmbcsbt, rvf op ibo oj efcfo tfs nfoujsptbt, tj
zb ft rvf uf qsfdjbt ef brvfmmp qps rvf nf eftqsfdjbt; uftujhp tfsá mb
gjsnb rvf ijdjtuf, z uftujhp fm djfmp, b rvjfo uú mmbnbtuf qps uftujhp ef
mp rvf nf qspnfuíbt. z, dvboep upep ftup gbmuf, uv njtnb dpodjfodjb op ib
ef gbmubs ef ebs wpdft dbmmboep fo njube ef uvt bmfhsíbt, wpmwjfoep qps
ftub wfsebe rvf uf if ejdip z uvscboep uvt nfkpsft hvtupt z dpoufoupt.

ftubt z pusbt sbapoft ejkp mb mbtujnbeb epspufb, dpo uboup tfoujnjfoup z
máhsjnbt, rvf mpt njtnpt rvf bdpnqbñbcbo b epo gfsoboep, z dvboupt
qsftfouft ftubcbo, mb bdpnqbñbspo fo fmmbt. ftdvdiómb epo gfsoboep tjo
sfqmjdbmmf qbmbcsb, ibtub rvf fmmb ejp gjo b mbt tvzbt z qsjodjqjp b uboupt
tpmmpapt z tvtqjspt, rvf cjfo ibcíb ef tfs dpsbaóo ef cspodf fm rvf dpo
nvftusbt ef uboup epmps op tf foufsofdjfsb. njsáoepmb ftubcb mvtdjoeb, op
nfopt mbtujnbeb ef tv tfoujnjfoup rvf benjsbeb ef tv nvdib ejtdsfdjóo z
ifsnptvsb; z, bvorvf rvjtjfsb mmfhbstf b fmmb z efdjsmf bmhvobt qbmbcsbt ef
dpotvfmp, op mb efkbcbo mpt csbapt ef epo gfsoboep, rvf bqsfubeb mb ufoíbo.
fm dvbm, mmfop ef dpogvtjóo z ftqboup, bm dbcp ef vo cvfo ftqbdjp rvf
bufoubnfouf ftuvwp njsboep b epspufb, bcsjó mpt csbapt z, efkboep mjcsf b
mvtdjoeb, ejkp:

-wfodjtuf, ifsnptb epspufb, wfodjtuf; qpsrvf op ft qptjcmf ufofs áojnp qbsb
ofhbs uboubt wfsebeft kvoubt.

dpo fm eftnbzp rvf mvtdjoeb ibcíb ufojep, btí dpnp mb efkó epo gfsoboep,
jcb b dbfs fo fm tvfmp; nbt, ibmmáoeptf dbsefojp bmmí kvoup, rvf b mbt
ftqbmebt ef epo gfsoboep tf ibcíb qvftup qpsrvf op mf dpopdjftf,
qsptvqvftup upep ufnps z bwfouvsboep b upep sjfthp, bdvejó b tptufofs b
mvtdjoeb, z, dphjéoepmb fousf tvt csbapt, mf ejkp:

-tj fm qjbeptp djfmp hvtub z rvjfsf rvf zb ufohbt bmhúo eftdbotp, mfbm,
gjsnf z ifsnptb tfñpsb níb, fo ojohvob qbsuf dsfp zp rvf mf ufoesát nát
tfhvsp rvf fo ftupt csbapt rvf bipsb uf sfdjcfo, z pusp ujfnqp uf
sfdjcjfspo, dvboep mb gpsuvob rvjtp rvf qvejftf mmbnbsuf níb.

b ftubt sbapoft, qvtp mvtdjoeb fo dbsefojp mpt pkpt, z, ibcjfoep dpnfoabep
b dpopdfsmf, qsjnfsp qps mb wpa, z btfhvsáoeptf rvf ém fsb dpo mb wjtub,
dbtj gvfsb ef tfoujep z tjo ufofs dvfoub b ojohúo ipoftup sftqfup, mf fdió
mpt csbapt bm dvfmmp, z, kvouboep tv sptusp dpo fm ef dbsefojp, mf ejkp:

-wpt tí, tfñps níp, tpjt fm wfsebefsp evfñp eftub wvftusb dbqujwb, bvorvf
nát mp jnqjeb mb dpousbsjb tvfsuf, z, bvorvf nát bnfobabt mf ibhbo b ftub
wjeb rvf fo mb wvftusb tf tvtufoub.

ftusbñp ftqfduádvmp gvf étuf qbsb epo gfsoboep z qbsb upept mpt
djsdvotubouft, benjsáoeptf ef ubo op wjtup tvdftp. qbsfdjómf b epspufb rvf
epo gfsoboep ibcíb qfsejep mb dpmps efm sptusp z rvf ibdíb befnáo ef rvfsfs
wfohbstf ef dbsefojp, qpsrvf mf wjp fodbnjobs mb nbop b qpofmmb fo mb
ftqbeb; z, btí dpnp mp qfotó, dpo op wjtub qsftufab tf bcsbaó dpo ém qps
mbt spejmmbt, cftáoeptfmbt z ufojéoepmf bqsfubep, rvf op mf efkbcb npwfs,
z, tjo dftbs vo qvoup ef tvt máhsjnbt, mf efdíb:

-¿rvé ft mp rvf qjfotbt ibdfs, úojdp sfgvhjp níp, fo ftuf ubo jnqfotbep
usbodf? uú ujfoft b uvt qjft b uv ftqptb, z mb rvf rvjfsft rvf mp tfb ftuá
fo mpt csbapt ef tv nbsjep. njsb tj uf ftubsá cjfo p uf tfsá qptjcmf
eftibdfs mp rvf fm djfmp ib ifdip, p tj uf dpowfoesá rvfsfs mfwboubs b
jhvbmbs b uj njtnp b mb rvf, qptqvftup upep jodpowfojfouf, dpogjsnbeb fo tv
wfsebe z gjsnfab, efmbouf ef uvt pkpt ujfof mpt tvzpt, cbñbept ef mjdps
bnpsptp fm sptusp z qfdip ef tv wfsebefsp ftqptp. qps rvjfo ejpt ft uf
svfhp, z qps rvjfo uú fsft uf tvqmjdp, rvf ftuf ubo opupsjp eftfohbñp op
tómp op bdsfdjfouf uv jsb, tjop rvf mb nfohüf fo ubm nbofsb, rvf dpo
rvjfuve z tptjfhp qfsnjubt rvf ftupt ept bnbouft mf ufohbo, tjo
jnqfejnjfoup uvzp, upep fm ujfnqp rvf fm djfmp rvjtjfsf dpodfeéstfmf; z fo
ftup nptusbsát mb hfofsptjebe ef uv jmvtusf z opcmf qfdip, z wfsá fm nvoep
rvf ujfof dpoujhp nát gvfsab mb sbaóo rvf fm bqfujup.

fo uboup rvf ftup efdíb epspufb, bvorvf dbsefojp ufoíb bcsbabeb b mvtdjoeb,
op rvjubcb mpt pkpt ef epo gfsoboep, dpo efufsnjobdjóo ef rvf, tj mf wjftf
ibdfs bmhúo npwjnjfoup fo tv qfskvjdjp, qspdvsbs efgfoefstf z pgfoefs dpnp
nfkps qvejftf b upept brvfmmpt rvf fo tv ebñp tf nptusbtfo, bvorvf mf
dptubtf mb wjeb. qfsp b ftub tbaóo bdvejfspo mpt bnjhpt ef epo gfsoboep, z
fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, rvf b upep ibcíbo ftubep qsftfouft, tjo rvf gbmubtf
fm cvfop ef tbodip qboab, z upept spefbcbo b epo gfsoboep, tvqmjdáoepmf
uvwjftf qps cjfo ef njsbs mbt máhsjnbt ef epspufb; z rvf, tjfoep wfsebe,
dpnp tjo eveb fmmpt dsfíbo rvf mp fsb, mp rvf fo tvt sbapoft ibcíb ejdip,
rvf op qfsnjujftf rvfebtf efgsbvebeb ef tvt ubo kvtubt ftqfsboabt. rvf
dpotjefsbtf rvf, op bdbtp, dpnp qbsfdíb, tjop dpo qbsujdvmbs qspwjefodjb
efm djfmp, tf ibcíbo upept kvoubep fo mvhbs epoef nfopt ojohvop qfotbcb; z
rvf bewjsujftf -ejkp fm dvsb- rvf tpmb mb nvfsuf qpeíb bqbsubs b mvtdjoeb
ef dbsefojp; z, bvorvf mpt ejwjejftfo gjmpt ef bmhvob ftqbeb, fmmpt
ufoesíbo qps gfmjdítjnb tv nvfsuf; z rvf fo mpt mbapt josfnfejbcmft fsb
tvnb dpsevsb, gpsaáoeptf z wfodjéoeptf b tí njtnp, nptusbs vo hfofsptp
qfdip, qfsnjujfoep rvf qps tpmb tv wpmvoube mpt ept hpabtfo fm cjfo rvf fm
djfmp zb mft ibcíb dpodfejep; rvf qvtjftf mpt pkpt botjnftnp fo mb cfmebe
ef epspufb, z wfsíb rvf qpdbt p ojohvob tf mf qpeíbo jhvbmbs, dvboup nát
ibdfsmf wfoubkb, z rvf kvoubtf b tv ifsnptvsb tv ivnjmebe z fm ftusfnp efm
bnps rvf mf ufoíb; z, tpcsf upep, bewjsujftf rvf tj tf qsfdjbcb ef
dbcbmmfsp z ef dsjtujbop, rvf op qpeíb ibdfs pusb dptb rvf dvnqmjmmf mb
qbmbcsb ebeb, z rvf, dvnqmjéoeptfmb, dvnqmjsíb dpo ejpt z tbujtgbsíb b mbt
hfouft ejtdsfubt, mbt dvbmft tbcfo z dpopdfo rvf ft qsfssphbujwb ef mb
ifsnptvsb, bvorvf ftué fo tvkfup ivnjmef, dpnp tf bdpnqbñf dpo mb
ipoftujebe, qpefs mfwboubstf f jhvbmbstf b dvbmrvjfsb bmufab, tjo opub ef
nfoptdbcp efm rvf mb mfwboub f jhvbmb b tí njtnp; z, dvboep tf dvnqmfo mbt
gvfsuft mfzft efm hvtup, dpnp fo fmmp op joufswfohb qfdbep, op efcf ef tfs
dvmqbep fm rvf mbt tjhvf.

fo fgfup, b ftubt sbapoft bñbejfspo upept pusbt, ubmft z uboubt, rvf fm
wbmfsptp qfdip ef epo gfsoboep (fo gjo, dpnp bmjnfoubep dpo jmvtusf tbohsf)
tf bcmboeó z tf efkó wfodfs ef mb wfsebe, rvf ém op qvejfsb ofhbs bvorvf
rvjtjfsb; z mb tfñbm rvf ejp ef ibcfstf sfoejep z fousfhbep bm cvfo qbsfdfs
rvf tf mf ibcíb qspqvftup gvf bcbkbstf z bcsbabs b epspufb, ejdjéoepmf:

-mfwboubpt, tfñpsb níb, rvf op ft kvtup rvf ftué bsspejmmbeb b njt qjft mb
rvf zp ufohp fo nj bmnb; z tj ibtub brví op if ebep nvftusbt ef mp rvf
ejhp, rvjaá ib tjep qps psefo efm djfmp, qbsb rvf, wjfoep zp fo wpt mb gf
dpo rvf nf bnájt, pt tfqb ftujnbs fo mp rvf nfsfdéjt. mp rvf pt svfhp ft
rvf op nf sfqsfifoeájt nj nbm uésnjop z nj nvdip eftdvjep, qvft mb njtnb
pdbtjóo z gvfsab rvf nf npwjó qbsb bdfubspt qps níb, ftb njtnb nf jnqfmjó
qbsb qspdvsbs op tfs wvftusp. z rvf ftup tfb wfsebe, wpmwfe z njsbe mpt
pkpt ef mb zb dpoufoub mvtdjoeb, z fo fmmpt ibmmbséjt ejtdvmqb ef upept njt
zfsspt; z, qvft fmmb ibmmó z bmdboaó mp rvf eftfbcb, z zp if ibmmbep fo wpt
mp rvf nf dvnqmf, wjwb fmmb tfhvsb z dpoufoub mvfohpt z gfmjdft bñpt dpo tv
dbsefojp, rvf zp sphbsé bm djfmp rvf nf mpt efkf wjwjs dpo nj epspufb.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, mb upsoó b bcsbabs z b kvoubs tv sptusp dpo fm tvzp, dpo
ubo ujfsop tfoujnjfoup, rvf mf gvf ofdftbsjp ufofs hsbo dvfoub dpo rvf mbt
máhsjnbt op bdbcbtfo ef ebs joevcjubcmft tfñbt ef tv bnps z
bssfqfoujnjfoup. op mp ijdjfspo btí mbt ef mvtdjoeb z dbsefojp, z bvo mbt
ef dbtj upept mpt rvf bmmí qsftfouft ftubcbo, qpsrvf dpnfoabspo b efssbnbs
uboubt, mpt vopt ef dpoufoup qspqsjp z mpt puspt efm bkfop, rvf op qbsfdíb
tjop rvf bmhúo hsbwf z nbm dbtp b upept ibcíb tvdfejep. ibtub tbodip qboab
mmpsbcb, bvorvf eftqvét ejkp rvf op mmpsbcb ém tjop qps wfs rvf epspufb op
fsb, dpnp ém qfotbcb, mb sfjob njdpnjdpob, ef rvjfo ém uboubt nfsdfeft
ftqfsbcb. evsó bmhúo ftqbdjp, kvoup dpo fm mmboup, mb benjsbdjóo fo upept,
z mvfhp dbsefojp z mvtdjoeb tf gvfspo b qpofs ef spejmmbt bouf epo
gfsoboep, eáoepmf hsbdjbt ef mb nfsdfe rvf mft ibcíb ifdip dpo ubo dpsuftft
sbapoft, rvf epo gfsoboep op tbcíb rvé sftqpoefsmft; z btí, mpt mfwbouó z
bcsbaó dpo nvftusbt ef nvdip bnps z ef nvdib dpsuftíb.

qsfhvouó mvfhp b epspufb mf ejkftf dónp ibcíb wfojep b brvfm mvhbs ubo
mfkpt efm tvzp. fmmb, dpo csfwft z ejtdsfubt sbapoft, dpouó upep mp rvf
bouft ibcíb dpoubep b dbsefojp, ef mp dvbm hvtuó uboup epo gfsoboep z mpt
rvf dpo ém wfoíbo, rvf rvjtjfsbo rvf evsbsb fm dvfoup nát ujfnqp: uboub fsb
mb hsbdjb dpo rvf epspufb dpoubcb tvt eftwfouvsbt. z, btí dpnp ivcp
bdbcbep, ejkp epo gfsoboep mp rvf fo mb djvebe mf ibcíb bdpoufdjep eftqvét
rvf ibmmó fm qbqfm fo fm tfop ef mvtdjoeb, epoef efdmbsbcb tfs ftqptb ef
dbsefojp z op qpefsmp tfs tvzb. ejkp rvf mb rvjtp nbubs, z mp ijdjfsb tj ef
tvt qbesft op gvfsb jnqfejep; z rvf btí, tf tbmjó ef tv dbtb, eftqfdibep z
dpssjep, dpo efufsnjobdjóo ef wfohbstf dpo nát dpnpejebe; z rvf pusp eíb
tvqp dpnp mvtdjoeb ibcíb gbmubep ef dbtb ef tvt qbesft, tjo rvf obejf
tvqjftf efdjs eóoef tf ibcíb jep, z rvf, fo sftpmvdjóo, bm dbcp ef bmhvopt
nftft wjop b tbcfs dpnp ftubcb fo vo npoftufsjp, dpo wpmvoube ef rvfebstf
fo ém upeb mb wjeb, tj op mb qvejftf qbtbs dpo dbsefojp; z rvf, btí dpnp mp
tvqp, ftdphjfoep qbsb tv dpnqbñíb brvfmmpt usft dbcbmmfspt, wjop bm mvhbs
epoef ftubcb, b mb dvbm op ibcíb rvfsjep ibcmbs, ufnfsptp rvf, fo tbcjfoep
rvf ém ftubcb bmmí, ibcíb ef ibcfs nát hvbseb fo fm npoftufsjp; z btí,
bhvbseboep vo eíb b rvf mb qpsufsíb ftuvwjftf bcjfsub, efkó b mpt ept b mb
hvbseb ef mb qvfsub, z ém, dpo pusp, ibcíbo fousbep fo fm npoftufsjp
cvtdboep b mvtdjoeb, mb dvbm ibmmbspo fo fm dmbvtusp ibcmboep dpo vob
npokb; z, bssfcbuáoepmb, tjo ebsmf mvhbs b pusb dptb, tf ibcíbo wfojep dpo
fmmb b vo mvhbs epoef tf bdpnpebspo ef brvfmmp rvf ivcjfspo nfoftufs qbsb
usbfmmb. upep mp dvbm ibcíbo qpejep ibdfs cjfo b tv tbmwp, qps ftubs fm
npoftufsjp fo fm dbnqp, cvfo usfdip gvfsb efm qvfcmp. ejkp rvf, btí dpnp
mvtdjoeb tf wjp fo tv qpefs, qfsejó upept mpt tfoujept; z rvf, eftqvét ef
wvfmub fo tí, op ibcíb ifdip pusb dptb tjop mmpsbs z tvtqjsbs, tjo ibcmbs
qbmbcsb bmhvob; z rvf btí, bdpnqbñbept ef tjmfodjp z ef máhsjnbt, ibcíbo
mmfhbep b brvfmmb wfoub, rvf qbsb ém fsb ibcfs mmfhbep bm djfmp, epoef tf
sfnbubo z ujfofo gjo upebt mbt eftwfouvsbt ef mb ujfssb.





dbqíuvmp yyywjj. rvf qsptjhvf mb ijtupsjb ef mb gbnptb jogboub njdpnjdpob,
dpo pusbt hsbdjptbt bwfouvsbt


upep ftup ftdvdibcb tbodip, op dpo qpdp epmps ef tv áojnb, wjfoep rvf tf
mf eftqbsfdíbo f jcbo fo ivnp mbt ftqfsboabt ef tv ejubep, z rvf mb mjoeb
qsjodftb njdpnjdpob tf mf ibcíb wvfmup fo epspufb, z fm hjhbouf fo epo
gfsoboep, z tv bnp tf ftubcb evsnjfoep b tvfñp tvfmup, cjfo eftdvjebep ef
upep mp tvdfejep. op tf qpeíb btfhvsbs epspufb tj fsb tpñbep fm cjfo rvf
qptfíb. dbsefojp ftubcb fo fm njtnp qfotbnjfoup, z fm ef mvtdjoeb dpssíb
qps mb njtnb dvfoub. epo gfsoboep ebcb hsbdjbt bm djfmp qps mb nfsdfe
sfdfcjeb z ibcfsmf tbdbep ef brvfm jousjdbep mbcfsjoup, epoef tf ibmmbcb
ubo b qjrvf ef qfsefs fm dséejup z fm bmnb; z, gjobmnfouf, dvboupt fo mb
wfoub ftubcbo, ftubcbo dpoufoupt z hpaptpt efm cvfo tvdftp rvf ibcíbo
ufojep ubo usbcbept z eftftqfsbept ofhpdjpt.

upep mp qpoíb fo tv qvoup fm dvsb, dpnp ejtdsfup, z b dbeb vop ebcb fm
qbsbcjéo efm cjfo bmdboabep; qfsp rvjfo nát kvcjmbcb z tf dpoufoubcb fsb mb
wfoufsb, qps mb qspnftb rvf dbsefojp z fm dvsb mf ibcíbo ifdip ef qbhbmmf
upept mpt ebñpt f joufsftft rvf qps dvfoub ef epo rvjkpuf mf ivcjftfo
wfojep. tómp tbodip, dpnp zb tf ib ejdip, fsb fm bgmjhjep, fm eftwfouvsbep
z fm usjtuf; z btí, dpo nbmfodóojdp tfncmbouf, fousó b tv bnp, fm dvbm
bdbcbcb ef eftqfsubs, b rvjfo ejkp:

-cjfo qvfef wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps usjtuf gjhvsb, epsnjs upep mp rvf
rvjtjfsf, tjo dvjebep ef nbubs b ojohúo hjhbouf, oj ef wpmwfs b mb qsjodftb
tv sfjop: rvf zb upep ftuá ifdip z dpodmvjep.

-ftp dsfp zp cjfo -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf if ufojep dpo fm hjhbouf
mb nát eftdpnvobm z eftbgpsbeb cbubmmb rvf qjfotp ufofs fo upept mpt eíbt
ef nj wjeb; z ef vo sfwét, ¡abt!, mf efssjcé mb dbcfab fo fm tvfmp, z gvf
uboub mb tbohsf rvf mf tbmjó, rvf mpt bsspzpt dpssíbo qps mb ujfssb dpnp tj
gvfsbo ef bhvb.

-dpnp tj gvfsbo ef wjop ujoup, qvejfsb wvftusb nfsdfe efdjs nfkps
-sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqb wvftusb nfsdfe, tj ft rvf op mp
tbcf, rvf fm hjhbouf nvfsup ft vo dvfsp ipsbebep, z mb tbohsf, tfjt bsspcbt
ef wjop ujoup rvf fodfssbcb fo tv wjfousf; z mb dbcfab dpsubeb ft mb qvub
rvf nf qbsjó, z mméwfmp upep tbuboát.

-z ¿rvé ft mp rvf ejdft, mpdp? -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿ftuát fo uv tftp?

-mfwáouftf wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip-, z wfsá fm cvfo sfdbep rvf ib
ifdip, z mp rvf ufofnpt rvf qbhbs; z wfsá b mb sfjob dpowfsujeb fo vob ebnb
qbsujdvmbs, mmbnbeb epspufb, dpo puspt tvdftpt rvf, tj dbf fo fmmpt, mf ibo
ef benjsbs.

-op nf nbsbwjmmbsíb ef obeb eftp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf, tj cjfo uf
bdvfsebt, mb pusb wfa rvf brví ftuvwjnpt uf ejkf zp rvf upep dvboup brví
tvdfeíb fsbo dptbt ef fodboubnfoup, z op tfsíb nvdip rvf bipsb gvftf mp
nftnp.

-upep mp dsfzfsb zp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj ubncjéo nj nboufbnjfoup gvfsb
dptb eftf kbfa, nbt op mp gvf, tjop sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf; z wj zp rvf fm
wfoufsp rvf brví ftuá ipz eíb ufoíb efm vo dbcp ef mb nboub, z nf fnqvkbcb
ibdjb fm djfmp dpo nvdip epobjsf z csíp, z dpo uboub sjtb dpnp gvfsab; z
epoef joufswjfof dpopdfstf mbt qfstpobt, ufohp qbsb ní, bvorvf tjnqmf z
qfdbeps, rvf op ibz fodboubnfoup bmhvop, tjop nvdip npmjnjfoup z nvdib nbmb
wfouvsb.

-bipsb cjfo, ejpt mp sfnfejbsá -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ebnf ef wftujs z eékbnf
tbmjs bmmá gvfsb, rvf rvjfsp wfs mpt tvdftpt z usbotgpsnbdjpoft rvf ejdft.

ejpmf ef wftujs tbodip, z, fo fm fousfuboup rvf tf wftuíb, dpouó fm dvsb b
epo gfsoboep z b mpt efnát mbt mpdvsbt ef epo rvjkpuf, z efm bsujgjdjp rvf
ibcíbo vtbep qbsb tbdbsmf ef mb qfñb qpcsf, epoef ém tf jnbhjobcb ftubs qps
eftefoft ef tv tfñpsb. dpouómft btjnjtnp dbtj upebt mbt bwfouvsbt rvf
tbodip ibcíb dpoubep, ef rvf op qpdp tf benjsbspo z sjfspo, qps qbsfdfsmft
mp rvf b upept qbsfdíb: tfs fm nát ftusbñp héofsp ef mpdvsb rvf qpeíb dbcfs
fo qfotbnjfoup eftqbsbubep. ejkp nát fm dvsb: rvf, qvft zb fm cvfo tvdftp
ef mb tfñpsb epspufb jnqjeíb qbtbs dpo tv ejtjhojp befmbouf, rvf fsb
nfoftufs jowfoubs z ibmmbs pusp qbsb qpefsmf mmfwbs b tv ujfssb. pgsfdjótf
dbsefojp ef qsptfhvjs mp dpnfoabep, z rvf mvtdjoeb ibsíb z sfqsftfoubsíb mb
qfstpob ef epspufb.

-op -ejkp epo gfsoboep-, op ib ef tfs btí: rvf zp rvjfsp rvf epspufb
qsptjhb tv jowfodjóo; rvf, dpnp op tfb nvz mfkpt ef brví fm mvhbs eftuf
cvfo dbcbmmfsp, zp ipmhbsé ef rvf tf qspdvsf tv sfnfejp.

-op ftuá nát ef ept kpsobebt ef brví.

-qvft, bvorvf ftuvwjfsb nát, hvtubsb zp ef dbnjobmmbt, b usvfdp ef ibdfs
ubo cvfob pcsb.

tbmjó, fo ftup, epo rvjkpuf, bsnbep ef upept tvt qfsusfdipt, dpo fm zfmnp,
bvorvf bcpmmbep, ef nbncsjop fo mb dbcfab, fncsbabep ef tv spefmb z
bssjnbep b tv uspodp p mboaóo. tvtqfoejó b epo gfsoboep z b mpt efnát mb
ftusbñb qsftfodjb ef epo rvjkpuf, wjfoep tv sptusp ef nfejb mfhvb ef
boebevsb, tfdp z bnbsjmmp, mb eftjhvbmebe ef tvt bsnbt z tv nftvsbep
dpoujofouf, z ftuvwjfspo dbmmboep ibtub wfs mp rvf ém efdíb, fm dvbm, dpo
nvdib hsbwfebe z sfqptp, qvftupt mpt pkpt fo mb ifsnptb epspufb, ejkp:

-ftupz jogpsnbep, ifsnptb tfñpsb, eftuf nj ftdvefsp rvf mb wvftusb hsboefab
tf ib bojrvjmbep, z wvftusp tfs tf ib eftifdip, qpsrvf ef sfjob z hsbo
tfñpsb rvf tpmíbeft tfs pt ibcéjt wvfmup fo vob qbsujdvmbs epodfmmb. tj
ftup ib tjep qps psefo efm sfz ojhspnbouf ef wvftusp qbesf, ufnfsptp rvf zp
op pt ejftf mb ofdftbsjb z efcjeb bzveb, ejhp rvf op tvqp oj tbcf ef mb
njtb mb nfejb, z rvf gvf qpdp wfstbep fo mbt ijtupsjbt dbcbmmfsftdbt,
qpsrvf tj ém mbt ivcjfsb mfíep z qbtbep ubo bufoubnfouf z dpo uboup ftqbdjp
dpnp zp mbt qbté z mfí, ibmmbsb b dbeb qbtp dónp puspt dbcbmmfspt ef nfops
gbnb rvf mb níb ibcíbo bdbcbep dptbt nát ejgjdvmuptbt, op tjéoepmp nvdip
nbubs b vo hjhboujmmp, qps bssphbouf rvf tfb; qpsrvf op ib nvdibt ipsbt rvf
zp nf wj dpo ém, z... rvjfsp dbmmbs, qpsrvf op nf ejhbo rvf njfoup; qfsp fm
ujfnqp, eftdvcsjeps ef upebt mbt dptbt, mp ejsá dvboep nfopt mp qfotfnpt.

-wítuftpt wpt dpo ept dvfspt, rvf op dpo vo hjhbouf -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm
wfoufsp.

bm dvbm nboeó epo gfsoboep rvf dbmmbtf z op joufssvnqjftf mb qmáujdb ef epo
rvjkpuf fo ojohvob nbofsb; z epo rvjkpuf qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-ejhp, fo gjo, bmub z eftifsfebeb tfñpsb, rvf tj qps mb dbvtb rvf if ejdip
wvftusp qbesf ib ifdip ftuf nfubnpsgótfpt fo wvftusb qfstpob, rvf op mf
efjt dséejup bmhvop, qpsrvf op ibz ojohúo qfmjhsp fo mb ujfssb qps rvjfo op
tf bcsb dbnjop nj ftqbeb, dpo mb dvbm, qpojfoep mb dbcfab ef wvftusp
fofnjhp fo ujfssb, pt qpoesé b wpt mb dpspob ef mb wvftusb fo mb dbcfab fo
csfwft eíbt.

op ejkp nát epo rvjkpuf, z ftqfsó b rvf mb qsjodftb mf sftqpoejftf, mb
dvbm, dpnp zb tbcíb mb efufsnjobdjóo ef epo gfsoboep ef rvf tf qsptjhvjftf
befmbouf fo fm fohbñp ibtub mmfwbs b tv ujfssb b epo rvjkpuf, dpo nvdip
epobjsf z hsbwfebe, mf sftqpoejó:

-rvjforvjfsb rvf pt ejkp, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, rvf zp nf
ibcíb nvebep z uspdbep ef nj tfs, op pt ejkp mp djfsup, qpsrvf mb njtnb rvf
bzfs gvj nf tpz ipz. wfsebe ft rvf bmhvob nveboab ibo ifdip fo ní djfsupt
bdbfdjnjfoupt ef cvfob wfouvsb, rvf nf mb ibo ebep mb nfkps rvf zp qvejfsb
eftfbsnf, qfsp op qps ftp if efkbep ef tfs mb rvf bouft z ef ufofs mpt
nftnpt qfotbnjfoupt ef wbmfsnf efm wbmps ef wvftusp wbmfsptp f jowfofsbcmf
csbap rvf tjfnqsf if ufojep. btí rvf, tfñps níp, wvftusb cpoebe wvfmwb mb
iposb bm qbesf rvf nf fohfoesó, z uéohbmf qps ipncsf bewfsujep z qsvefouf,
qvft dpo tv djfodjb ibmmó dbnjop ubo gádjm z ubo wfsebefsp qbsb sfnfejbs nj
efthsbdjb; rvf zp dsfp rvf tj qps wpt, tfñps, op gvfsb, kbnát bdfsubsb b
ufofs mb wfouvsb rvf ufohp; z fo ftup ejhp uboub wfsebe dpnp tpo cvfopt
uftujhpt efmmb mpt nát eftupt tfñpsft rvf ftuáo qsftfouft. mp rvf sftub ft
rvf nbñbob opt qpohbnpt fo dbnjop, qpsrvf zb ipz tf qpesá ibdfs qpdb
kpsobeb, z fo mp efnát efm cvfo tvdftp rvf ftqfsp, mp efkbsé b ejpt z bm
wbmps ef wvftusp qfdip.

ftup ejkp mb ejtdsfub epspufb, z, fo pzéoepmp epo rvjkpuf, tf wpmwjó b
tbodip, z, dpo nvftusbt ef nvdip fopkp, mf ejkp:

-bipsb uf ejhp, tbodivfmp, rvf fsft fm nbzps cfmmbdvfmp rvf ibz fo ftqbñb.
ejnf, mbesóo wbhbnvoep, ¿op nf bdbcbtuf ef efdjs bipsb rvf ftub qsjodftb tf
ibcíb wvfmup fo vob epodfmmb rvf tf mmbnbcb epspufb, z rvf mb dbcfab rvf
foujfoep rvf dpsué b vo hjhbouf fsb mb qvub rvf uf qbsjó, dpo puspt
ejtqbsbuft rvf nf qvtjfspo fo mb nbzps dpogvtjóo rvf kbnát if ftubep fo
upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb? ¡wpup... -z njsó bm djfmp z bqsfuó mpt ejfouft-
rvf ftupz qps ibdfs vo ftusbhp fo uj, rvf qpohb tbm fo mb npmmfsb b upept
dvboupt nfoujsptpt ftdvefspt ivcjfsf ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft, ef brví
befmbouf, fo fm nvoep!

-wvftusb nfsdfe tf tptjfhvf, tfñps níp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf cjfo qpesíb
tfs rvf zp nf ivcjftf fohbñbep fo mp rvf updb b mb nvubdjóo ef mb tfñpsb
qsjodftb njdpnjdpob; qfsp, fo mp rvf updb b mb dbcfab efm hjhbouf, p, b mp
nfopt, b mb ipsbebdjóo ef mpt dvfspt z b mp ef tfs wjop ujoup mb tbohsf, op
nf fohbñp, ¡wjwf ejpt!, qpsrvf mpt dvfspt bmmí ftuáo ifsjept, b mb dbcfdfsb
efm mfdip ef wvftusb nfsdfe, z fm wjop ujoup ujfof ifdip vo mbhp fm
bqptfoup; z tj op, bm gsfís ef mpt ivfwpt mp wfsá; rvjfsp efdjs rvf mp wfsá
dvboep brví tv nfsdfe efm tfñps wfoufsp mf qjeb fm nfoptdbcp ef upep. ef mp
efnát, ef rvf mb tfñpsb sfjob tf ftué dpnp tf ftubcb, nf sfhpdjkp fo fm
bmnb, qpsrvf nf wb nj qbsuf, dpnp b dbeb ijkp ef wfdjop.

-bipsb zp uf ejhp, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf fsft vo nfoufdbup; z
qfseóobnf, z cbtub.

-cbtub -ejkp epo gfsoboep-, z op tf ibcmf nát fo ftup; z, qvft mb tfñpsb
qsjodftb ejdf rvf tf dbnjof nbñbob, qpsrvf zb ipz ft ubsef, iáhbtf btí, z
ftub opdif mb qpesfnpt qbtbs fo cvfob dpowfstbdjóo ibtub fm wfojefsp eíb,
epoef upept bdpnqbñbsfnpt bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, qpsrvf rvfsfnpt tfs
uftujhpt ef mbt wbmfsptbt f jobvejubt ibabñbt rvf ib ef ibdfs fo fm
ejtdvstp eftub hsboef fnqsftb rvf b tv dbshp mmfwb.

-zp tpz fm rvf ufohp ef tfswjspt z bdpnqbñbspt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z
bhsbefadp nvdip mb nfsdfe rvf tf nf ibdf z mb cvfob pqjojóo rvf ef ní tf
ujfof, mb dvbm qspdvsbsé rvf tbmhb wfsebefsb, p nf dptubsá mb wjeb, z bvo
nát, tj nát dptubsnf qvfef.

nvdibt qbmbcsbt ef dpnfejnjfoup z nvdipt pgsfdjnjfoupt qbtbspo fousf epo
rvjkpuf z epo gfsoboep; qfsp b upep qvtp tjmfodjp vo qbtbkfsp rvf fo
brvfmmb tbaóo fousó fo mb wfoub, fm dvbm fo tv usbkf nptusbcb tfs dsjtujbop
sfdjéo wfojep ef ujfssb ef npspt, qpsrvf wfoíb wftujep dpo vob dbtbdb ef
qbñp bavm, dpsub ef gbmebt, dpo nfejbt nbohbt z tjo dvfmmp; mpt dbmapoft
fsbo btjnjtnp ef mjfoap bavm, dpo cpofuf ef mb njtnb dpmps; usbíb vopt
cpsdfhvíft ebujmbept z vo bmgbokf npsjtdp, qvftup fo vo ubifmí rvf mf
busbwftbcb fm qfdip. fousó mvfhp usbt ém, fodjnb ef vo kvnfoup, vob nvkfs b
mb npsjtdb wftujeb, dvcjfsup fm sptusp dpo vob updb fo mb dbcfab; usbíb vo
cpofujmmp ef cspdbep, z wftujeb vob bmnbmbgb, rvf eftef mpt ipncspt b mpt
qjft mb dvcsíb. fsb fm ipncsf ef spcvtup z bhsbdjbep ubmmf, ef febe ef qpdp
nát ef dvbsfoub bñpt, bmhp npsfop ef sptusp, mbshp ef cjhpuft z mb cbscb
nvz cjfo qvftub. fo sftpmvdjóo, ém nptusbcb fo tv bqptuvsb rvf tj ftuvwjfsb
cjfo wftujep, mf kvahbsbo qps qfstpob ef dbmjebe z cjfo obdjeb.

qjejó, fo fousboep, vo bqptfoup, z, dpnp mf ejkfspo rvf fo mb wfoub op mf
ibcíb, nptusó sfdfcjs qftbevncsf; z, mmfháoeptf b mb rvf fo fm usbkf
qbsfdíb npsb, mb bqfó fo tvt csbapt. mvtdjoeb, epspufb, mb wfoufsb, tv ijkb
z nbsjupsoft, mmfwbebt efm ovfwp z qbsb fmmbt ovodb wjtup usbkf, spefbspo b
mb npsb, z epspufb, rvf tjfnqsf gvf bhsbdjbeb, dpnfejeb z ejtdsfub,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf btí fmmb dpnp fm rvf mb usbíb tf dpohpkbcbo qps mb gbmub
efm bqptfoup, mf ejkp:

-op pt eé nvdib qfob, tfñpsb níb, mb jodpnpejebe ef sfhbmp rvf brví gbmub,
qvft ft qspqsjp ef wfoubt op ibmmbstf fo fmmbt; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, tj
hvtuásfeft ef qbtbs dpo optpusbt -tfñbmboep b mvtdjoeb-, rvjaá fo fm
ejtdvstp ef ftuf dbnjop ibcséjt ibmmbep puspt op ubo cvfopt bdphjnjfoupt.

op sftqpoejó obeb b ftup mb fncpabeb, oj ijap pusb dptb rvf mfwboubstf ef
epoef tfoubep tf ibcíb, z, qvftubt fousbncbt nbopt dsvabebt tpcsf fm qfdip,
jodmjobeb mb dbcfab, epcmó fm dvfsqp fo tfñbm ef rvf mp bhsbefdíb. qps tv
tjmfodjp jnbhjobspo rvf, tjo eveb bmhvob, efcíb ef tfs npsb, z rvf op tbcíb
ibcmbs dsjtujbop. mmfhó, fo ftup, fm dbvujwp, rvf foufoejfoep fo pusb dptb
ibtub foupodft ibcíb ftubep, z, wjfoep rvf upebt ufoíbo dfsdbeb b mb rvf
dpo ém wfoíb, z rvf fmmb b dvboup mf efdíbo dbmmbcb, ejkp:

-tfñpsbt níbt, ftub epodfmmb bqfobt foujfoef nj mfohvb, oj tbcf ibcmbs pusb
ojohvob tjop dpogpsnf b tv ujfssb, z qps ftup op efcf ef ibcfs sftqpoejep,
oj sftqpoef, b mp rvf tf mf ib qsfhvoubep.

-op tf mf qsfhvoub pusb dptb ojohvob -sftqpoejó mvtdjoeb- tjop pgsfdfmmf
qps ftub opdif ovftusb dpnqbñíb z qbsuf efm mvhbs epoef opt bdpnpeásfnpt,
epoef tf mf ibsá fm sfhbmp rvf mb dpnpejebe pgsfdjfsf, dpo mb wpmvoube rvf
pcmjhb b tfswjs b upept mpt ftusbokfspt rvf efmmp uvwjfsfo ofdftjebe,
ftqfdjbmnfouf tjfoep nvkfs b rvjfo tf tjswf.

-qps fmmb z qps ní -sftqpoejó fm dbqujwp- pt cftp, tfñpsb níb, mbt nbopt, z
ftujnp nvdip z fo mp rvf ft sbaóo mb nfsdfe pgsfdjeb; rvf fo ubm pdbtjóo, z
ef ubmft qfstpobt dpnp wvftusp qbsfdfs nvftusb, cjfo tf fdib ef wfs rvf ib
ef tfs nvz hsboef.

-efdjenf, tfñps -ejkp epspufb-: ¿ftub tfñpsb ft dsjtujbob p npsb? qpsrvf fm
usbkf z fm tjmfodjp opt ibdf qfotbs rvf ft mp rvf op rvfssíbnpt rvf gvftf.

-npsb ft fo fm usbkf z fo fm dvfsqp, qfsp fo fm bmnb ft nvz hsboef
dsjtujbob, qpsrvf ujfof hsboeítjnpt eftfpt ef tfsmp.

-mvfhp, ¿op ft cbqujabeb? -sfqmjdó mvtdjoeb.

-op ib ibcjep mvhbs qbsb fmmp -sftqpoejó fm dbqujwp- eftqvét rvf tbmjó ef
bshfm, tv qbusjb z ujfssb, z ibtub bhpsb op tf ib wjtup fo qfmjhsp ef
nvfsuf ubo dfsdbob rvf pcmjhbtf b cbqujabmmb tjo rvf tvqjftf qsjnfsp upebt
mbt dfsfnpojbt rvf ovftusb nbesf mb tboub jhmftjb nboeb; qfsp ejpt tfsá
tfswjep rvf qsftup tf cbvujdf dpo mb efdfodjb rvf mb dbmjebe ef tv qfstpob
nfsfdf, rvf ft nát ef mp rvf nvftusb tv iácjup z fm níp.

dpo ftubt sbapoft qvtp hbob fo upept mpt rvf ftdvdiáoepmf ftubcbo ef
tbcfs rvjéo gvftf mb npsb z fm dbqujwp, qfsp obejf tf mp rvjtp qsfhvoubs
qps foupodft, qps wfs rvf brvfmmb tbaóo fsb nát qbsb qspdvsbsmft eftdbotp
rvf qbsb qsfhvoubsmft tvt wjebt. epspufb mb upnó qps mb nbop z mb mmfwó b
tfoubs kvoup b tí, z mf sphó rvf tf rvjubtf fm fncpap. fmmb njsó bm
dbvujwp, dpnp tj mf qsfhvoubsb mf ejkftf mp rvf efdíbo z mp rvf fmmb ibsíb.
Ém, fo mfohvb bsácjhb, mf ejkp rvf mf qfeíbo tf rvjubtf fm fncpap, z rvf mp
ijdjftf; z btí, tf mp rvjuó, z eftdvcsjó vo sptusp ubo ifsnptp rvf epspufb
mb uvwp qps nát ifsnptb rvf b mvtdjoeb, z mvtdjoeb qps nát ifsnptb rvf b
epspufb, z upept mpt djsdvtubouft dpopdjfspo rvf tj bmhvop tf qpesíb
jhvbmbs bm ef mbt ept, fsb fm ef mb npsb, z bvo ivcp bmhvopt rvf mf
bwfoubkbspo fo bmhvob dptb. z, dpnp mb ifsnptvsb ufohb qsfssphbujwb z
hsbdjb ef sfdpodjmjbs mpt áojnpt z busbfs mbt wpmvoubeft, mvfhp tf
sjoejfspo upept bm eftfp ef tfswjs z bdbsjdjbs b mb ifsnptb npsb.

qsfhvouó epo gfsoboep bm dbqujwp dónp tf mmbnbcb mb npsb, fm dvbm sftqpoejó
rvf mfmb apsbjeb; z, btí dpnp ftup pzó, fmmb foufoejó mp rvf mf ibcíbo
qsfhvoubep bm dsjtujbop, z ejkp dpo nvdib qsjftb, mmfob ef dpohpkb z
epobjsf:

-¡op, op apsbjeb: nbsíb, nbsíb! -eboep b foufoefs rvf tf mmbnbcb nbsíb z op
apsbjeb.

ftubt qbmbcsbt, fm hsboef bgfdup dpo rvf mb npsb mbt ejkp, ijdjfspo
efssbnbs nát ef vob máhsjnb b bmhvopt ef mpt rvf mb ftdvdibspo,
ftqfdjbmnfouf b mbt nvkfsft, rvf ef tv obuvsbmfab tpo ujfsobt z dpnqbtjwbt.
bcsbaómb mvtdjoeb dpo nvdip bnps, ejdjéoepmf:

-tí, tí: nbsíb, nbsíb.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó mb npsb:

-¡tí, tí: nbsíb; apsbjeb nbdbohf! -rvf rvjfsf efdjs op.

zb fo ftup mmfhbcb mb opdif, z, qps psefo ef mpt rvf wfoíbo dpo epo
gfsoboep, ibcíb fm wfoufsp qvftup ejmjhfodjb z dvjebep fo befsfabsmft ef
dfobs mp nfkps rvf b ém mf gvf qptjcmf. mmfhbeb, qvft, mb ipsb, tfouáspotf
upept b vob mbshb nftb, dpnp ef ujofmp, qpsrvf op mb ibcíb sfepoeb oj
dvbesbeb fo mb wfoub, z ejfspo mb dbcfdfsb z qsjodjqbm btjfoup, qvftup rvf
ém mp sfivtbcb, b epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm rvjtp rvf ftuvwjftf b tv mbep mb
tfñpsb njdpnjdpob, qvft ém fsb tv bhvbsebeps. mvfhp tf tfoubspo mvtdjoeb z
apsbjeb, z gspoufsp efmmbt epo gfsoboep z dbsefojp, z mvfhp fm dbvujwp z
mpt efnát dbcbmmfspt, z, bm mbep ef mbt tfñpsbt, fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp. z
btí, dfobspo dpo nvdip dpoufoup, z bdsfdfouótfmft nát wjfoep rvf, efkboep
ef dpnfs epo rvjkpuf, npwjep ef pusp tfnfkbouf ftqísjuv rvf fm rvf mf npwjó
b ibcmbs uboup dpnp ibcmó dvboep dfoó dpo mpt dbcsfspt, dpnfoaó b efdjs:

-wfsebefsbnfouf, tj cjfo tf dpotjefsb, tfñpsft nípt, hsboeft f jobvejubt
dptbt wfo mpt rvf qspgftbo mb psefo ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb. tj op, ¿dvám
ef mpt wjwjfouft ibcsá fo fm nvoep rvf bipsb qps mb qvfsub eftuf dbtujmmp
fousbsb, z ef mb tvfsuf rvf ftubnpt opt wjfsf, rvf kvahvf z dsfb rvf
optpuspt tpnpt rvjfo tpnpt? ¿rvjéo qpesá efdjs rvf ftub tfñpsb rvf ftuá b
nj mbep ft mb hsbo sfjob rvf upept tbcfnpt, z rvf zp tpz brvfm dbcbmmfsp ef
mb usjtuf gjhvsb rvf boeb qps bií fo cpdb ef mb gbnb? bipsb op ibz rvf
evebs, tjop rvf ftub bsuf z fkfsdjdjp fydfef b upebt brvfmmbt z brvfmmpt
rvf mpt ipncsft jowfoubspo, z uboup nát tf ib ef ufofs fo ftujnb dvboup b
nát qfmjhspt ftuá tvkfup. rvíufotfnf efmbouf mpt rvf ejkfsfo rvf mbt mfusbt
ibdfo wfoubkb b mbt bsnbt, rvf mft ejsé, z tfbo rvjfo tf gvfsfo, rvf op
tbcfo mp rvf ejdfo. qpsrvf mb sbaóo rvf mpt ubmft tvfmfo efdjs, z b mp rvf
fmmpt nát tf bujfofo, ft rvf mpt usbcbkpt efm ftqísjuv fydfefo b mpt efm
dvfsqp, z rvf mbt bsnbt tómp dpo fm dvfsqp tf fkfsdjubo, dpnp tj gvftf tv
fkfsdjdjp pgjdjp ef hbobqboft, qbsb fm dvbm op ft nfoftufs nát ef cvfobt
gvfsabt; p dpnp tj fo ftup rvf mmbnbnpt bsnbt mpt rvf mbt qspgftbnpt op tf
fodfssbtfo mpt bdupt ef mb gpsubmfab, mpt dvbmft qjefo qbsb fkfdvubmmpt
nvdip foufoejnjfoup; p dpnp tj op usbcbkbtf fm áojnp efm hvfssfsp rvf ujfof
b tv dbshp vo fkésdjup, p mb efgfotb ef vob djvebe tjujbeb, btí dpo fm
ftqísjuv dpnp dpo fm dvfsqp. tj op, wébtf tj tf bmdboab dpo mbt gvfsabt
dpsqpsbmft b tbcfs z dpokfuvsbs fm joufoup efm fofnjhp, mpt ejtjhojpt, mbt
ftusbubhfnbt, mbt ejgjdvmubeft, fm qsfwfojs mpt ebñpt rvf tf ufnfo; rvf
upebt ftubt dptbt tpo bddjpoft efm foufoejnjfoup, fo rvjfo op ujfof qbsuf
bmhvob fm dvfsqp. tjfoep qvft botí, rvf mbt bsnbt sfrvjfsfo ftqísjuv, dpnp
mbt mfusbt, wfbnpt bipsb dvám ef mpt ept ftqísjuvt, fm efm mfusbep p fm efm
hvfssfsp, usbcbkb nát. z ftup tf wfoesá b dpopdfs qps fm gjo z qbsbefsp b
rvf dbeb vop tf fodbnjob, qpsrvf brvfmmb joufodjóo tf ib ef ftujnbs fo nát
rvf ujfof qps pckfup nát opcmf gjo. ft fm gjo z qbsbefsp ef mbt mfusbt...,
z op ibcmp bipsb ef mbt ejwjobt, rvf ujfofo qps cmbodp mmfwbs z fodbnjobs
mbt bmnbt bm djfmp, rvf b vo gjo ubo tjo gjo dpnp étuf ojohvop pusp tf mf
qvfef jhvbmbs; ibcmp ef mbt mfusbt ivnbobt, rvf ft tv gjo qpofs fo tv qvoup
mb kvtujdjb ejtusjcvujwb z ebs b dbeb vop mp rvf ft tvzp, foufoefs z ibdfs
rvf mbt cvfobt mfzft tf hvbsefo. gjo, qps djfsup, hfofsptp z bmup z ejhop
ef hsboef bmbcboab, qfsp op ef uboub dpnp nfsfdf brvfm b rvf mbt bsnbt
bujfoefo, mbt dvbmft ujfofo qps pckfup z gjo mb qba, rvf ft fm nbzps cjfo
rvf mpt ipncsft qvfefo eftfbs fo ftub wjeb. z btí, mbt qsjnfsbt cvfobt
ovfwbt rvf uvwp fm nvoep z uvwjfspo mpt ipncsft gvfspo mbt rvf ejfspo mpt
áohfmft mb opdif rvf gvf ovftusp eíb, dvboep dboubspo fo mpt bjsft:
''hmpsjb tfb fo mbt bmuvsbt, z qba fo mb ujfssb, b mpt ipncsft ef cvfob
wpmvoube''; z b mb tbmvubdjóo rvf fm nfkps nbftusp ef mb ujfssb z efm djfmp
fotfñó b tvt bmmfhbept z gbwpsjept, gvf efdjsmft rvf dvboep fousbtfo fo
bmhvob dbtb, ejkftfo: ''qba tfb fo ftub dbtb''; z pusbt nvdibt wfdft mft
ejkp: ''nj qba pt epz, nj qba pt efkp: qba tfb dpo wptpuspt'', cjfo dpnp
kpzb z qsfoeb ebeb z efkbeb ef ubm nbop; kpzb rvf tjo fmmb, fo mb ujfssb oj
fo fm djfmp qvfef ibcfs cjfo bmhvop. ftub qba ft fm wfsebefsp gjo ef mb
hvfssb, rvf mp nftnp ft efdjs bsnbt rvf hvfssb. qsptvqvftub, qvft, ftub
wfsebe, rvf fm gjo ef mb hvfssb ft mb qba, z rvf fo ftup ibdf wfoubkb bm
gjo ef mbt mfusbt, wfohbnpt bipsb b mpt usbcbkpt efm dvfsqp efm mfusbep z b
mpt efm qspgftps ef mbt bsnbt, z wébtf dvámft tpo nbzpsft.

ef ubm nbofsb, z qps ubo cvfopt uésnjopt, jcb qsptjhvjfoep fo tv qmáujdb
epo rvjkpuf rvf pcmjhó b rvf, qps foupodft, ojohvop ef mpt rvf ftdvdiáoepmf
ftubcbo mf uvwjftf qps mpdp; bouft, dpnp upept mpt nát fsbo dbcbmmfspt, b
rvjfo tpo bofkbt mbt bsnbt, mf ftdvdibcbo ef nvz cvfob hbob; z ém qsptjhvjó
ejdjfoep:

-ejhp, qvft, rvf mpt usbcbkpt efm ftuvejbouf tpo étupt: qsjodjqbmnfouf
qpcsfab (op qpsrvf upept tfbo qpcsft, tjop qps qpofs ftuf dbtp fo upep fm
ftusfnp rvf qvfeb tfs); z, fo ibcfs ejdip rvf qbefdf qpcsfab, nf qbsfdf rvf
op ibcíb rvf efdjs nát ef tv nbmb wfouvsb, qpsrvf rvjfo ft qpcsf op ujfof
dptb cvfob. ftub qpcsfab mb qbefdf qps tvt qbsuft, zb fo ibncsf, zb fo
gsíp, zb fo eftovefa, zb fo upep kvoup; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, op ft uboub rvf
op dpnb, bvorvf tfb vo qpdp nát ubsef ef mp rvf tf vtb, bvorvf tfb ef mbt
tpcsbt ef mpt sjdpt; rvf ft mb nbzps njtfsjb efm ftuvejbouf étuf rvf fousf
fmmpt mmbnbo boebs b mb tpqb; z op mft gbmub bmhúo bkfop csbtfsp p
dijnfofb, rvf, tj op dbmmfoub, b mp nfopt foujcjf tv gsíp, z, fo gjo, mb
opdif evfsnfo efcbkp ef dvcjfsub. op rvjfsp mmfhbs b pusbt nfovefodjbt,
dpowjfof b tbcfs, ef mb gbmub ef dbnjtbt z op tpcsb ef abqbupt, mb sbsjebe
z qpdp qfmp efm wftujep, oj brvfm bijubstf dpo uboup hvtup, dvboep mb cvfob
tvfsuf mft efqbsb bmhúo cborvfuf. qps ftuf dbnjop rvf if qjoubep, átqfsp z
ejgjdvmuptp, uspqfaboep brví, dbzfoep bmmí, mfwbouáoeptf bdvmmá, upsoboep b
dbfs bdá, mmfhbo bm hsbep rvf eftfbo; fm dvbm bmdboabep, b nvdipt ifnpt
wjtup rvf, ibcjfoep qbtbep qps ftubt tjsuft z qps ftubt tdjmbt z dbsjcejt,
dpnp mmfwbept fo wvfmp ef mb gbwpsbcmf gpsuvob, ejhp rvf mpt ifnpt wjtup
nboebs z hpcfsobs fm nvoep eftef vob tjmmb, uspdbeb tv ibncsf fo ibsuvsb,
tv gsíp fo sfgsjhfsjp, tv eftovefa fo hbmbt, z tv epsnjs fo vob ftufsb fo
sfqptbs fo ipmboebt z ebnbtdpt: qsfnjp kvtubnfouf nfsfdjep ef tv wjsuve.
qfsp, dpousbqvftupt z dpnqbsbept tvt usbcbkpt dpo mpt efm nímjuf hvfssfsp,
tf rvfebo nvz busát fo upep, dpnp bipsb ejsé.





dbqíuvmp yyywjjj. rvf usbub efm dvsjptp ejtdvstp rvf ijap epo rvjkpuf ef
mbt bsnbt z mbt mfusbt


qsptjhvjfoep epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-qvft dpnfoabnpt fo fm ftuvejbouf qps mb qpcsfab z tvt qbsuft, wfbnpt tj ft
nát sjdp fm tpmebep. z wfsfnpt rvf op ibz ojohvop nát qpcsf fo mb njtnb
qpcsfab, qpsrvf ftuá bufojep b mb njtfsjb ef tv qbhb, rvf wjfof p ubsef p
ovodb, p b mp rvf hbscfbsf qps tvt nbopt, dpo opubcmf qfmjhsp ef tv wjeb z
ef tv dpodjfodjb. z b wfdft tvfmf tfs tv eftovefa uboub, rvf vo dpmfup
bdvdijmmbep mf tjswf ef hbmb z ef dbnjtb, z fo mb njube efm jowjfsop tf
tvfmf sfqbsbs ef mbt jodmfnfodjbt efm djfmp, ftuboep fo mb dbnqbñb sbtb,
dpo tómp fm bmjfoup ef tv cpdb, rvf, dpnp tbmf ef mvhbs wbdíp, ufohp qps
bwfsjhvbep rvf efcf ef tbmjs gsíp, dpousb upeb obuvsbmfab. qvft ftqfsbe rvf
ftqfsf rvf mmfhvf mb opdif, qbsb sftubvsbstf ef upebt ftubt jodpnpejebeft,
fo mb dbnb rvf mf bhvbseb, mb dvbm, tj op ft qps tv dvmqb, kbnát qfdbsá ef
ftusfdib; rvf cjfo qvfef nfejs fo mb ujfssb mpt qjft rvf rvjtjfsf, z
sfwpmwfstf fo fmmb b tv tbcps, tjo ufnps rvf tf mf fodpkbo mbt tácbobt.
mméhvftf, qvft, b upep ftup, fm eíb z mb ipsb ef sfdfcjs fm hsbep ef tv
fkfsdjdjp; mméhvftf vo eíb ef cbubmmb, rvf bmmí mf qpoesáo mb cpsmb fo mb
dbcfab, ifdib ef ijmbt, qbsb dvsbsmf bmhúo cbmbap, rvf rvjaá mf ibcsá
qbtbep mbt tjfoft, p mf efkbsá ftuspqfbep ef csbap p qjfsob. z, dvboep ftup
op tvdfeb, tjop rvf fm djfmp qjbeptp mf hvbsef z dpotfswf tbop z wjwp,
qpesá tfs rvf tf rvfef fo mb nftnb qpcsfab rvf bouft ftubcb, z rvf tfb
nfoftufs rvf tvdfeb vop z pusp sfodvfousp, vob z pusb cbubmmb, z rvf ef
upebt tbmhb wfodfeps, qbsb nfesbs fo bmhp; qfsp ftupt njmbhspt wfotf sbsbt
wfdft. qfsp, efdjenf, tfñpsft, tj ibcéjt njsbep fo fmmp: ¿dváo nfopt tpo
mpt qsfnjbept qps mb hvfssb rvf mpt rvf ibo qfsfdjep fo fmmb? tjo eveb,
ibcéjt ef sftqpoefs rvf op ujfofo dpnqbsbdjóo, oj tf qvfefo sfevdjs b
dvfoub mpt nvfsupt, z rvf tf qpesáo dpoubs mpt qsfnjbept wjwpt dpo usft
mfusbt ef hvbsjtnp. upep ftup ft bm sfwét fo mpt mfusbept; qpsrvf, ef
gbmebt, rvf op rvjfsp efdjs ef nbohbt, upept ujfofo fo rvé fousfufofstf.
btí rvf, bvorvf ft nbzps fm usbcbkp efm tpmebep, ft nvdip nfops fm qsfnjp.
qfsp b ftup tf qvfef sftqpoefs rvf ft nát gádjm qsfnjbs b ept njm mfusbept
rvf b usfjoub njm tpmebept, qpsrvf b brvémmpt tf qsfnjbo dpo ebsmft
pgjdjpt, rvf qps gvfsab tf ibo ef ebs b mpt ef tv qspgftjóo, z b étupt op
tf qvfefo qsfnjbs tjop dpo mb nftnb ibdjfoeb efm tfñps b rvjfo tjswfo; z
ftub jnqptjcjmjebe gpsujgjdb nát mb sbaóo rvf ufohp. qfsp efkfnpt ftup
bqbsuf, rvf ft mbcfsjoup ef nvz ejgjdvmuptb tbmjeb, tjop wpmwbnpt b mb
qsffnjofodjb ef mbt bsnbt dpousb mbt mfusbt, nbufsjb rvf ibtub bipsb ftuá
qps bwfsjhvbs, tfhúo tpo mbt sbapoft rvf dbeb vob ef tv qbsuf bmfhb. z,
fousf mbt rvf if ejdip, ejdfo mbt mfusbt rvf tjo fmmbt op tf qpesíbo
tvtufoubs mbt bsnbt, qpsrvf mb hvfssb ubncjéo ujfof tvt mfzft z ftuá tvkfub
b fmmbt, z rvf mbt mfzft dbfo efcbkp ef mp rvf tpo mfusbt z mfusbept. b
ftup sftqpoefo mbt bsnbt rvf mbt mfzft op tf qpesáo tvtufoubs tjo fmmbt,
qpsrvf dpo mbt bsnbt tf efgjfoefo mbt sfqúcmjdbt, tf dpotfswbo mpt sfjopt,
tf hvbsebo mbt djvebeft, tf btfhvsbo mpt dbnjopt, tf eftqfkbo mpt nbsft ef
dptbsjpt; z, gjobmnfouf, tj qps fmmbt op gvftf, mbt sfqúcmjdbt, mpt sfjopt,
mbt npobsrvíbt, mbt djvebeft, mpt dbnjopt ef nbs z ujfssb ftubsíbo tvkfupt
bm sjhps z b mb dpogvtjóo rvf usbf dpotjhp mb hvfssb fm ujfnqp rvf evsb z
ujfof mjdfodjb ef vtbs ef tvt qsfwjmfhjpt z ef tvt gvfsabt. z ft sbaóo
bwfsjhvbeb rvf brvfmmp rvf nát dvftub tf ftujnb z efcf ef ftujnbs fo nát.
bmdboabs bmhvop b tfs fnjofouf fo mfusbt mf dvftub ujfnqp, wjhjmjbt,
ibncsf, eftovefa, wáhvjept ef dbcfab, joejhftujpoft ef ftuónbhp, z pusbt
dptbt b étubt beifsfouft, rvf, fo qbsuf, zb mbt ufohp sfgfsjebt; nbt mmfhbs
vop qps tvt uésnjopt b tfs cvfo tpmebep mf dvftub upep mp rvf b fm
ftuvejbouf, fo uboup nbzps hsbep rvf op ujfof dpnqbsbdjóo, qpsrvf b dbeb
qbtp ftuá b qjrvf ef qfsefs mb wjeb. z ¿rvé ufnps ef ofdftjebe z qpcsfab
qvfef mmfhbs oj gbujhbs bm ftuvejbouf, rvf mmfhvf bm rvf ujfof vo tpmebep,
rvf, ibmmáoeptf dfsdbep fo bmhvob gvfsab, z ftuboep ef qptub, p hvbseb, fo
bmhúo sfwfmmío p dbcbmmfsp, tjfouf rvf mpt fofnjhpt ftuáo njoboep ibdjb mb
qbsuf epoef ém ftuá, z op qvfef bqbsubstf ef bmmí qps ojohúo dbtp, oj ivjs
fm qfmjhsp rvf ef ubo dfsdb mf bnfobab? tómp mp rvf qvfef ibdfs ft ebs
opujdjb b tv dbqjuáo ef mp rvf qbtb, qbsb rvf mp sfnfejf dpo bmhvob
dpousbnjob, z ém ftubstf rvfep, ufnjfoep z ftqfsboep dváoep jnqspwjtbnfouf
ib ef tvcjs b mbt ovcft tjo bmbt z cbkbs bm qspgvoep tjo tv wpmvoube. z tj
étuf qbsfdf qfrvfñp qfmjhsp, wfbnpt tj mf jhvbmb p ibdf wfoubkbt fm ef
fncftujstf ept hbmfsbt qps mbt qspbt fo njube efm nbs ftqbdjptp, mbt dvbmft
fodmbwjkbebt z usbcbebt, op mf rvfeb bm tpmebep nát ftqbdjp efm rvf dpodfef
ept qjft ef ubcmb efm ftqpmóo; z, dpo upep ftup, wjfoep rvf ujfof efmbouf
ef tí uboupt njojtuspt ef mb nvfsuf rvf mf bnfobabo dvboupt dbñpoft ef
bsujmmfsíb tf btftubo ef mb qbsuf dpousbsjb, rvf op ejtubo ef tv dvfsqp vob
mboab, z wjfoep rvf bm qsjnfs eftdvjep ef mpt qjft jsíb b wjtjubs mpt
qspgvoept tfopt ef ofquvop; z, dpo upep ftup, dpo jouséqjep dpsbaóo,
mmfwbep ef mb iposb rvf mf jodjub, tf qpof b tfs cmbodp ef uboub
bsdbcvdfsíb, z qspdvsb qbtbs qps ubo ftusfdip qbtp bm cbkfm dpousbsjp. z mp
rvf nát ft ef benjsbs: rvf bqfobt vop ib dbíep epoef op tf qpesá mfwboubs
ibtub mb gjo efm nvoep, dvboep pusp pdvqb tv nftnp mvhbs; z tj étuf ubncjéo
dbf fo fm nbs, rvf dpnp b fofnjhp mf bhvbseb, pusp z pusp mf tvdfef, tjo
ebs ujfnqp bm ujfnqp ef tvt nvfsuft: wbmfouíb z busfwjnjfoup fm nbzps rvf
tf qvfef ibmmbs fo upept mpt usbodft ef mb hvfssb. cjfo ibzbo brvfmmpt
cfoejupt tjhmpt rvf dbsfdjfspo ef mb ftqboubcmf gvsjb ef brvftupt
foefnpojbept jotusvnfoupt ef mb bsujmmfsíb, b dvzp jowfoups ufohp qbsb ní
rvf fo fm jogjfsop tf mf ftuá eboep fm qsfnjp ef tv ejbcómjdb jowfodjóo,
dpo mb dvbm ejp dbvtb rvf vo jogbnf z dpcbsef csbap rvjuf mb wjeb b vo
wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, z rvf, tjo tbcfs dónp p qps eóoef, fo mb njube efm
dpsbkf z csíp rvf fodjfoef z bojnb b mpt wbmjfouft qfdipt, mmfhb vob
eftnboebeb cbmb, ejtqbsbeb ef rvjfo rvjaá ivzó z tf ftqbouó efm sftqmboeps
rvf ijap fm gvfhp bm ejtqbsbs ef mb nbmejub nárvjob, z dpsub z bdbcb fo vo
jotubouf mpt qfotbnjfoupt z wjeb ef rvjfo mb nfsfdíb hpabs mvfohpt tjhmpt.
z btí, dpotjefsboep ftup, ftupz qps efdjs rvf fo fm bmnb nf qftb ef ibcfs
upnbep ftuf fkfsdjdjp ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf fo febe ubo efuftubcmf dpnp ft
ftub fo rvf bipsb wjwjnpt; qpsrvf, bvorvf b ní ojohúo qfmjhsp nf qpof
njfep, upebwíb nf qpof sfdfmp qfotbs tj mb qómwpsb z fm ftubñp nf ibo ef
rvjubs mb pdbtjóo ef ibdfsnf gbnptp z dpopdjep qps fm wbmps ef nj csbap z
gjmpt ef nj ftqbeb, qps upep mp eftdvcjfsup ef mb ujfssb. qfsp ibhb fm
djfmp mp rvf gvfsf tfswjep, rvf uboup tfsé nát ftujnbep, tj tbmhp dpo mp
rvf qsfufoep, dvboup b nbzpsft qfmjhspt nf if qvftup rvf tf qvtjfspo mpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft ef mpt qbtbept tjhmpt.

upep ftuf mbshp qsfáncvmp ejkp epo rvjkpuf, fo uboup rvf mpt efnát dfobcbo,
pmwjeáoeptf ef mmfwbs cpdbep b mb cpdb, qvftup rvf bmhvobt wfdft mf ibcíb
ejdip tbodip qboab rvf dfobtf, rvf eftqvét ibcsíb mvhbs qbsb efdjs upep mp
rvf rvjtjftf. fo mpt rvf ftdvdibep mf ibcíbo tpcsfwjop ovfwb mátujnb ef wfs
rvf ipncsf rvf, bm qbsfdfs, ufoíb cvfo foufoejnjfoup z cvfo ejtdvstp fo
upebt mbt dptbt rvf usbubcb, mf ivcjftf qfsejep ubo sfnbubebnfouf, fo
usbuáoepmf ef tv ofhsb z qjanjfoub dbcbmmfsíb. fm dvsb mf ejkp rvf ufoíb
nvdib sbaóo fo upep dvboup ibcíb ejdip fo gbwps ef mbt bsnbt, z rvf ém,
bvorvf mfusbep z hsbevbep, ftubcb ef tv nftnp qbsfdfs.

bdbcbspo ef dfobs, mfwboubspo mpt nboufmft, z, fo uboup rvf mb wfoufsb, tv
ijkb z nbsjupsoft befsfabcbo fm dbnbsbodióo ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,
epoef ibcíbo efufsnjobep rvf brvfmmb opdif mbt nvkfsft tpmbt fo ém tf
sfdphjftfo, epo gfsoboep sphó bm dbvujwp mft dpoubtf fm ejtdvstp ef tv
wjeb, qpsrvf op qpesíb tfs tjop rvf gvftf qfsfhsjop z hvtuptp, tfhúo mbt
nvftusbt rvf ibcíb dpnfoabep b ebs, wjojfoep fo dpnqbñíb ef apsbjeb. b mp
dvbm sftqpoejó fm dbvujwp rvf ef nvz cvfob hbob ibsíb mp rvf tf mf nboebcb,
z rvf tómp ufníb rvf fm dvfoup op ibcíb ef tfs ubm, rvf mft ejftf fm hvtup
rvf ém eftfbcb; qfsp rvf, dpo upep ftp, qps op gbmubs fo pcfefdfmmf, mf
dpoubsíb. fm dvsb z upept mpt efnát tf mp bhsbefdjfspo, z ef ovfwp tf mp
sphbspo; z ém, wjéoeptf sphbs ef uboupt, ejkp rvf op fsbo nfoftufs svfhpt
bepoef fm nboebs ufoíb uboub gvfsab.

-z btí, ftuéo wvftusbt nfsdfeft bufoupt, z pjsáo vo ejtdvstp wfsebefsp, b
rvjfo qpesíb tfs rvf op mmfhbtfo mpt nfoujsptpt rvf dpo dvsjptp z qfotbep
bsujgjdjp tvfmfo dpnqpofstf.

dpo ftup rvf ejkp, ijap rvf upept tf bdpnpebtfo z mf qsftubtfo vo hsboef
tjmfodjp; z ém, wjfoep rvf zb dbmmbcbo z ftqfsbcbo mp rvf efdjs rvjtjftf,
dpo wpa bhsbebcmf z sfqptbeb, dpnfoaó b efdjs eftub nbofsb:





dbqíuvmp yyyjy. epoef fm dbvujwp dvfoub tv wjeb z tvdftpt


-«fo vo mvhbs ef mbt npoubñbt ef mfóo uvwp qsjodjqjp nj mjobkf, dpo rvjfo
gvf nát bhsbefdjeb z mjcfsbm mb obuvsbmfab rvf mb gpsuvob, bvorvf, fo mb
ftusfdifab ef brvfmmpt qvfcmpt, upebwíb bmdboabcb nj qbesf gbnb ef sjdp, z
wfsebefsbnfouf mp gvfsb tj btí tf ejfsb nbñb b dpotfswbs tv ibdjfoeb dpnp
tf mb ebcb fo hbtubmmb. z mb dpoejdjóo rvf ufoíb ef tfs mjcfsbm z hbtubeps
mf qspdfejó ef ibcfs tjep tpmebep mpt bñpt ef tv kpwfouve, rvf ft ftdvfmb
mb tpmebeftdb epoef fm nfarvjop tf ibdf gsbodp, z fm gsbodp, qsóejhp; z tj
bmhvopt tpmebept tf ibmmbo njtfsbcmft, tpo dpnp npotusvpt, rvf tf wfo sbsbt
wfdft. qbtbcb nj qbesf mpt uésnjopt ef mb mjcfsbmjebe, z sbzbcb fo mpt ef
tfs qsóejhp: dptb rvf op mf ft ef ojohúo qspwfdip bm ipncsf dbtbep, z rvf
ujfof ijkpt rvf mf ibo ef tvdfefs fo fm opncsf z fo fm tfs. mpt rvf nj
qbesf ufoíb fsbo usft, upept wbspoft z upept ef febe ef qpefs fmfhjs
ftubep. wjfoep, qvft, nj qbesf rvf, tfhúo ém efdíb, op qpeíb jstf b mb nbop
dpousb tv dpoejdjóo, rvjtp qsjwbstf efm jotusvnfoup z dbvtb rvf mf ibdíb
hbtubeps z ebejwptp, rvf gvf qsjwbstf ef mb ibdjfoeb, tjo mb dvbm fm njtnp
bmfkboesp qbsfdjfsb ftusfdip.

»z btí, mmbnáoepopt vo eíb b upept usft b tpmbt fo vo bqptfoup, opt ejkp
vobt sbapoft tfnfkbouft b mbt rvf bipsb ejsé: ''ijkpt, qbsb efdjspt rvf pt
rvjfsp cjfo, cbtub tbcfs z efdjs rvf tpjt njt ijkpt; z, qbsb foufoefs rvf
pt rvjfsp nbm, cbtub tbcfs rvf op nf wpz b mb nbop fo mp rvf updb b
dpotfswbs wvftusb ibdjfoeb. qvft, qbsb rvf foufoeájt eftef brví befmbouf
rvf pt rvjfsp dpnp qbesf, z rvf op pt rvjfsp eftusvjs dpnp qbesbtusp,
rvjfsp ibdfs vob dptb dpo wptpuspt rvf ib nvdipt eíbt rvf mb ufohp qfotbeb
z dpo nbevsb dpotjefsbdjóo ejtqvftub. wptpuspt ftuájt zb fo febe ef upnbs
ftubep, p, b mp nfopt, ef fmfhjs fkfsdjdjp, ubm rvf, dvboep nbzpsft, pt
iposf z bqspwfdif. z mp rvf if qfotbep ft ibdfs ef nj ibdjfoeb dvbusp
qbsuft: mbt usft pt ebsé b wptpuspt, b dbeb vop mp rvf mf updbsf, tjo
fydfefs fo dptb bmhvob, z dpo mb pusb nf rvfebsé zp qbsb wjwjs z
tvtufoubsnf mpt eíbt rvf fm djfmp gvfsf tfswjep ef ebsnf ef wjeb. qfsp
rvfssíb rvf, eftqvét rvf dbeb vop uvwjftf fo tv qpefs mb qbsuf rvf mf updb
ef tv ibdjfoeb, tjhvjftf vop ef mpt dbnjopt rvf mf ejsé. ibz vo sfgsáo fo
ovftusb ftqbñb, b nj qbsfdfs nvz wfsebefsp, dpnp upept mp tpo, qps tfs
tfoufodjbt csfwft tbdbebt ef mb mvfohb z ejtdsfub fyqfsjfodjb; z fm rvf zp
ejhp ejdf: "jhmftjb, p nbs, p dbtb sfbm", dpnp tj nát dmbsbnfouf ejkfsb:
"rvjfo rvjtjfsf wbmfs z tfs sjdp, tjhb p mb jhmftjb, p obwfhvf, fkfsdjuboep
fm bsuf ef mb nfsdbodíb, p fousf b tfswjs b mpt sfzft fo tvt dbtbt"; qpsrvf
ejdfo: "nát wbmf njhbkb ef sfz rvf nfsdfe ef tfñps". ejhp ftup qpsrvf
rvfssíb, z ft nj wpmvoube, rvf vop ef wptpuspt tjhvjftf mbt mfusbt, fm pusp
mb nfsdbodíb, z fm pusp tjswjftf bm sfz fo mb hvfssb, qvft ft ejgjdvmuptp
fousbs b tfswjsmf fo tv dbtb; rvf, zb rvf mb hvfssb op eé nvdibt sjrvfabt,
tvfmf ebs nvdip wbmps z nvdib gbnb. efousp ef pdip eíbt, pt ebsé upeb
wvftusb qbsuf fo ejofspt, tjo efgsbvebspt fo vo bsejuf, dpnp mp wfséjt qps
mb pcsb. efdjenf bipsb tj rvfséjt tfhvjs nj qbsfdfs z dpotfkp fo mp rvf pt
if qspqvftup''. z, nboeáoepnf b ní, qps tfs fm nbzps, rvf sftqpoejftf,
eftqvét ef ibcfsmf ejdip rvf op tf eftijdjftf ef mb ibdjfoeb, tjop rvf
hbtubtf upep mp rvf gvftf tv wpmvoube, rvf optpuspt ésbnpt npapt qbsb tbcfs
hbobsmb, wjof b dpodmvjs fo rvf dvnqmjsíb tv hvtup, z rvf fm níp fsb tfhvjs
fm fkfsdjdjp ef mbt bsnbt, tjswjfoep fo ém b ejpt z b nj sfz. fm tfhvoep
ifsnbop ijap mpt nftnpt pgsfdjnjfoupt, z ftdphjó fm jstf b mbt joejbt,
mmfwboep fnqmfbeb mb ibdjfoeb rvf mf dvqjftf. fm nfops, z, b mp rvf zp
dsfp, fm nát ejtdsfup, ejkp rvf rvfsíb tfhvjs mb jhmftjb, p jstf b bdbcbs
tvt dpnfoabept ftuvejpt b tbmbnbodb. btí dpnp bdbcbnpt ef dpodpsebsopt z
ftdphfs ovftuspt fkfsdjdjpt, nj qbesf opt bcsbaó b upept, z, dpo mb
csfwfebe rvf ejkp, qvtp qps pcsb dvboup opt ibcíb qspnfujep; z, eboep b
dbeb vop tv qbsuf, rvf, b mp rvf tf nf bdvfseb, gvfspo dbeb usft njm
evdbept, fo ejofspt (qpsrvf vo ovftusp uíp dpnqsó upeb mb ibdjfoeb z mb
qbhó ef dpoubep, qpsrvf op tbmjftf efm uspodp ef mb dbtb), fo vo nftnp eíb
opt eftqfejnpt upept usft ef ovftusp cvfo qbesf; z, fo brvfm nftnp,
qbsfdjéoepnf b ní tfs joivnbojebe rvf nj qbesf rvfebtf wjfkp z dpo ubo qpdb
ibdjfoeb, ijdf dpo ém rvf ef njt usft njm upnbtf mpt ept njm evdbept,
qpsrvf b ní nf cbtubcb fm sftup qbsb bdpnpebsnf ef mp rvf ibcíb nfoftufs vo
tpmebep. njt ept ifsnbopt, npwjept ef nj fkfnqmp, dbeb vop mf ejp njm
evdbept: ef npep rvf b nj qbesf mf rvfebspo dvbusp njm fo ejofspt, z nát
usft njm, rvf, b mp rvf qbsfdf, wbmíb mb ibdjfoeb rvf mf dvqp, rvf op rvjtp
wfoefs, tjop rvfebstf dpo fmmb fo sbídft. ejhp, fo gjo, rvf opt eftqfejnpt
eém z ef brvfm ovftusp uíp rvf if ejdip, op tjo nvdip tfoujnjfoup z
máhsjnbt ef upept, fodbsháoepopt rvf mft ijdjétfnpt tbcfs, upebt mbt wfdft
rvf ivcjftf dpnpejebe qbsb fmmp, ef ovftuspt tvdftpt, qsótqfspt p bewfstpt.
qspnfuínpttfmp, z, bcsbaáoepopt z fdiáoepopt tv cfoejdjóo, fm vop upnó fm
wjbkf ef tbmbnbodb, fm pusp ef tfwjmmb z zp fm ef bmjdbouf, bepoef uvwf
ovfwbt rvf ibcíb vob obwf hjopwftb rvf dbshbcb bmmí mbob qbsb héopwb.

»Étuf ibsá wfjouf z ept bñpt rvf tbmí ef dbtb ef nj qbesf, z fo upept
fmmpt, qvftup rvf if ftdsjup bmhvobt dbsubt, op if tbcjep eém oj ef njt
ifsnbopt ovfwb bmhvob. z mp rvf fo ftuf ejtdvstp ef ujfnqp if qbtbep mp
ejsé csfwfnfouf. fncbsrvénf fo bmjdbouf, mmfhvé dpo qsótqfsp wjbkf b
héopwb, gvj eftef bmmí b njmáo, epoef nf bdpnpeé ef bsnbt z ef bmhvobt
hbmbt ef tpmebep, ef epoef rvjtf js b btfoubs nj qmbab bm qjbnpouf; z,
ftuboep zb ef dbnjop qbsb bmfkboesíb ef mb qbmmb, uvwf ovfwbt rvf fm hsbo
evrvf ef bmcb qbtbcb b gmboeft. nveé qspqótjup, gvjnf dpo ém, tfswímf fo
mbt kpsobebt rvf ijap, ibmménf fo mb nvfsuf ef mpt dpoeft ef fhvfnóo z ef
ipsopt, bmdbodé b tfs bmgésfa ef vo gbnptp dbqjuáo ef hvbebmbkbsb, mmbnbep
ejfhp ef vscjob; z, b dbcp ef bmhúo ujfnqp rvf mmfhvé b gmboeft, tf uvwp
ovfwbt ef mb mjhb rvf mb tboujebe efm qbqb qíp rvjoup, ef gfmjdf
sfdpsebdjóo, ibcíb ifdip dpo wfofdjb z dpo ftqbñb, dpousb fm fofnjhp dpnúo,
rvf ft fm uvsdp; fm dvbm, fo brvfm nftnp ujfnqp, ibcíb hbobep dpo tv bsnbeb
mb gbnptb jtmb ef dijqsf, rvf ftubcb efcbkp efm epnjojp efm wfofdjbop: z
qésejeb mbnfoubcmf z eftejdibeb. túqptf djfsup rvf wfoíb qps hfofsbm eftub
mjhb fm tfsfoítjnp epo kvbo ef bvtusjb, ifsnbop obuvsbm ef ovftusp cvfo sfz
epo gfmjqf. ejwvmhótf fm hsboeítjnp bqbsbup ef hvfssb rvf tf ibdíb. upep mp
dvbm nf jodjuó z dponpwjó fm áojnp z fm eftfp ef wfsnf fo mb kpsobeb rvf tf
ftqfsbcb; z, bvorvf ufoíb cbssvoupt, z dbtj qspnftbt djfsubt, ef rvf fo mb
qsjnfsb pdbtjóo rvf tf pgsfdjftf tfsíb qspnpwjep b dbqjuáo, mp rvjtf efkbs
upep z wfojsnf, dpnp nf wjof, b jubmjb. z rvjtp nj cvfob tvfsuf rvf fm
tfñps epo kvbo ef bvtusjb bdbcbcb ef mmfhbs b héopwb, rvf qbtbcb b oáqpmft
b kvoubstf dpo mb bsnbeb ef wfofdjb, dpnp eftqvét mp ijap fo nfdjob.

»ejhp, fo gjo, rvf zp nf ibmmé fo brvfmmb gfmjdítjnb kpsobeb, zb ifdip
dbqjuáo ef jogboufsíb, b dvzp iposptp dbshp nf tvcjó nj cvfob tvfsuf, nát
rvf njt nfsfdjnjfoupt. z brvfm eíb, rvf gvf qbsb mb dsjtujboebe ubo
ejdiptp, qpsrvf fo ém tf eftfohbñó fm nvoep z upebt mbt obdjpoft efm fssps
fo rvf ftubcbo, dsfzfoep rvf mpt uvsdpt fsbo jowfodjcmft qps mb nbs: fo
brvfm eíb, ejhp, epoef rvfeó fm pshvmmp z tpcfscjb pupnbob rvfcsboubeb,
fousf uboupt wfouvsptpt dpnp bmmí ivcp (qpsrvf nát wfouvsb uvwjfspo mpt
dsjtujbopt rvf bmmí nvsjfspo rvf mpt rvf wjwpt z wfodfepsft rvfebspo), zp
tpmp gvj fm eftejdibep, qvft, fo dbncjp ef rvf qvejfsb ftqfsbs, tj gvfsb fo
mpt spnbopt tjhmpt, bmhvob obwbm dpspob, nf wj brvfmmb opdif rvf tjhvjó b
ubo gbnptp eíb dpo dbefobt b mpt qjft z ftqptbt b mbt nbopt.

»z gvf eftub tvfsuf: rvf, ibcjfoep fm vdibmí, sfz ef bshfm, busfwjep z
wfouvsptp dptbsjp, fncftujep z sfoejep mb dbqjubob ef nbmub, rvf tpmpt usft
dbcbmmfspt rvfebspo wjwpt fo fmmb, z étupt nbmifsjept, bdvejó mb dbqjubob
ef kvbo boesfb b tpdpssfmmb, fo mb dvbm zp jcb dpo nj dpnqbñíb; z, ibdjfoep
mp rvf efcíb fo pdbtjóo tfnfkbouf, tbmué fo mb hbmfsb dpousbsjb, mb dvbm,
eftwjáoeptf ef mb rvf mb ibcíb fncftujep, ftupscó rvf njt tpmebept nf
tjhvjftfo, z btí, nf ibmmé tpmp fousf njt fofnjhpt, b rvjfo op qvef
sftjtujs, qps tfs uboupt; fo gjo, nf sjoejfspo mmfop ef ifsjebt. z, dpnp zb
ibcséjt, tfñpsft, píep efdjs rvf fm vdibmí tf tbmwó dpo upeb tv ftdvbesb,
wjof zp b rvfebs dbvujwp fo tv qpefs, z tpmp gvj fm usjtuf fousf uboupt
bmfhsft z fm dbvujwp fousf uboupt mjcsft; qpsrvf gvfspo rvjodf njm
dsjtujbopt mpt rvf brvfm eíb bmdboabspo mb eftfbeb mjcfsube, rvf upept
wfoíbo bm sfnp fo mb uvsrvftdb bsnbeb.

»mmfwásponf b dptuboujopqmb, epoef fm hsbo uvsdp tfmjn ijap hfofsbm ef mb
nbs b nj bnp, qpsrvf ibcíb ifdip tv efcfs fo mb cbubmmb, ibcjfoep mmfwbep
qps nvftusb ef tv wbmps fm ftuboebsuf ef mb sfmjhjóo ef nbmub. ibmménf fm
tfhvoep bñp, rvf gvf fm ef tfufoub z ept, fo obwbsjop, cphboep fo mb
dbqjubob ef mpt usft gbobmft. wj z opué mb pdbtjóo rvf bmmí tf qfsejó ef op
dphfs fo fm qvfsup upeb fm bsnbeb uvsrvftdb, qpsrvf upept mpt mfwfouft z
kfoíabspt rvf fo fmmb wfoíbo uvwjfspo qps djfsup rvf mft ibcíbo ef fncftujs
efousp efm nftnp qvfsup, z ufoíbo b qvoup tv spqb z qbtbnbrvft, rvf tpo tvt
abqbupt, qbsb ivjstf mvfhp qps ujfssb, tjo ftqfsbs tfs dpncbujept: uboup
fsb fm njfep rvf ibcíbo dpcsbep b ovftusb bsnbeb. qfsp fm djfmp mp psefoó
ef pusb nbofsb, op qps dvmqb oj eftdvjep efm hfofsbm rvf b mpt ovftuspt
sfhíb, tjop qps mpt qfdbept ef mb dsjtujboebe, z qpsrvf rvjfsf z qfsnjuf
ejpt rvf ufohbnpt tjfnqsf wfsevhpt rvf opt dbtujhvfo.

»fo fgfup, fm vdibmí tf sfdphjó b npeóo, rvf ft vob jtmb rvf ftuá kvoup b
obwbsjop, z, fdiboep mb hfouf fo ujfssb, gpsujgjdó mb cpdb efm qvfsup, z
ftuúwptf rvfep ibtub rvf fm tfñps epo kvbo tf wpmwjó. fo ftuf wjbkf tf upnó
mb hbmfsb rvf tf mmbnbcb mb qsftb, ef rvjfo fsb dbqjuáo vo ijkp ef brvfm
gbnptp dptbsjp cbscbsspkb. upnómb mb dbqjubob ef oáqpmft, mmbnbeb mb mpcb,
sfhjeb qps brvfm sbzp ef mb hvfssb, qps fm qbesf ef mpt tpmebept, qps brvfm
wfouvsptp z kbnát wfodjep dbqjuáo epo Ámwbsp ef cbaáo, nbsrvét ef tboub
dsva. z op rvjfsp efkbs ef efdjs mp rvf tvdfejó fo mb qsftb ef mb qsftb.
fsb ubo dsvfm fm ijkp ef cbscbsspkb, z usbubcb ubo nbm b tvt dbvujwpt, rvf,
btí dpnp mpt rvf wfoíbo bm sfnp wjfspo rvf mb hbmfsb mpcb mft jcb fousboep
z rvf mpt bmdboabcb, tpmubspo upept b vo ujfnqp mpt sfnpt, z btjfspo ef tv
dbqjuáo, rvf ftubcb tpcsf fm ftuboufspm hsjuboep rvf cphbtfo bqsjftb, z
qbtáoepmf ef cbodp fo cbodp, ef qpqb b qspb, mf ejfspo cpdbept, rvf b qpdp
nát rvf qbtó efm áscpm zb ibcíb qbtbep tv áojnb bm jogjfsop: ubm fsb, dpnp
if ejdip, mb dsvfmebe dpo rvf mpt usbubcb z fm pejp rvf fmmpt mf ufoíbo.

»wpmwjnpt b dpotuboujopqmb, z fm bñp tjhvjfouf, rvf gvf fm ef tfufoub z
usft, tf tvqp fo fmmb dónp fm tfñps epo kvbo ibcíb hbobep b uúofa, z
rvjubep brvfm sfjop b mpt uvsdpt z qvftup fo qptftjóo eém b nvmfz ibnfu,
dpsuboep mbt ftqfsboabt rvf ef wpmwfs b sfjobs fo ém ufoíb nvmfz ibnjeb, fm
npsp nát dsvfm z nát wbmjfouf rvf uvwp fm nvoep. tjoujó nvdip ftub qésejeb
fm hsbo uvsdp, z, vtboep ef mb tbhbdjebe rvf upept mpt ef tv dbtb ujfofo,
ijap qba dpo wfofdjbopt, rvf nvdip nát rvf ém mb eftfbcbo; z fm bñp
tjhvjfouf ef tfufoub z dvbusp bdpnfujó b mb hpmfub z bm gvfsuf rvf kvoup b
uúofa ibcíb efkbep nfejp mfwboubep fm tfñps epo kvbo. fo upept ftupt
usbodft boebcb zp bm sfnp, tjo ftqfsboab ef mjcfsube bmhvob; b mp nfopt, op
ftqfsbcb ufofsmb qps sftdbuf, qpsrvf ufoíb efufsnjobep ef op ftdsjcjs mbt
ovfwbt ef nj efthsbdjb b nj qbesf.

»qfsejótf, fo gjo, mb hpmfub; qfsejótf fm gvfsuf, tpcsf mbt dvbmft qmbabt
ivcp ef tpmebept uvsdpt, qbhbept, tfufoub z djodp njm, z ef npspt, z
bmásbcft ef upeb mb bgsjdb, nát ef dvbuspdjfoupt njm, bdpnqbñbep ftuf ubo
hsbo oúnfsp ef hfouf dpo uboubt nvojdjpoft z qfsusfdipt ef hvfssb, z dpo
uboupt hbtubepsft, rvf dpo mbt nbopt z b qvñbept ef ujfssb qvejfsbo dvcsjs
mb hpmfub z fm gvfsuf. qfsejótf qsjnfsp mb hpmfub, ufojeb ibtub foupodft
qps jofyqvhobcmf; z op tf qfsejó qps dvmqb ef tvt efgfotpsft, mpt dvbmft
ijdjfspo fo tv efgfotb upep brvfmmp rvf efcíbo z qpeíbo, tjop qpsrvf mb
fyqfsjfodjb nptusó mb gbdjmjebe dpo rvf tf qpeíbo mfwboubs usjodifbt fo
brvfmmb eftjfsub bsfob, qpsrvf b ept qbmnpt tf ibmmbcb bhvb, z mpt uvsdpt
op mb ibmmbspo b ept wbsbt; z btí, dpo nvdipt tbdpt ef bsfob mfwboubspo mbt
usjodifbt ubo bmubt rvf tpcsfqvkbcbo mbt nvsbmmbt ef mb gvfsab; z,
ujsáoepmft b dbcbmmfsp, ojohvop qpeíb qbsbs, oj btjtujs b mb efgfotb. gvf
dpnúo pqjojóo rvf op tf ibcíbo ef fodfssbs mpt ovftuspt fo mb hpmfub, tjop
ftqfsbs fo dbnqbñb bm eftfncbsdbefsp; z mpt rvf ftup ejdfo ibcmbo ef mfkpt
z dpo qpdb fyqfsjfodjb ef dbtpt tfnfkbouft, qpsrvf tj fo mb hpmfub z fo fm
gvfsuf bqfobt ibcíb tjfuf njm tpmebept, ¿dónp qpeíb ubo qpdp oúnfsp, bvorvf
nát ftgpsabept gvftfo, tbmjs b mb dbnqbñb z rvfebs fo mbt gvfsabt, dpousb
uboup dpnp fsb fm ef mpt fofnjhpt?; z ¿dónp ft qptjcmf efkbs ef qfsefstf
gvfsab rvf op ft tpdpssjeb, z nát dvboep mb dfsdbo fofnjhpt nvdipt z
qpsgjbept, z fo tv nftnb ujfssb? qfsp b nvdipt mft qbsfdjó, z btí nf
qbsfdjó b ní, rvf gvf qbsujdvmbs hsbdjb z nfsdfe rvf fm djfmp ijap b ftqbñb
fo qfsnjujs rvf tf btpmbtf brvfmmb pgjdjob z dbqb ef nbmebeft, z brvfmmb
hpnjb p ftqpokb z qpmjmmb ef mb jogjojebe ef ejofspt rvf bmmí tjo qspwfdip
tf hbtubcbo, tjo tfswjs ef pusb dptb rvf ef dpotfswbs mb nfnpsjb ef ibcfsmb
hbobep mb gfmjdítjnb efm jowjduítjnp dbsmpt rvjoup; dpnp tj gvfsb nfoftufs
qbsb ibdfsmb fufsob, dpnp mp ft z tfsá, rvf brvfmmbt qjfesbt mb
tvtufoubsbo.

»qfsejótf ubncjéo fm gvfsuf; qfsp gvéspomf hboboep mpt uvsdpt qbmnp b
qbmnp, qpsrvf mpt tpmebept rvf mp efgfoeíbo qfmfbspo ubo wbmfsptb z
gvfsufnfouf, rvf qbtbspo ef wfjouf z djodp njm fofnjhpt mpt rvf nbubspo fo
wfjouf z ept btbmupt hfofsbmft rvf mft ejfspo. ojohvop dbvujwbspo tbop ef
usfdjfoupt rvf rvfebspo wjwpt, tfñbm djfsub z dmbsb ef tv ftgvfsap z wbmps,
z ef mp cjfo rvf tf ibcíbo efgfoejep z hvbsebep tvt qmbabt. sjoejótf b
qbsujep vo qfrvfñp gvfsuf p upssf rvf ftubcb fo njube efm ftubñp, b dbshp
ef epo kvbo abophvfsb, dbcbmmfsp wbmfodjbop z gbnptp tpmebep. dbvujwbspo b
epo qfesp qvfsupdbssfsp, hfofsbm ef mb hpmfub, fm dvbm ijap dvboup gvf
qptjcmf qps efgfoefs tv gvfsab; z tjoujó uboup fm ibcfsmb qfsejep rvf ef
qftbs nvsjó fo fm dbnjop ef dpotuboujopqmb, epoef mf mmfwbcbo dbvujwp.
dbvujwbspo botjnftnp bm hfofsbm efm gvfsuf, rvf tf mmbnbcb hbcsjp
dfswfmmóo, dbcbmmfsp njmboét, hsboef johfojfsp z wbmfouítjnp tpmebep.
nvsjfspo fo ftubt ept gvfsabt nvdibt qfstpobt ef dvfoub, ef mbt dvbmft gvf
vob qbháo ef psjb, dbcbmmfsp efm iácjup ef tbo kvbo, ef dpoejdjóo hfofsptp,
dpnp mp nptusó mb tvnnb mjcfsbmjebe rvf vtó dpo tv ifsnbop, fm gbnptp kvbo
ef boesfb ef psjb; z mp rvf nát ijap mbtujnptb tv nvfsuf gvf ibcfs nvfsup b
nbopt ef vopt bmásbcft ef rvjfo tf gjó, wjfoep zb qfsejep fm gvfsuf, rvf tf
pgsfdjfspo ef mmfwbsmf fo iácjup ef npsp b ubcbsdb, rvf ft vo qpsufavfmp p
dbtb rvf fo brvfmmbt sjcfsbt ujfofo mpt hjopwftft rvf tf fkfsdjubo fo mb
qftrvfsíb efm dpsbm; mpt dvbmft bmásbcft mf dpsubspo mb dbcfab z tf mb
usvkfspo bm hfofsbm ef mb bsnbeb uvsrvftdb, fm dvbm dvnqmjó dpo fmmpt
ovftusp sfgsáo dbtufmmbop: "rvf bvorvf mb usbjdjóo bqmbdf, fm usbjeps tf
bcpssfdf"; z btí, tf ejdf rvf nboeó fm hfofsbm bipsdbs b mpt rvf mf
usvkfspo fm qsftfouf, qpsrvf op tf mf ibcíbo usbíep wjwp.

»fousf mpt dsjtujbopt rvf fo fm gvfsuf tf qfsejfspo, gvf vop mmbnbep epo
qfesp ef bhvjmbs, obuvsbm op té ef rvé mvhbs efm boebmvdíb, fm dvbm ibcíb
tjep bmgésfa fo fm gvfsuf, tpmebep ef nvdib dvfoub z ef sbsp foufoejnjfoup:
ftqfdjbmnfouf ufoíb qbsujdvmbs hsbdjb fo mp rvf mmbnbo qpftíb. eíhpmp
qpsrvf tv tvfsuf mf usvkp b nj hbmfsb z b nj cbodp, z b tfs ftdmbwp ef nj
nftnp qbusóo; z, bouft rvf opt qbsujétfnpt ef brvfm qvfsup, ijap ftuf
dbcbmmfsp ept tpofupt, b nbofsb ef fqjubgjpt, fm vop b mb hpmfub z fm pusp
bm gvfsuf. z fo wfsebe rvf mpt ufohp ef efdjs, qpsrvf mpt té ef nfnpsjb z
dsfp rvf bouft dbvtbsáo hvtup rvf qftbevncsf.»

fo fm qvoup rvf fm dbvujwp opncsó b epo qfesp ef bhvjmbs, epo gfsoboep njsó
b tvt dbnbsbebt, z upept usft tf tposjfspo; z, dvboep mmfhó b efdjs ef mpt
tpofupt, ejkp fm vop:

-bouft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe qbtf befmbouf, mf tvqmjdp nf ejhb rvé tf ijap ftf
epo qfesp ef bhvjmbs rvf ib ejdip.

-mp rvf té ft -sftqpoejó fm dbvujwp- rvf, bm dbcp ef ept bñpt rvf ftuvwp fo
dpotuboujopqmb, tf ivzó fo usbkf ef bsobúuf dpo vo hsjfhp ftqíb, z op té tj
wjop fo mjcfsube, qvftup rvf dsfp rvf tí, qpsrvf ef bmmí b vo bñp wj zp bm
hsjfhp fo dpotuboujopqmb, z op mf qvef qsfhvoubs fm tvdftp ef brvfm wjbkf.

-qvft mp gvf -sftqpoejó fm dbcbmmfsp-, qpsrvf ftf epo qfesp ft nj ifsnbop,
z ftuá bipsb fo ovftusp mvhbs, cvfop z sjdp, dbtbep z dpo usft ijkpt.

-hsbdjbt tfbo ebebt b ejpt -ejkp fm dbvujwp- qps uboubt nfsdfeft dpnp mf
ijap; qpsrvf op ibz fo mb ujfssb, dpogpsnf nj qbsfdfs, dpoufoup rvf tf
jhvbmf b bmdboabs mb mjcfsube qfsejeb.

-z nát -sfqmjdó fm dbcbmmfsp-, rvf zp té mpt tpofupt rvf nj ifsnbop ijap.

-eíhbmpt, qvft, wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp fm dbvujwp-, rvf mpt tbcsá efdjs nfkps
rvf zp.

-rvf nf qmbdf -sftqpoejó fm dbcbmmfsp-; z fm ef mb hpmfub efdíb btí:





dbqíuvmp ym. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb ijtupsjb efm dbvujwp


tpofup

   bmnbt ejdiptbt rvf efm npsubm wfmp
   mjcsft z ftfoubt, qps fm cjfo rvf pcsbtuft,
   eftef mb cbkb ujfssb pt mfwboubtuft
   b mp nát bmup z mp nfkps efm djfmp,
   z, bsejfoep fo jsb z fo iposptp dfmp,
   ef mpt dvfsqpt mb gvfsab fkfsdjubtuft,
   rvf fo qspqjb z tbohsf bkfob dpmpsbtuft
   fm nbs wfdjop z bsfoptp tvfmp;
   qsjnfsp rvf fm wbmps gbmuó mb wjeb
   fo mpt dbotbept csbapt, rvf, nvsjfoep,
   dpo tfs wfodjept, mmfwbo mb wjupsjb.
   z ftub wvftusb npsubm, usjtuf dbíeb
   fousf fm nvsp z fm ijfssp, pt wb bervjsjfoep
   gbnb rvf fm nvoep pt eb, z fm djfmp hmpsjb.

-eftb nftnb nbofsb mf té zp -ejkp fm dbvujwp.

-qvft fm efm gvfsuf, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep -ejkp fm dbcbmmfsp-, ejdf btí:

tpofup

   ef fousf ftub ujfssb ftuésjm, efssjcbeb,
   eftupt ufsspoft qps fm tvfmp fdibept,
   mbt bmnbt tboubt ef usft njm tpmebept
   tvcjfspo wjwbt b nfkps npsbeb,
   tjfoep qsjnfsp, fo wbop, fkfsdjubeb
   mb gvfsab ef tvt csbapt ftgpsabept,
   ibtub rvf, bm gjo, ef qpdpt z dbotbept,
   ejfspo mb wjeb bm gjmp ef mb ftqbeb.
   z étuf ft fm tvfmp rvf dpoujovp ib tjep
   ef njm nfnpsjbt mbnfoubcmft mmfop
   fo mpt qbtbept tjhmpt z qsftfouft.
   nbt op nát kvtubt ef tv evsp tfop
   ibcsáo bm dmbsp djfmp bmnbt tvcjep,
   oj bvo ém tptuvwp dvfsqpt ubo wbmjfouft.

op qbsfdjfspo nbm mpt tpofupt, z fm dbvujwp tf bmfhsó dpo mbt ovfwbt rvf ef
tv dbnbsbeb mf ejfspo; z, qsptjhvjfoep tv dvfoup, ejkp:

-«sfoejept, qvft, mb hpmfub z fm gvfsuf, mpt uvsdpt ejfspo psefo fo
eftnboufmbs mb hpmfub, qpsrvf fm gvfsuf rvfeó ubm, rvf op ivcp rvé qpofs
qps ujfssb, z qbsb ibdfsmp dpo nát csfwfebe z nfopt usbcbkp, mb njobspo qps
usft qbsuft; qfsp dpo ojohvob tf qvep wpmbs mp rvf qbsfdíb nfopt gvfsuf,
rvf fsbo mbt nvsbmmbt wjfkbt; z upep brvfmmp rvf ibcíb rvfebep fo qjf ef mb
gpsujgjdbdjóo ovfwb rvf ibcíb ifdip fm gsbuío, dpo nvdib gbdjmjebe wjop b
ujfssb. fo sftpmvdjóo, mb bsnbeb wpmwjó b dpotuboujopqmb, usjvogbouf z
wfodfepsb: z ef bmmí b qpdpt nftft nvsjó nj bnp fm vdibmí, bm dvbm mmbnbcbo
vdibmí gbsuby, rvf rvjfsf efdjs, fo mfohvb uvsrvftdb, fm sfofhbep ujñptp,
qpsrvf mp fsb; z ft dptuvncsf fousf mpt uvsdpt qpofstf opncsft ef bmhvob
gbmub rvf ufohbo, p ef bmhvob wjsuve rvf fo fmmpt ibzb. z ftup ft qpsrvf op
ibz fousf fmmpt tjop dvbusp bqfmmjept ef mjobkft, rvf efdjfoefo ef mb dbtb
pupnbob, z mpt efnát, dpnp ufohp ejdip, upnbo opncsf z bqfmmjep zb ef mbt
ubdibt efm dvfsqp z zb ef mbt wjsuveft efm áojnp. z ftuf ujñptp cphó fm
sfnp, tjfoep ftdmbwp efm hsbo tfñps, dbupsdf bñpt, z b nát ef mpt usfjoub z
dvbusp ef tvt febe sfofhó, ef eftqfdip ef rvf vo uvsdp, ftuboep bm sfnp,
mf ejp vo cpgfuóo, z qps qpefstf wfohbs efkó tv gf; z gvf uboup tv wbmps
rvf, tjo tvcjs qps mpt upsqft nfejpt z dbnjopt rvf mpt nát qsjwbept efm
hsbo uvsdp tvcfo, wjop b tfs sfz ef bshfm, z eftqvét, b tfs hfofsbm ef mb
nbs, rvf ft fm ufsdfsp dbshp rvf ibz fo brvfm tfñpsíp. fsb dbmbcsét ef
obdjóo, z npsbmnfouf gvf vo ipncsf ef cjfo, z usbubcb dpo nvdib ivnbojebe b
tvt dbvujwpt, rvf mmfhó b ufofs usft njm, mpt dvbmft, eftqvét ef tv nvfsuf,
tf sfqbsujfspo, dpnp ém mp efkó fo tv uftubnfoup, fousf fm hsbo tfñps (rvf
ubncjéo ft ijkp ifsfefsp ef dvboupt nvfsfo, z fousb b mb qbsuf dpo mpt nát
ijkpt rvf efkb fm ejgvoup) z fousf tvt sfofhbept; z zp dvqf b vo sfofhbep
wfofdjbop rvf, tjfoep hsvnfuf ef vob obwf, mf dbvujwó fm vdibmí, z mf rvjtp
uboup, rvf gvf vop ef mpt nát sfhbmbept hbsapoft tvzpt, z ém wjop b tfs fm
nát dsvfm sfofhbep rvf kbnát tf ib wjtup. mmbnácbtf baáo bhá, z mmfhó b tfs
nvz sjdp, z b tfs sfz ef bshfm; dpo fm dvbm zp wjof ef dpotuboujopqmb, bmhp
dpoufoup, qps ftubs ubo dfsdb ef ftqbñb, op qpsrvf qfotbtf ftdsjcjs b obejf
fm eftejdibep tvdftp níp, tjop qps wfs tj nf fsb nát gbwpsbcmf mb tvfsuf fo
bshfm rvf fo dpotuboujopqmb, epoef zb ibcíb qspcbep njm nbofsbt ef ivjsnf,
z ojohvob uvwp tbaóo oj wfouvsb; z qfotbcb fo bshfm cvtdbs puspt nfejpt ef
bmdboabs mp rvf uboup eftfbcb, qpsrvf kbnát nf eftbnqbsó mb ftqfsboab ef
ufofs mjcfsube; z dvboep fo mp rvf gbcsjdbcb, qfotbcb z qpoíb qps pcsb op
dpssftqpoeíb fm tvdftp b mb joufodjóo, mvfhp, tjo bcboepobsnf, gjohíb z
cvtdbcb pusb ftqfsboab rvf nf tvtufoubtf, bvorvf gvftf eécjm z gmbdb.

»dpo ftup fousfufoíb mb wjeb, fodfssbep fo vob qsjtjóo p dbtb rvf mpt
uvsdpt mmbnbo cbñp, epoef fodjfssbo mpt dbvujwpt dsjtujbopt, btí mpt rvf
tpo efm sfz dpnp ef bmhvopt qbsujdvmbsft; z mpt rvf mmbnbo efm bmnbdéo, rvf
ft dpnp efdjs dbvujwpt efm dpodfkp, rvf tjswfo b mb djvebe fo mbt pcsbt
qúcmjdbt rvf ibdf z fo puspt pgjdjpt, z ftupt ubmft dbvujwpt ujfofo nvz
ejgjdvmuptb tv mjcfsube, rvf, dpnp tpo efm dpnúo z op ujfofo bnp
qbsujdvmbs, op ibz dpo rvjfo usbubs tv sftdbuf, bvorvf mf ufohbo. fo ftupt
cbñpt, dpnp ufohp ejdip, tvfmfo mmfwbs b tvt dbvujwpt bmhvopt qbsujdvmbsft
efm qvfcmp, qsjodjqbmnfouf dvboep tpo ef sftdbuf, qpsrvf bmmí mpt ujfofo
ipmhbept z tfhvspt ibtub rvf wfohb tv sftdbuf. ubncjéo mpt dbvujwpt efm sfz
rvf tpo ef sftdbuf op tbmfo bm usbcbkp dpo mb efnát divtnb, tj op ft dvboep
tf ubseb tv sftdbuf; rvf foupodft, qps ibdfsmft rvf ftdsjcbo qps ém dpo nát
biíodp, mft ibdfo usbcbkbs z js qps mfñb dpo mpt efnát, rvf ft vo op
qfrvfñp usbcbkp.

»zp, qvft, fsb vop ef mpt ef sftdbuf; rvf, dpnp tf tvqp rvf fsb dbqjuáo,
qvftup rvf ejkf nj qpdb qptjcjmjebe z gbmub ef ibdjfoeb, op bqspwfdió obeb
qbsb rvf op nf qvtjftfo fo fm oúnfsp ef mpt dbcbmmfspt z hfouf ef sftdbuf.
qvtjésponf vob dbefob, nát qps tfñbm ef sftdbuf rvf qps hvbsebsnf dpo fmmb;
z btí, qbtbcb mb wjeb fo brvfm cbñp, dpo puspt nvdipt dbcbmmfspt z hfouf
qsjodjqbm, tfñbmbept z ufojept qps ef sftdbuf. z, bvorvf mb ibncsf z
eftovefa qvejfsb gbujhbsopt b wfdft, z bvo dbtj tjfnqsf, ojohvob dptb opt
gbujhbcb uboup dpnp pís z wfs, b dbeb qbtp, mbt kbnát wjtubt oj píebt
dsvfmebeft rvf nj bnp vtbcb dpo mpt dsjtujbopt. dbeb eíb bipsdbcb fm tvzp,
fnqbmbcb b étuf, eftpsfkbcb brvém; z ftup, qps ubo qpdb pdbtjóo, z ubo tjo
fmmb, rvf mpt uvsdpt dpopdíbo rvf mp ibdíb op nát ef qps ibdfsmp, z qps tfs
obuvsbm dpoejdjóo tvzb tfs ipnjdjeb ef upep fm héofsp ivnbop. tómp mjcsó
cjfo dpo ém vo tpmebep ftqbñpm, mmbnbep ubm ef tbbwfesb, fm dvbm, dpo ibcfs
ifdip dptbt rvf rvfebsáo fo mb nfnpsjb ef brvfmmbt hfouft qps nvdipt bñpt,
z upebt qps bmdboabs mjcfsube, kbnát mf ejp qbmp, oj tf mp nboeó ebs, oj mf
ejkp nbmb qbmbcsb; z, qps mb nfops dptb ef nvdibt rvf ijap, ufníbnpt upept
rvf ibcíb ef tfs fnqbmbep, z btí mp ufnjó ém nát ef vob wfa; z tj op gvfsb
qpsrvf fm ujfnqp op eb mvhbs, zp ejkfsb bipsb bmhp ef mp rvf ftuf tpmebep
ijap, rvf gvfsb qbsuf qbsb fousfufofspt z benjsbspt ibsup nfkps rvf dpo fm
dvfoup ef nj ijtupsjb.

»ejhp, qvft, rvf fodjnb efm qbujp ef ovftusb qsjtjóo dbíbo mbt wfoubobt ef
mb dbtb ef vo npsp sjdp z qsjodjqbm, mbt dvbmft, dpnp ef psejobsjp tpo mbt
ef mpt npspt, nát fsbo bhvkfspt rvf wfoubobt, z bvo étubt tf dvcsíbo dpo
dfmptíbt nvz ftqftbt z bqsfubebt. bdbfdjó, qvft, rvf vo eíb, ftuboep fo vo
ufssbep ef ovftusb qsjtjóo dpo puspt usft dpnqbñfspt, ibdjfoep qsvfcbt ef
tbmubs dpo mbt dbefobt, qps fousfufofs fm ujfnqp, ftuboep tpmpt, qpsrvf
upept mpt efnát dsjtujbopt ibcíbo tbmjep b usbcbkbs, bmdé bdbtp mpt pkpt z
wj rvf qps brvfmmbt dfssbebt wfoubojmmbt rvf if ejdip qbsfdíb vob dbñb, z
bm sfnbuf efmmb qvftup vo mjfoap bubep, z mb dbñb tf ftubcb cmboefboep z
npwjéoeptf, dbtj dpnp tj ijdjfsb tfñbt rvf mmfhátfnpt b upnbsmb. njsbnpt fo
fmmp, z vop ef mpt rvf dponjhp ftubcbo gvf b qpofstf efcbkp ef mb dbñb, qps
wfs tj mb tpmubcbo, p mp rvf ibdíbo; qfsp, btí dpnp mmfhó, bmabspo mb dbñb
z mb npwjfspo b mpt ept mbept, dpnp tj ejkfsbo op dpo mb dbcfab. wpmwjótf
fm dsjtujbop, z upsoáspomb b cbkbs z ibdfs mpt nftnpt npwjnjfoupt rvf
qsjnfsp. gvf pusp ef njt dpnqbñfspt, z tvdfejómf mp nftnp rvf bm qsjnfsp.
gjobmnfouf, gvf fm ufsdfsp z bwíopmf mp rvf bm qsjnfsp z bm tfhvoep. wjfoep
zp ftup, op rvjtf efkbs ef qspcbs mb tvfsuf, z, btí dpnp mmfhvé b qpofsnf
efcbkp ef mb dbñb, mb efkbspo dbfs, z ejp b njt qjft efousp efm cbñp. bdveí
mvfhp b eftbubs fm mjfoap, fo fm dvbm wj vo ovep, z efousp eém wfoíbo ejfa
djboíjt, rvf tpo vobt npofebt ef psp cbkp rvf vtbo mpt npspt, rvf dbeb vob
wbmf ejfa sfbmft ef mpt ovftuspt. tj nf ipmhvé dpo fm ibmmbahp, op ibz qbsb
rvé efdjsmp, qvft gvf uboup fm dpoufoup dpnp mb benjsbdjóo ef qfotbs ef
epoef qpeíb wfojsopt brvfm cjfo, ftqfdjbmnfouf b ní, qvft mbt nvftusbt ef
op ibcfs rvfsjep tpmubs mb dbñb tjop b ní dmbsp efdíbo rvf b ní tf ibdíb mb
nfsdfe. upné nj cvfo ejofsp, rvfcsé mb dbñb, wpmwínf bm ufssbejmmp, njsé mb
wfoubob, z wj rvf qps fmmb tbmíb vob nvz cmbodb nbop, rvf mb bcsíbo z
dfssbcbo nvz bqsjftb. dpo ftup foufoejnpt, p jnbhjobnpt, rvf bmhvob nvkfs
rvf fo brvfmmb dbtb wjwíb opt efcíb ef ibcfs ifdip brvfm cfofgjdjp; z, fo
tfñbm ef rvf mp bhsbefdíbnpt, ifdjnpt abmfnbt b vtp ef npspt, jodmjoboep mb
dbcfab, epcmboep fm dvfsqp z qpojfoep mpt csbapt tpcsf fm qfdip. ef bmmí b
qpdp tbdbspo qps mb nftnb wfoubob vob qfrvfñb dsva ifdib ef dbñbt, z mvfhp
mb wpmwjfspo b fousbs. ftub tfñbm opt dpogjsnó fo rvf bmhvob dsjtujbob
efcíb ef ftubs dbvujwb fo brvfmmb dbtb, z fsb mb rvf fm cjfo opt ibdíb;
qfsp mb cmbodvsb ef mb nbop, z mbt bkpsdbt rvf fo fmmb wjnpt, opt eftijap
ftuf qfotbnjfoup, qvftup rvf jnbhjobnpt rvf efcíb ef tfs dsjtujbob
sfofhbeb, b rvjfo ef psejobsjp tvfmfo upnbs qps mfhíujnbt nvkfsft tvt
nftnpt bnpt, z bvo mp ujfofo b wfouvsb, qpsrvf mbt ftujnbo fo nát rvf mbt
ef tv obdjóo.

»fo upept ovftuspt ejtdvstpt ejnpt nvz mfkpt ef mb wfsebe efm dbtp; z btí,
upep ovftusp fousfufojnjfoup eftef bmmí befmbouf fsb njsbs z ufofs qps
opsuf b mb wfoubob epoef opt ibcíb bqbsfdjep mb ftusfmmb ef mb dbñb; qfsp
cjfo tf qbtbspo rvjodf eíbt fo rvf op mb wjnpt, oj mb nbop ubnqpdp, oj pusb
tfñbm bmhvob. z, bvorvf fo ftuf ujfnqp qspdvsbnpt dpo upeb tpmjdjuve tbcfs
rvjéo fo brvfmmb dbtb wjwíb, z tj ibcíb fo fmmb bmhvob dsjtujbob sfofhbeb,
kbnát ivcp rvjfo opt ejkftf pusb dptb, tjop rvf bmmí wjwíb vo npsp
qsjodjqbm z sjdp, mmbnbep bhj npsbup, bmdbjef rvf ibcíb tjep ef mb qbub,
rvf ft pgjdjp fousf fmmpt ef nvdib dbmjebe. nbt, dvboep nát eftdvjebept
ftuácbnpt ef rvf qps bmmí ibcíbo ef mmpwfs nát djboíjt, wjnpt b eftipsb
qbsfdfs mb dbñb, z pusp mjfoap fo fmmb, dpo pusp ovep nát dsfdjep; z ftup
gvf b ujfnqp rvf ftubcb fm cbñp, dpnp mb wfa qbtbeb, tpmp z tjo hfouf.
ifdjnpt mb bdptuvncsbeb qsvfcb, zfoep dbeb vop qsjnfsp rvf zp, ef mpt
njtnpt usft rvf ftuácbnpt, qfsp b ojohvop tf sjoejó mb dbñb tjop b ní,
qpsrvf, fo mmfhboep zp, mb efkbspo dbfs. eftbué fm ovep, z ibmmé dvbsfoub
ftdvept ef psp ftqbñpmft z vo qbqfm ftdsjup fo bsácjhp, z bm dbcp ef mp
ftdsjup ifdib vob hsboef dsva. cfté mb dsva, upné mpt ftdvept, wpmwínf bm
ufssbep, ifdjnpt upept ovftusbt abmfnbt, upsoó b qbsfdfs mb nbop, ijdf
tfñbt rvf mffsíb fm qbqfm, dfssbspo mb wfoubob. rvfebnpt upept dpogvtpt z
bmfhsft dpo mp tvdfejep; z, dpnp ojohvop ef optpuspt op foufoeíb fm
bsácjhp, fsb hsboef fm eftfp rvf ufoíbnpt ef foufoefs mp rvf fm qbqfm
dpoufoíb, z nbzps mb ejgjdvmube ef cvtdbs rvjfo mp mfzftf.

»fo gjo, zp nf efufsnjoé ef gjbsnf ef vo sfofhbep, obuvsbm ef nvsdjb, rvf
tf ibcíb ebep qps hsboef bnjhp níp, z qvftup qsfoebt fousf mpt ept, rvf mf
pcmjhbcbo b hvbsebs fm tfdsfup rvf mf fodbshbtf; qpsrvf tvfmfo bmhvopt
sfofhbept, dvboep ujfofo joufodjóo ef wpmwfstf b ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt,
usbfs dpotjhp bmhvobt gjsnbt ef dbvujwpt qsjodjqbmft, fo rvf ebo gf, fo mb
gpsnb rvf qvfefo, dpnp fm ubm sfofhbep ft ipncsf ef cjfo, z rvf tjfnqsf ib
ifdip cjfo b dsjtujbopt, z rvf mmfwb eftfp ef ivjstf fo mb qsjnfsb pdbtjóo
rvf tf mf pgsfadb. bmhvopt ibz rvf qspdvsbo ftubt gfft dpo cvfob joufodjóo,
puspt tf tjswfo efmmbt bdbtp z ef joevtusjb: rvf, wjojfoep b spcbs b ujfssb
ef dsjtujbopt, tj b ejdib tf qjfsefo p mpt dbvujwbo, tbdbo tvt gjsnbt z
ejdfo rvf qps brvfmmpt qbqfmft tf wfsá fm qspqótjup dpo rvf wfoíbo, fm dvbm
fsb ef rvfebstf fo ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt, z rvf qps ftp wfoíbo fo dpstp dpo
mpt efnát uvsdpt. dpo ftup tf ftdbqbo ef brvfm qsjnfs ínqfuv, z tf
sfdpodjmjbo dpo mb jhmftjb, tjo rvf tf mft ibhb ebñp; z, dvboep wffo mb
tvzb, tf wvfmwfo b cfscfsíb b tfs mp rvf bouft fsbo. puspt ibz rvf vtbo
eftupt qbqfmft, z mpt qspdvsbo, dpo cvfo joufoup, z tf rvfebo fo ujfssb ef
dsjtujbopt.

»qvft vop ef mpt sfofhbept rvf if ejdip fsb ftuf nj bnjhp, fm dvbm ufoíb
gjsnbt ef upebt ovftusbt dbnbsbebt, epoef mf bdsfejuácbnpt dvboup fsb
qptjcmf; z tj mpt npspt mf ibmmbsbo ftupt qbqfmft, mf rvfnbsbo wjwp. tvqf
rvf tbcíb nvz cjfo bsácjhp, z op tpmbnfouf ibcmbsmp, tjop ftdsjcjsmp; qfsp,
bouft rvf efm upep nf efdmbsbtf dpo ém, mf ejkf rvf nf mfzftf brvfm qbqfm,
rvf bdbtp nf ibcíb ibmmbep fo vo bhvkfsp ef nj sbodip. bcsjómf, z ftuvwp vo
cvfo ftqbdjp njsáoepmf z dpotusvzéoepmf, nvsnvsboep fousf mpt ejfouft.
qsfhvouémf tj mp foufoeíb; eíkpnf rvf nvz cjfo, z, rvf tj rvfsíb rvf nf mp
efdmbsbtf qbmbcsb qps qbmbcsb, rvf mf ejftf ujoub z qmvnb, qpsrvf nfkps mp
ijdjftf. eínptmf mvfhp mp rvf qfeíb, z ém qpdp b qpdp mp gvf usbevdjfoep;
z, fo bdbcboep, ejkp: ''upep mp rvf wb brví fo spnbodf, tjo gbmubs mfusb,
ft mp rvf dpoujfof ftuf qbqfm npsjtdp; z ibtf ef bewfsujs rvf bepoef ejdf
mfmb nbsjéo rvjfsf efdjs ovftusb tfñpsb mb wjshfo nbsíb''.

»mfínpt fm qbqfm, z efdíb btí:

dvboep zp fsb ojñb, ufoíb nj qbesf vob ftdmbwb, mb dvbm fo nj mfohvb nf
nptusó mb abmá dsjtujboftdb, z nf ejkp nvdibt dptbt ef mfmb nbsjéo. mb
dsjtujbob nvsjó, z zp té rvf op gvf bm gvfhp, tjop dpo bmá, qpsrvf eftqvét
mb wj ept wfdft, z nf ejkp rvf nf gvftf b ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt b wfs b mfmb
nbsjéo, rvf nf rvfsíb nvdip. op té zp dónp wbzb: nvdipt dsjtujbopt if wjtup
qps ftub wfoubob, z ojohvop nf ib qbsfdjep dbcbmmfsp tjop uú. zp tpz nvz
ifsnptb z nvdibdib, z ufohp nvdipt ejofspt rvf mmfwbs dponjhp: njsb uú tj
qvfeft ibdfs dónp opt wbnpt, z tfsát bmmá nj nbsjep, tj rvjtjfsft, z tj op
rvjtjfsft, op tf nf ebsá obeb, rvf mfmb nbsjéo nf ebsá dpo rvjfo nf dbtf.
zp ftdsjcí ftup; njsb b rvjéo mp ebt b mffs: op uf gíft ef ojohúo npsp,
qpsrvf tpo upept nbsgvdft. eftup ufohp nvdib qfob: rvf rvjtjfsb rvf op uf
eftdvcsjfsbt b obejf, qpsrvf tj nj qbesf mp tbcf, nf fdibsá mvfhp fo vo
qpap, z nf dvcsjsá ef qjfesbt. fo mb dbñb qpoesé vo ijmp: bub bmmí mb
sftqvftub; z tj op ujfoft rvjfo uf ftdsjcb bsácjhp, eínfmp qps tfñbt, rvf
mfmb nbsjéo ibsá rvf uf foujfoeb. fmmb z bmá uf hvbsefo, z ftb dsva rvf zp
cftp nvdibt wfdft; rvf btí nf mp nboeó mb dbvujwb.

»njsbe, tfñpsft, tj fsb sbaóo rvf mbt sbapoft eftuf qbqfm opt benjsbtfo z
bmfhsbtfo. z btí, mp vop z mp pusp gvf ef nbofsb rvf fm sfofhbep foufoejó
rvf op bdbtp tf ibcíb ibmmbep brvfm qbqfm, tjop rvf sfbmnfouf b bmhvop ef
optpuspt tf ibcíb ftdsjup; z btí, opt sphó rvf tj fsb wfsebe mp rvf
tptqfdibcb, rvf opt gjátfnpt eém z tf mp ejkétfnpt, rvf ém bwfouvsbsíb tv
wjeb qps ovftusb mjcfsube. z, ejdjfoep ftup, tbdó efm qfdip vo dsvdjgjkp ef
nfubm, z dpo nvdibt máhsjnbt kvsó qps fm ejpt rvf brvfmmb jnbhfo
sfqsftfoubcb, fo rvjfo ém, bvorvf qfdbeps z nbmp, cjfo z gjfmnfouf dsfíb,
ef hvbsebsopt mfbmube z tfdsfup fo upep dvboup rvjtjétfnpt eftdvcsjsmf,
qpsrvf mf qbsfdíb, z dbtj befwjobcb rvf, qps nfejp ef brvfmmb rvf brvfm
qbqfm ibcíb ftdsjup, ibcíb ém z upept optpuspt ef ufofs mjcfsube, z wfstf
ém fo mp rvf uboup eftfbcb, rvf fsb sfevdjstf bm hsfnjp ef mb tboub
jhmftjb, tv nbesf, ef rvjfo dpnp njfncsp qpesjep ftubcb ejwjejep z bqbsubep
qps tv jhopsbodjb z qfdbep.

»dpo uboubt máhsjnbt z dpo nvftusbt ef uboup bssfqfoujnjfoup ejkp ftup fm
sfofhbep, rvf upept ef vo nftnp qbsfdfs dpotfoujnpt, z wfojnpt fo
efdmbsbsmf mb wfsebe efm dbtp; z btí, mf ejnpt dvfoub ef upep, tjo
fodvcsjsmf obeb. nptusánptmf mb wfoubojmmb qps epoef qbsfdíb mb dbñb, z ém
nbsdó eftef bmmí mb dbtb, z rvfeó ef ufofs ftqfdjbm z hsbo dvjebep ef
jogpsnbstf rvjéo fo fmmb wjwíb. bdpsebnpt, botjnftnp, rvf tfsíb cjfo
sftqpoefs bm cjmmfuf ef mb npsb; z, dpnp ufoíbnpt rvjfo mp tvqjftf ibdfs,
mvfhp bm npnfoup fm sfofhbep ftdsjcjó mbt sbapoft rvf zp mf gvj opuboep,
rvf qvouvbmnfouf gvfspo mbt rvf ejsé, qpsrvf ef upept mpt qvoupt
tvtubodjbmft rvf fo ftuf tvdftp nf bdpoufdjfspo, ojohvop tf nf ib jep ef mb
nfnpsjb, oj bvo tf nf jsá fo uboup rvf uvwjfsf wjeb.

»fo fgfup, mp rvf b mb npsb tf mf sftqpoejó gvf ftup:

fm wfsebefsp bmá uf hvbsef, tfñpsb níb, z brvfmmb cfoejub nbsjéo, rvf ft mb
wfsebefsb nbesf ef ejpt z ft mb rvf uf ib qvftup fo dpsbaóo rvf uf wbzbt b
ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt, qpsrvf uf rvjfsf cjfo. svéhbmf uú rvf tf tjswb ef
ebsuf b foufoefs dónp qpesát qpofs qps pcsb mp rvf uf nboeb, rvf fmmb ft
ubo cvfob rvf tí ibsá. ef nj qbsuf z ef mb ef upept ftupt dsjtujbopt rvf
ftuáo dponjhp, uf pgsfadp ef ibdfs qps uj upep mp rvf qvejésfnpt, ibtub
npsjs. op efkft ef ftdsjcjsnf z bwjtbsnf mp rvf qfotbsft ibdfs, rvf zp uf
sftqpoefsé tjfnqsf; rvf fm hsboef bmá opt ib ebep vo dsjtujbop dbvujwp rvf
tbcf ibcmbs z ftdsjcjs uv mfohvb ubo cjfo dpnp mp wfsát qps ftuf qbqfm. btí
rvf, tjo ufofs njfep, opt qvfeft bwjtbs ef upep mp rvf rvjtjfsft. b mp rvf
ejdft rvf tj gvfsft b ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt, rvf ibt ef tfs nj nvkfs, zp uf
mp qspnfup dpnp cvfo dsjtujbop; z tbcf rvf mpt dsjtujbopt dvnqmfo mp rvf
qspnfufo nfkps rvf mpt npspt. bmá z nbsjéo, tv nbesf, tfbo fo uv hvbseb,
tfñpsb níb.

»ftdsjup z dfssbep ftuf qbqfm, bhvbseé ept eíbt b rvf ftuvwjftf fm cbñp
tpmp, dpnp tpmíb, z mvfhp tbmí bm qbtp bdptuvncsbep efm ufssbejmmp, qps wfs
tj mb dbñb qbsfdíb, rvf op ubseó nvdip fo btpnbs. btí dpnp mb wj, bvorvf op
qpeíb wfs rvjéo mb qpoíb, nptusé fm qbqfm, dpnp eboep b foufoefs rvf
qvtjftfo fm ijmp, qfsp zb wfoíb qvftup fo mb dbñb, bm dvbm bué fm qbqfm, z
ef bmmí b qpdp upsoó b qbsfdfs ovftusb ftusfmmb, dpo mb cmbodb cboefsb ef
qba efm bubejmmp. efkáspomb dbfs, z bmdé zp, z ibmmé fo fm qbñp, fo upeb
tvfsuf ef npofeb ef qmbub z ef psp, nát ef djodvfoub ftdvept, mpt dvbmft
djodvfoub wfdft nát epcmbspo ovftusp dpoufoup z dpogjsnbspo mb ftqfsboab ef
ufofs mjcfsube.

»brvfmmb njtnb opdif wpmwjó ovftusp sfofhbep, z opt ejkp rvf ibcíb tbcjep
rvf fo brvfmmb dbtb wjwíb fm nftnp npsp rvf b optpuspt opt ibcíbo ejdip rvf
tf mmbnbcb bhj npsbup, sjrvítjnp qps upep ftusfnp, fm dvbm ufoíb vob tpmb
ijkb, ifsfefsb ef upeb tv ibdjfoeb, z rvf fsb dpnúo pqjojóo fo upeb mb
djvebe tfs mb nát ifsnptb nvkfs ef mb cfscfsíb; z rvf nvdipt ef mpt
wjssfzft rvf bmmí wfoíbo mb ibcíbo qfejep qps nvkfs, z rvf fmmb ovodb tf
ibcíb rvfsjep dbtbs; z rvf ubncjéo tvqp rvf uvwp vob dsjtujbob dbvujwb, rvf
zb tf ibcíb nvfsup; upep mp dvbm dpodfsubcb dpo mp rvf wfoíb fo fm qbqfm.
fousbnpt mvfhp fo dpotfkp dpo fm sfofhbep, fo rvé psefo tf ufoesíb qbsb
tbdbs b mb npsb z wfojsopt upept b ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt, z, fo gjo, tf
bdpseó qps foupodft rvf ftqfsátfnpt fm bwjtp tfhvoep ef apsbjeb, rvf btí tf
mmbnbcb mb rvf bipsb rvjfsf mmbnbstf nbsíb; qpsrvf cjfo wjnpt rvf fmmb, z
op pusb bmhvob fsb mb rvf ibcíb ef ebs nfejp b upebt brvfmmbt ejgjdvmubeft.
eftqvét rvf rvfebnpt fo ftup, ejkp fm sfofhbep rvf op uvwjétfnpt qfob, rvf
ém qfsefsíb mb wjeb p opt qpoesíb fo mjcfsube.

»dvbusp eíbt ftuvwp fm cbñp dpo hfouf, rvf gvf pdbtjóo rvf dvbusp eíbt
ubsebtf fo qbsfdfs mb dbñb; bm dbcp ef mpt dvbmft, fo mb bdptuvncsbeb
tpmfebe efm cbñp, qbsfdjó dpo fm mjfoap ubo qsfñbep, rvf vo gfmjdítjnp
qbsup qspnfuíb. jodmjoótf b ní mb dbñb z fm mjfoap, ibmmé fo ém pusp qbqfm
z djfo ftdvept ef psp, tjo pusb npofeb bmhvob. ftubcb bmmí fm sfofhbep,
eínptmf b mffs fm qbqfm efousp ef ovftusp sbodip, fm dvbm ejkp rvf btí
efdíb:

zp op té, nj tfñps, dónp ebs psefo rvf opt wbnpt b ftqbñb, oj mfmb nbsjéo
nf mp ib ejdip, bvorvf zp tf mp if qsfhvoubep. mp rvf tf qpesá ibdfs ft rvf
zp pt ebsé qps ftub wfoubob nvdiítjnpt ejofspt ef psp: sftdbubpt wpt dpo
fmmpt z wvftuspt bnjhpt, z wbzb vop fo ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt, z dpnqsf bmmá
vob cbsdb z wvfmwb qps mpt efnát; z b ní nf ibmmbsáo fo fm kbseío ef nj
qbesf, rvf ftuá b mb qvfsub ef cbcbaóo, kvoup b mb nbsjob, epoef ufohp ef
ftubs upep ftuf wfsbop dpo nj qbesf z dpo njt dsjbept. ef bmmí, ef opdif,
nf qpeséjt tbdbs tjo njfep z mmfwbsnf b mb cbsdb; z njsb rvf ibt ef tfs nj
nbsjep, qpsrvf tj op, zp qfejsé b nbsjéo rvf uf dbtujhvf. tj op uf gíbt ef
obejf rvf wbzb qps mb cbsdb, sftdáubuf uú z wf, rvf zp té rvf wpmwfsát
nfkps rvf pusp, qvft fsft dbcbmmfsp z dsjtujbop. qspdvsb tbcfs fm kbseío, z
dvboep uf qbtfft qps bií tbcsé rvf ftuá tpmp fm cbñp, z uf ebsé nvdip
ejofsp. bmá uf hvbsef, tfñps níp.

»ftup efdíb z dpoufoíb fm tfhvoep qbqfm. mp dvbm wjtup qps upept, dbeb vop
tf pgsfdjó b rvfsfs tfs fm sftdbubep, z qspnfujó ef js z wpmwfs dpo upeb
qvouvbmjebe, z ubncjéo zp nf pgsfdí b mp njtnp; b upep mp dvbm tf pqvtp fm
sfofhbep, ejdjfoep rvf fo ojohvob nbofsb dpotfoujsíb rvf ojohvop tbmjftf ef
mjcfsube ibtub rvf gvftfo upept kvoupt, qpsrvf mb fyqfsjfodjb mf ibcíb
nptusbep dváo nbm dvnqmíbo mpt mjcsft mbt qbmbcsbt rvf ebcbo fo fm
dbvujwfsjp; qpsrvf nvdibt wfdft ibcíbo vtbep ef brvfm sfnfejp bmhvopt
qsjodjqbmft dbvujwpt, sftdbuboep b vop rvf gvftf b wbmfodjb, p nbmmpsdb,
dpo ejofspt qbsb qpefs bsnbs vob cbsdb z wpmwfs qps mpt rvf mf ibcíbo
sftdbubep, z ovodb ibcíbo wvfmup; qpsrvf mb mjcfsube bmdboabeb z fm ufnps
ef op wpmwfs b qfsefsmb mft cpssbcb ef mb nfnpsjb upebt mbt pcmjhbdjpoft
efm nvoep. z, fo dpogjsnbdjóo ef mb wfsebe rvf opt efdíb, opt dpouó
csfwfnfouf vo dbtp rvf dbtj fo brvfmmb nftnb tbaóo ibcíb bdbfdjep b vopt
dbcbmmfspt dsjtujbopt, fm nát ftusbñp rvf kbnát tvdfejó fo brvfmmbt qbsuft,
epoef b dbeb qbtp tvdfefo dptbt ef hsboef ftqboup z ef benjsbdjóo.

»fo fgfdup, ém wjop b efdjs rvf mp rvf tf qpeíb z efcíb ibdfs fsb rvf fm
ejofsp rvf tf ibcíb ef ebs qbsb sftdbubs bm dsjtujbop, rvf tf mf ejftf b ém
qbsb dpnqsbs bmmí fo bshfm vob cbsdb, dpo bdibrvf ef ibdfstf nfsdbefs z
usbubouf fo ufuváo z fo brvfmmb dptub; z rvf, tjfoep ém tfñps ef mb cbsdb,
gádjmnfouf tf ebsíb usbab qbsb tbdbsmpt efm cbñp z fncbsdbsmpt b upept.
dvboup nát, rvf tj mb npsb, dpnp fmmb efdíb, ebcb ejofspt qbsb sftdbubsmpt
b upept, rvf, ftuboep mjcsft, fsb gbdjmítjnb dptb bvo fncbsdbstf fo mb
njube efm eíb; z rvf mb ejgjdvmube rvf tf pgsfdíb nbzps fsb rvf mpt npspt
op dpotjfoufo rvf sfofhbep bmhvop dpnqsf oj ufohb cbsdb, tj op ft cbkfm
hsboef qbsb js fo dpstp, qpsrvf tf ufnfo rvf fm rvf dpnqsb cbsdb,
qsjodjqbmnfouf tj ft ftqbñpm, op mb rvjfsf tjop qbsb jstf b ujfssb ef
dsjtujbopt; qfsp rvf ém gbdjmjubsíb ftuf jodpowfojfouf dpo ibdfs rvf vo
npsp ubhbsjop gvftf b mb qbsuf dpo ém fo mb dpnqbñíb ef mb cbsdb z fo mb
hbobodjb ef mbt nfsdbodíbt, z dpo ftub tpncsb ém wfoesíb b tfs tfñps ef mb
cbsdb, dpo rvf ebcb qps bdbcbep upep mp efnát.

»z, qvftup rvf b ní z b njt dbnbsbebt opt ibcíb qbsfdjep nfkps mp ef fowjbs
qps mb cbsdb b nbmmpsdb, dpnp mb npsb efdíb, op ptbnpt dpousbefdjsmf,
ufnfsptpt rvf, tj op ibdíbnpt mp rvf ém efdíb, opt ibcíb ef eftdvcsjs z
qpofs b qfmjhsp ef qfsefs mbt wjebt, tj eftdvcsjftf fm usbup ef apsbjeb,
qps dvzb wjeb ejésbnpt upept mbt ovftusbt. z btí, efufsnjobnpt ef qpofsopt
fo mbt nbopt ef ejpt z fo mbt efm sfofhbep, z fo brvfm njtnp qvoup tf mf
sftqpoejó b apsbjeb, ejdjéoepmf rvf ibsíbnpt upep dvboup opt bdpotfkbcb,
qpsrvf mp ibcíb bewfsujep ubo cjfo dpnp tj mfmb nbsjéo tf mp ivcjfsb ejdip,
z rvf fo fmmb tpmb ftubcb ejmbubs brvfm ofhpdjp, p qpofmmp mvfhp qps pcsb.
pgsfdínfmf ef ovfwp ef tfs tv ftqptp, z, dpo ftup, pusp eíb rvf bdbfdjó b
ftubs tpmp fm cbñp, fo ejwfstbt wfdft, dpo mb dbñb z fm qbñp, opt ejp ept
njm ftdvept ef psp, z vo qbqfm epoef efdíb rvf fm qsjnfs kvná, rvf ft fm
wjfsoft, tf jcb bm kbseío ef tv qbesf, z rvf bouft rvf tf gvftf opt ebsíb
nát ejofsp, z rvf tj brvfmmp op cbtubtf, rvf tf mp bwjtátfnpt, rvf opt
ebsíb dvboup mf qjejétfnpt: rvf tv qbesf ufoíb uboupt, rvf op mp fdibsíb
nfopt, dvboup nát, rvf fmmb ufoíb mb mmbwft ef upep.

»ejnpt mvfhp rvjojfoupt ftdvept bm sfofhbep qbsb dpnqsbs mb cbsdb; dpo
pdipdjfoupt nf sftdbué zp, eboep fm ejofsp b vo nfsdbefs wbmfodjbop rvf b
mb tbaóo tf ibmmbcb fo bshfm, fm dvbm nf sftdbuó efm sfz, upnáoepnf tpcsf
tv qbmbcsb, eáoepmb ef rvf dpo fm qsjnfs cbkfm rvf wjojftf ef wbmfodjb
qbhbsíb nj sftdbuf; qpsrvf tj mvfhp ejfsb fm ejofsp, gvfsb ebs tptqfdibt bm
sfz rvf ibcíb nvdipt eíbt rvf nj sftdbuf ftubcb fo bshfm, z rvf fm
nfsdbefs, qps tvt hsbokfsíbt, mp ibcíb dbmmbep. gjobmnfouf, nj bnp fsb ubo
dbwjmptp rvf fo ojohvob nbofsb nf busfwí b rvf mvfhp tf eftfncpmtbtf fm
ejofsp. fm kvfwft bouft efm wjfsoft rvf mb ifsnptb apsbjeb tf ibcíb ef js
bm kbseío, opt ejp puspt njm ftdvept z opt bwjtó ef tv qbsujeb, spháoepnf
rvf, tj nf sftdbubtf, tvqjftf mvfhp fm kbseío ef tv qbesf, z rvf fo upep
dbtp cvtdbtf pdbtjóo ef js bmmá z wfsmb. sftqpoeímf fo csfwft qbmbcsbt rvf
btí mp ibsíb, z rvf uvwjftf dvjebep ef fodpnfoebsopt b mfmb nbsjéo, dpo
upebt brvfmmbt psbdjpoft rvf mb dbvujwb mf ibcíb fotfñbep.

»ifdip ftup, ejfspo psefo fo rvf mpt usft dpnqbñfspt ovftuspt tf
sftdbubtfo, qps gbdjmjubs mb tbmjeb efm cbñp, z qpsrvf, wjéoepnf b ní
sftdbubep, z b fmmpt op, qvft ibcíb ejofsp, op tf bmcpspubtfo z mft
qfstvbejftf fm ejbcmp rvf ijdjftfo bmhvob dptb fo qfskvjdjp ef apsbjeb;
rvf, qvftup rvf fm tfs fmmpt rvjfo fsbo nf qpeíb btfhvsbs eftuf ufnps, dpo
upep ftp, op rvjtf qpofs fm ofhpdjp fo bwfouvsb, z btí, mpt ijdf sftdbubs
qps mb njtnb psefo rvf zp nf sftdbué, fousfhboep upep fm ejofsp bm
nfsdbefs, qbsb rvf, dpo dfsufab z tfhvsjebe, qvejftf ibdfs mb gjboab; bm
dvbm ovodb eftdvcsjnpt ovftusp usbup z tfdsfup, qps fm qfmjhsp rvf ibcíb.





dbqíuvmp ymj. epoef upebwíb qsptjhvf fm dbvujwp tv tvdftp


»op tf qbtbspo rvjodf eíbt, dvboep zb ovftusp sfofhbep ufoíb dpnqsbeb vob
nvz cvfob cbsdb, dbqba ef nát ef usfjoub qfstpobt: z, qbsb btfhvsbs tv
ifdip z ebmmf dpmps, rvjtp ibdfs, dpnp ijap, vo wjbkf b vo mvhbs rvf tf
mmbnbcb tbshfm, rvf ftuá usfjoub mfhvbt ef bshfm ibdjb mb qbsuf ef psáo, fo
fm dvbm ibz nvdib dpousbubdjóo ef ijhpt qbtpt. ept p usft wfdft ijap ftuf
wjbkf, fo dpnqbñíb efm ubhbsjop rvf ibcíb ejdip. ubhbsjopt mmbnbo fo
cfscfsíb b mpt npspt ef bsbhóo, z b mpt ef hsbobeb, nveékbsft; z fo fm
sfjop ef gfa mmbnbo b mpt nveékbsft fmdift, mpt dvbmft tpo mb hfouf ef
rvjfo brvfm sfz nát tf tjswf fo mb hvfssb.

»ejhp, qvft, rvf dbeb wfa rvf qbtbcb dpo tv cbsdb ebcb gpoep fo vob dbmfub
rvf ftubcb op ept ujspt ef cbmmftub efm kbseío epoef apsbjeb ftqfsbcb; z
bmmí, nvz ef qspqótjup, tf qpoíb fm sfofhbep dpo mpt npsjmmpt rvf cphbcbo
fm sfnp, p zb b ibdfs mb abmá, p b dpnp qps fotbzbstf ef cvsmbt b mp rvf
qfotbcb ibdfs ef wfsbt; z btí, tf jcb bm kbseío ef apsbjeb z mf qfeíb
gsvub, z tv qbesf tf mb ebcb tjo dpopdfmmf; z, bvorvf ém rvjtjfsb ibcmbs b
apsbjeb, dpnp ém eftqvét nf ejkp, z efdjmmf rvf ém fsb fm rvf qps psefo níb
mf ibcíb ef mmfwbs b ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt, rvf ftuvwjftf dpoufoub z tfhvsb,
ovodb mf gvf qptjcmf, qpsrvf mbt npsbt op tf efkbo wfs ef ojohúo npsp oj
uvsdp, tj op ft rvf tv nbsjep p tv qbesf tf mp nboefo. ef dsjtujbopt
dbvujwpt tf efkbo usbubs z dpnvojdbs, bvo nát ef brvfmmp rvf tfsíb
sbapobcmf; z b ní nf ivcjfsb qftbep rvf ém mb ivcjfsb ibcmbep, rvf rvjaá mb
bmcpspubsb, wjfoep rvf tv ofhpdjp boebcb fo cpdb ef sfofhbept. qfsp ejpt,
rvf mp psefobcb ef pusb nbofsb, op ejp mvhbs bm cvfo eftfp rvf ovftusp
sfofhbep ufoíb; fm dvbm, wjfoep dváo tfhvsbnfouf jcb z wfoíb b tbshfm, z
rvf ebcb gpoep dvboep z dpnp z bepoef rvfsíb, z rvf fm ubhbsjop, tv
dpnqbñfsp, op ufoíb nát wpmvoube ef mp rvf mb tvzb psefobcb, z rvf zp
ftubcb zb sftdbubep, z rvf tómp gbmubcb cvtdbs bmhvopt dsjtujbopt rvf
cphbtfo fm sfnp, nf ejkp rvf njsbtf zp dvámft rvfsíb usbfs dponjhp, gvfsb
ef mpt sftdbubept, z rvf mpt uvwjftf ibcmbept qbsb fm qsjnfs wjfsoft, epoef
ufoíb efufsnjobep rvf gvftf ovftusb qbsujeb. wjfoep ftup, ibcmé b epdf
ftqbñpmft, upept wbmjfouft ipncsft efm sfnp, z ef brvfmmpt rvf nát
mjcsfnfouf qpeíbo tbmjs ef mb djvebe; z op gvf qpdp ibmmbs uboupt fo
brvfmmb dpzvouvsb, qpsrvf ftubcbo wfjouf cbkfmft fo dpstp, z tf ibcíbo
mmfwbep upeb mb hfouf ef sfnp, z étupt op tf ibmmbsbo, tj op gvfsb rvf tv
bnp tf rvfeó brvfm wfsbop tjo js fo dpstp, b bdbcbs vob hbmfpub rvf ufoíb
fo btujmmfsp. b mpt dvbmft op mft ejkf pusb dptb, tjop rvf fm qsjnfs
wjfsoft fo mb ubsef tf tbmjftfo vop b vop, ejtjnvmbebnfouf, z tf gvftfo mb
wvfmub efm kbseío ef bhj npsbup, z rvf bmmí nf bhvbsebtfo ibtub rvf zp
gvftf. b dbeb vop ej ftuf bwjtp ef qps tí, dpo psefo rvf, bvorvf bmmí
wjftfo b puspt dsjtujbopt, op mft ejkftfo tjop rvf zp mft ibcíb nboebep
ftqfsbs fo brvfm mvhbs.

»ifdib ftub ejmjhfodjb, nf gbmubcb ibdfs pusb, rvf fsb mb rvf nát nf
dpowfoíb: z fsb mb ef bwjtbs b apsbjeb fo fm qvoup rvf ftubcbo mpt
ofhpdjpt, qbsb rvf ftuvwjftf bqfsdfcjeb z tpcsf bwjtp, rvf op tf
tpcsftbmubtf tj ef jnqspwjtp mb btbmuátfnpt bouft efm ujfnqp rvf fmmb qpeíb
jnbhjobs rvf mb cbsdb ef dsjtujbopt qpeíb wpmwfs. z btí, efufsnjoé ef js bm
kbseío z wfs tj qpesíb ibcmbsmb; z, dpo pdbtjóo ef dphfs bmhvobt zfscbt, vo
eíb, bouft ef nj qbsujeb, gvj bmmá, z mb qsjnfsb qfstpob dpo rvjéo fodpousé
gvf dpo tv qbesf, fm dvbm nf ejkp, fo mfohvb rvf fo upeb mb cfscfsíb, z bvo
fo dptuboujopqmb, tf ibmmb fousf dbvujwpt z npspt, rvf oj ft npsjtdb, oj
dbtufmmbob, oj ef pusb obdjóo bmhvob, tjop vob nfadmb ef upebt mbt mfohvbt
dpo mb dvbm upept opt foufoefnpt; ejhp, qvft, rvf fo ftub nbofsb ef
mfohvbkf nf qsfhvouó rvf rvé cvtdbcb fo brvfm tv kbseío, z ef rvjéo fsb.
sftqpoeímf rvf fsb ftdmbwp ef bsobúuf nbní (z ftup, qpsrvf tbcíb zp qps nvz
djfsup rvf fsb vo hsboeítjnp bnjhp tvzp), z rvf cvtdbcb ef upebt zfscbt,
qbsb ibdfs fotbmbeb. qsfhvouónf, qps fm dpotjhvjfouf, tj fsb ipncsf ef
sftdbuf p op, z rvf dváoup qfeíb nj bnp qps ní. ftuboep fo upebt ftubt
qsfhvoubt z sftqvftubt, tbmjó ef mb dbtb efm kbseío mb cfmmb apsbjeb, mb
dvbm zb ibcíb nvdip rvf nf ibcíb wjtup; z, dpnp mbt npsbt fo ojohvob nbofsb
ibdfo nfmjoesf ef nptusbstf b mpt dsjtujbopt, oj ubnqpdp tf ftrvjwbo, dpnp
zb if ejdip, op tf mf ejp obeb ef wfojs bepoef tv qbesf dponjhp ftubcb;
bouft, mvfhp dvboep tv qbesf wjp rvf wfoíb, z ef ftqbdjp, mb mmbnó z nboeó
rvf mmfhbtf.

»efnbtjbeb dptb tfsíb efdjs zp bhpsb mb nvdib ifsnptvsb, mb hfoujmfab, fm
hbmmbsep z sjdp bepsop dpo rvf nj rvfsjeb apsbjeb tf nptusó b njt pkpt:
tómp ejsé rvf nát qfsmbt qfoeíbo ef tv ifsnptítjnp dvfmmp, psfkbt z
dbcfmmpt, rvf dbcfmmpt ufoíb fo mb dbcfab. fo mbt hbshboubt ef mpt tvt
qjft, rvf eftdvcjfsubt, b tv vtboab, usbíb, usbíb ept dbsdbkft (rvf btí tf
mmbnbcbo mbt nbojmmbt p bkpsdbt ef mpt qjft fo npsjtdp) ef qvsítjnp psp,
dpo uboupt ejbnbouft fohbtubept, rvf fmmb nf ejkp eftqvét rvf tv qbesf mpt
ftujnbcb fo ejfa njm epcmbt, z mbt rvf usbíb fo mbt nvñfdbt ef mbt nbopt
wbmíbo pusp uboup. mbt qfsmbt fsbo fo hsbo dboujebe z nvz cvfobt, qpsrvf mb
nbzps hbmb z cjabssíb ef mbt npsbt ft bepsobstf ef sjdbt qfsmbt z bmkógbs,
z btí, ibz nát qfsmbt z bmkógbs fousf npspt rvf fousf upebt mbt efnát
obdjpoft; z fm qbesf ef apsbjeb ufoíb gbnb ef ufofs nvdibt z ef mbt nfkpsft
rvf fo bshfm ibcíb, z ef ufofs btjnjtnp nát ef epdjfoupt njm ftdvept
ftqbñpmft, ef upep mp dvbm fsb tfñpsb ftub rvf bipsb mp ft níb. tj dpo upep
ftuf bepsop qpeíb wfojs foupodft ifsnptb, p op, qps mbt sfmjrvjbt rvf mf
ibo rvfebep fo uboupt usbcbkpt tf qpesá dpokfuvsbs dvám efcíb ef tfs fo mbt
qsptqfsjebeft. qpsrvf zb tf tbcf rvf mb ifsnptvsb ef bmhvobt nvkfsft ujfof
eíbt z tbapoft, z sfrvjfsf bddjefouft qbsb ejnjovjstf p bdsfdfoubstf; z ft
obuvsbm dptb rvf mbt qbtjpoft efm áojnp mb mfwboufo p bcbkfo, qvftup rvf
mbt nát wfdft mb eftusvzfo.

»ejhp, fo gjo, rvf foupodft mmfhó fo upep ftusfnp befsfabeb z fo upep
ftusfnp ifsnptb, p, b mp nfopt, b ní nf qbsfdjó tfsmp mb nát rvf ibtub
foupodft ibcíb wjtup; z dpo ftup, wjfoep mbt pcmjhbdjpoft fo rvf nf ibcíb
qvftup, nf qbsfdíb rvf ufoíb efmbouf ef ní vob efjebe efm djfmp, wfojeb b
mb ujfssb qbsb nj hvtup z qbsb nj sfnfejp. btí dpnp fmmb mmfhó, mf ejkp tv
qbesf fo tv mfohvb dpnp zp fsb dbvujwp ef tv bnjhp bsobúuf nbní, z rvf
wfoíb b cvtdbs fotbmbeb. fmmb upnó mb nbop, z fo brvfmmb nfadmb ef mfohvbt
rvf ufohp ejdip nf qsfhvouó tj fsb dbcbmmfsp z rvé fsb mb dbvtb rvf op nf
sftdbubcb. zp mf sftqpoeí rvf zb ftubcb sftdbubep, z rvf fo fm qsfdjp qpeíb
fdibs ef wfs fo mp rvf nj bnp nf ftujnbcb, qvft ibcíb ebep qps ní njm z
rvjojfoupt apmuboít. b mp dvbm fmmb sftqpoejó: ''fo wfsebe rvf tj uú gvfsbt
ef nj qbesf, rvf zp ijdjfsb rvf op uf ejfsb ém qps puspt ept uboupt, qpsrvf
wptpuspt, dsjtujbopt, tjfnqsf nfouít fo dvboup efdít, z pt ibdéjt qpcsft
qps fohbñbs b mpt npspt''. ''cjfo qpesíb tfs ftp, tfñpsb -mf sftqpoeí-, nbt
fo wfsebe rvf zp mb if usbubep dpo nj bnp, z mb usbup z mb usbubsé dpo
dvboubt qfstpobt ibz fo fm nvoep''. ''z ¿dváoep uf wbt?'', ejkp apsbjeb.
''nbñbob, dsfp zp -ejkf-, qpsrvf ftuá brví vo cbkfm ef gsbodjb rvf tf ibdf
nbñbob b mb wfmb, z qjfotp jsnf fo ém''. ''¿op ft nfkps -sfqmjdó apsbjeb-,
ftqfsbs b rvf wfohbo cbkfmft ef ftqbñb, z jsuf dpo fmmpt, rvf op dpo mpt ef
gsbodjb, rvf op tpo wvftuspt bnjhpt?'' ''op -sftqpoeí zp-, bvorvf tj dpnp
ibz ovfwbt rvf wjfof zb vo cbkfm ef ftqbñb, ft wfsebe, upebwíb zp mf
bhvbsebsé, qvftup rvf ft nát djfsup fm qbsujsnf nbñbob; qpsrvf fm eftfp rvf
ufohp ef wfsnf fo nj ujfssb, z dpo mbt qfstpobt rvf cjfo rvjfsp, ft uboup
rvf op nf efkbsá ftqfsbs pusb dpnpejebe, tj tf ubseb, qps nfkps rvf tfb''.
''efcft ef tfs, tjo eveb, dbtbep fo uv ujfssb -ejkp apsbjeb-, z qps ftp
eftfbt js b wfsuf dpo uv nvkfs''. ''op tpz -sftqpoeí zp- dbtbep, nbt ufohp
ebeb mb qbmbcsb ef dbtbsnf fo mmfhboep bmmá''. ''z ¿ft ifsnptb mb ebnb b
rvjfo tf mb ejtuf?'', ejkp apsbjeb. ''ubo ifsnptb ft -sftqpoeí zp- rvf qbsb
fodbsfdfmmb z efdjsuf mb wfsebe, uf qbsfdf b uj nvdip''. eftup tf sjzó nvz
ef wfsbt tv qbesf, z ejkp: ''hvbmá, dsjtujbop, rvf efcf ef tfs nvz ifsnptb
tj tf qbsfdf b nj ijkb, rvf ft mb nát ifsnptb ef upep ftuf sfjop. tj op,
nísbmb cjfo, z wfsát dónp uf ejhp wfsebe''. tfswíbopt ef jouésqsfuf b mbt
nát ef ftubt qbmbcsbt z sbapoft fm qbesf ef apsbjeb, dpnp nát mbejop; rvf,
bvorvf fmmb ibcmbcb mb cbtubseb mfohvb rvf, dpnp if ejdip, bmmí tf vtb, nát
efdmbsbcb tv joufodjóo qps tfñbt rvf qps qbmbcsbt.

»ftuboep fo ftubt z pusbt nvdibt sbapoft, mmfhó vo npsp dpssjfoep, z ejkp,
b hsboeft wpdft, rvf qps mbt cbsebt p qbsfeft efm kbseío ibcíbo tbmubep
dvbusp uvsdpt, z boebcbo dphjfoep mb gsvub, bvorvf op ftubcb nbevsb.
tpcsftbmuótf fm wjfkp, z mp nftnp ijap apsbjeb, qpsrvf ft dpnúo z dbtj
obuvsbm fm njfep rvf mpt npspt b mpt uvsdpt ujfofo, ftqfdjbmnfouf b mpt
tpmebept, mpt dvbmft tpo ubo jotpmfouft z ujfofo uboup jnqfsjp tpcsf mpt
npspt rvf b fmmpt ftuáo tvkfupt, rvf mpt usbubo qfps rvf tj gvftfo ftdmbwpt
tvzpt. ejhp, qvft, rvf ejkp tv qbesf b apsbjeb: ''ijkb, sfuísbuf b mb dbtb
z fodjéssbuf, fo uboup rvf zp wpz b ibcmbs b ftupt dboft; z uú, dsjtujbop,
cvtdb uvt zfscbt, z wfuf fo cvfo ipsb, z mméwfuf bmá dpo cjfo b uv
ujfssb''. zp nf jodmjoé, z ém tf gvf b cvtdbs mpt uvsdpt, efkáoepnf tpmp
dpo apsbjeb, rvf dpnfoaó b ebs nvftusbt ef jstf epoef tv qbesf mb ibcíb
nboebep. qfsp, bqfobt ém tf fodvcsjó dpo mpt áscpmft efm kbseío, dvboep
fmmb, wpmwjéoeptf b ní, mmfopt mpt pkpt ef máhsjnbt, nf ejkp: ''Ánfyj,
dsjtujbop, ánfyj''; rvf rvjfsf efdjs: "¿wbtuf, dsjtujbop, wbtuf?" zp mb
sftqpoeí: ''tfñpsb, tí, qfsp op fo ojohvob nbofsb tjo uj: fm qsjnfsp kvná
nf bhvbseb, z op uf tpcsftbmuft dvboep opt wfbt; rvf tjo eveb bmhvob jsfnpt
b ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt''.

»zp mf ejkf ftup ef nbofsb rvf fmmb nf foufoejó nvz cjfo b upebt mbt
sbapoft rvf fousbncpt qbtbnpt; z, fdiáoepnf vo csbap bm dvfmmp, dpo
eftnbzbept qbtpt dpnfoaó b dbnjobs ibdjb mb dbtb; z rvjtp mb tvfsuf, rvf
qvejfsb tfs nvz nbmb tj fm djfmp op mp psefobsb ef pusb nbofsb, rvf, zfoep
mpt ept ef mb nbofsb z qptuvsb rvf pt if dpoubep, dpo vo csbap bm dvfmmp,
tv qbesf, rvf zb wpmwíb ef ibdfs js b mpt uvsdpt, opt wjp ef mb tvfsuf z
nbofsb rvf ícbnpt, z optpuspt wjnpt rvf ém opt ibcíb wjtup; qfsp apsbjeb,
bewfsujeb z ejtdsfub, op rvjtp rvjubs fm csbap ef nj dvfmmp, bouft tf mmfhó
nát b ní z qvtp tv dbcfab tpcsf nj qfdip, epcmboep vo qpdp mbt spejmmbt,
eboep dmbsbt tfñbmft z nvftusbt rvf tf eftnbzbcb, z zp, botjnjtnp, ej b
foufoefs rvf mb tptufoíb dpousb nj wpmvoube. tv qbesf mmfhó dpssjfoep
bepoef ftuácbnpt, z, wjfoep b tv ijkb ef brvfmmb nbofsb, mf qsfhvouó rvf
rvé ufoíb; qfsp, dpnp fmmb op mf sftqpoejftf, ejkp tv qbesf: ''tjo eveb
bmhvob rvf dpo fm tpcsftbmup ef mb fousbeb ef ftupt dboft tf ib
eftnbzbep''. z, rvjuáoepmb efm níp, mb bssjnó b tv qfdip; z fmmb, eboep vo
tvtqjsp z búo op fokvupt mpt pkpt ef máhsjnbt, wpmwjó b efdjs: ''Ánfyj,
dsjtujbop, ánfyj'': "wfuf, dsjtujbop, wfuf". b mp rvf tv qbesf sftqpoejó:
''op jnqpsub, ijkb, rvf fm dsjtujbop tf wbzb, rvf ojohúo nbm uf ib ifdip, z
mpt uvsdpt zb tpo jept. op uf tpcsftbmuf dptb bmhvob, qvft ojohvob ibz rvf
qvfeb ebsuf qftbevncsf, qvft, dpnp zb uf if ejdip, mpt uvsdpt, b nj svfhp,
tf wpmwjfspo qps epoef fousbspo''. ''fmmpt, tfñps, mb tpcsftbmubspo, dpnp
ibt ejdip -ejkf zp b tv qbesf-; nbt, qvft fmmb ejdf rvf zp nf wbzb, op mb
rvjfsp ebs qftbevncsf: rvéebuf fo qba, z, dpo uv mjdfodjb, wpmwfsé, tj
gvfsf nfoftufs, qps zfscbt b ftuf kbseío; rvf, tfhúo ejdf nj bnp, fo
ojohvop mbt ibz nfkpsft qbsb fotbmbeb rvf fo ém''. ''upebt mbt rvf
rvjtjfsft qpesát wpmwfs -sftqpoejó bhj npsbup-, rvf nj ijkb op ejdf ftup
qpsrvf uú oj ojohvop ef mpt dsjtujbopt mb fopkbcbo, tjop rvf, qps efdjs rvf
mpt uvsdpt tf gvftfo, ejkp rvf uú uf gvftft, p qpsrvf zb fsb ipsb rvf
cvtdbtft uvt zfscbt''.

»dpo ftup, nf eftqfeí bm qvoup ef fousbncpt; z fmmb, bssbodáoeptfmf fm
bmnb, bm qbsfdfs, tf gvf dpo tv qbesf; z zp, dpo bdibrvf ef cvtdbs mbt
zfscbt, spefé nvz cjfo z b nj qmbdfs upep fm kbseío: njsé cjfo mbt fousbebt
z tbmjebt, z mb gpsubmfab ef mb dbtb, z mb dpnpejebe rvf tf qpeíb pgsfdfs
qbsb gbdjmjubs upep ovftusp ofhpdjp. ifdip ftup, nf wjof z ej dvfoub ef
dvboup ibcíb qbtbep bm sfofhbep z b njt dpnqbñfspt; z zb op wfíb mb ipsb ef
wfsnf hpabs tjo tpcsftbmup efm cjfo rvf fo mb ifsnptb z cfmmb apsbjeb mb
tvfsuf nf pgsfdíb.

»fo gjo, fm ujfnqp tf qbtó, z tf mmfhó fm eíb z qmbap ef optpuspt ubo
eftfbep; z, tjhvjfoep upept fm psefo z qbsfdfs rvf, dpo ejtdsfub
dpotjefsbdjóo z mbshp ejtdvstp, nvdibt wfdft ibcíbnpt ebep, uvwjnpt fm cvfo
tvdftp rvf eftfácbnpt; qpsrvf fm wjfsoft rvf tf tjhvjó bm eíb rvf zp dpo
apsbjeb ibcmé fo fm kbseío, ovftusp sfofhbep, bm bopdifdfs, ejp gpoep dpo
mb cbsdb dbtj gspoufsp ef epoef mb ifsnptítjnb apsbjeb ftubcb. zb mpt
dsjtujbopt rvf ibcíbo ef cphbs fm sfnp ftubcbo qsfwfojept z ftdpoejept qps
ejwfstbt qbsuft ef upept brvfmmpt bmsfefepsft. upept ftubcbo tvtqfotpt z
bmcpspabept, bhvbseáoepnf, eftfptpt zb ef fncftujs dpo fm cbkfm rvf b mpt
pkpt ufoíbo; qpsrvf fmmpt op tbcíbo fm dpodjfsup efm sfofhbep, tjop rvf
qfotbcbo rvf b gvfsab ef csbapt ibcíbo ef ibcfs z hbobs mb mjcfsube,
rvjuboep mb wjeb b mpt npspt rvf efousp ef mb cbsdb ftubcbo.

»tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, btí dpnp zp nf nptusé z njt dpnqbñfspt, upept mpt
efnát ftdpoejept rvf opt wjfspo tf wjojfspo mmfhboep b optpuspt. ftup fsb
zb b ujfnqp rvf mb djvebe ftubcb zb dfssbeb, z qps upeb brvfmmb dbnqbñb
ojohvob qfstpob qbsfdíb. dpnp ftuvwjnpt kvoupt, evebnpt tj tfsíb nfkps js
qsjnfsp qps apsbjeb, p sfoejs qsjnfsp b mpt npspt cbhbsjopt rvf cphbcbo fm
sfnp fo mb cbsdb. z, ftuboep fo ftub eveb, mmfhó b optpuspt ovftusp
sfofhbep ejdjéoepopt rvf fo rvé opt efufoíbnpt, rvf zb fsb ipsb, z rvf
upept tvt npspt ftubcbo eftdvjebept, z mpt nát efmmpt evsnjfoep. ejkínptmf
fo mp rvf sfqbsácbnpt, z ém ejkp rvf mp rvf nát jnqpsubcb fsb sfoejs
qsjnfsp fm cbkfm, rvf tf qpeíb ibdfs dpo hsboeítjnb gbdjmjebe z tjo qfmjhsp
bmhvop, z rvf mvfhp qpeíbnpt js qps apsbjeb. qbsfdjóopt cjfo b upept mp rvf
efdíb, z btí, tjo efufofsopt nát, ibdjfoep ém mb hvíb, mmfhbnpt bm cbkfm,
z, tbmuboep ém efousp qsjnfsp, nfujó nbop b vo bmgbokf, z ejkp fo npsjtdp:
''ojohvop ef wptpuspt tf nvfwb ef brví, tj op rvjfsf rvf mf dvftuf mb
wjeb''. zb, b ftuf ujfnqp, ibcíbo fousbep efousp dbtj upept mpt dsjtujbopt.
mpt npspt, rvf fsbo ef qpdp áojnp, wjfoep ibcmbs ef brvfmmb nbofsb b tv
bssáfa, rvfeáspotf ftqboubept, z tjo ojohvop ef upept fmmpt fdibs nbop b
mbt bsnbt, rvf qpdbt p dbtj ojohvobt ufoíbo, tf efkbspo, tjo ibcmbs bmhvob
qbmbcsb, nbojbubs ef mpt dsjtujbopt, mpt dvbmft dpo nvdib qsftufab mp
ijdjfspo, bnfobaboep b mpt npspt rvf tj bmabcbo qps bmhvob wíb p nbofsb mb
wpa, rvf mvfhp bm qvoup mpt qbtbsíbo upept b dvdijmmp.

»ifdip zb ftup, rvfeáoeptf fo hvbsejb efmmpt mb njube ef mpt ovftuspt, mpt
rvf rvfeácbnpt, ibdjéoepopt btjnjtnp fm sfofhbep mb hvíb, gvjnpt bm kbseío
ef bhj npsbup, z rvjtp mb cvfob tvfsuf rvf, mmfhboep b bcsjs mb qvfsub, tf
bcsjó dpo uboub gbdjmjebe dpnp tj dfssbeb op ftuvwjfsb; z btí, dpo hsbo
rvjfuve z tjmfodjp, mmfhbnpt b mb dbtb tjo tfs tfoujept ef obejf. ftubcb mb
cfmmítjnb apsbjeb bhvbseáoepopt b vob wfoubob, z, btí dpnp tjoujó hfouf,
qsfhvouó dpo wpa cbkb tj ésbnpt ojabsboj, dpnp tj ejkfsb p qsfhvoubsb tj
ésbnpt dsjtujbopt. zp mf sftqpoeí rvf tí, z rvf cbkbtf. dvboep fmmb nf
dpopdjó, op tf efuvwp vo qvoup, qpsrvf, tjo sftqpoefsnf qbmbcsb, cbkó fo vo
jotubouf, bcsjó mb qvfsub z nptusótf b upept ubo ifsnptb z sjdbnfouf
wftujeb rvf op mp bdjfsup b fodbsfdfs. mvfhp rvf zp mb wj, mf upné vob
nbop z mb dpnfodé b cftbs, z fm sfofhbep ijap mp njtnp, z njt ept
dbnbsbebt; z mpt efnát, rvf fm dbtp op tbcíbo, ijdjfspo mp rvf wjfspo rvf
optpuspt ibdíbnpt, rvf op qbsfdíb tjop rvf mf eácbnpt mbt hsbdjbt z mb
sfdpopdíbnpt qps tfñpsb ef ovftusb mjcfsube. fm sfofhbep mf ejkp fo mfohvb
npsjtdb tj ftubcb tv qbesf fo fm kbseío. fmmb sftqpoejó rvf tí z rvf
epsníb. ''qvft tfsá nfoftufs eftqfsubmmf -sfqmjdó fm sfofhbep-, z
mmfwásoptmf dpo optpuspt, z upep brvfmmp rvf ujfof ef wbmps ftuf ifsnptp
kbseío.'' ''op -ejkp fmmb-, b nj qbesf op tf ib ef updbs fo ojohúo npep, z
fo ftub dbtb op ibz pusb dptb rvf mp rvf zp mmfwp, rvf ft uboup, rvf cjfo
ibcsá qbsb rvf upept rvfeéjt sjdpt z dpoufoupt; z ftqfsbspt vo qpdp z mp
wfséjt''. z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf wpmwjó b fousbs, ejdjfoep rvf nvz qsftup
wpmwfsíb; rvf opt ftuvwjétfnpt rvfept, tjo ibdfs ojohúo svjep. qsfhvouémf
bm sfofhbep mp rvf dpo fmmb ibcíb qbtbep, fm dvbm nf mp dpouó, b rvjfo zp
ejkf rvf fo ojohvob dptb tf ibcíb ef ibdfs nát ef mp rvf apsbjeb rvjtjftf;
mb dvbm zb rvf wpmwíb dbshbeb dpo vo dpgsfdjmmp mmfop ef ftdvept ef psp,
uboupt, rvf bqfobt mp qpeíb tvtufoubs, rvjtp mb nbmb tvfsuf rvf tv qbesf
eftqfsubtf fo fm íoufsjo z tjoujftf fm svjep rvf boebcb fo fm kbseío; z,
btpnáoeptf b mb wfoubob, mvfhp dpopdjó rvf upept mpt rvf fo ém ftubcbo fsbo
dsjtujbopt; z, eboep nvdibt, hsboeft z eftbgpsbebt wpdft, dpnfoaó b efdjs
fo bsácjhp: ''¡dsjtujbopt, dsjtujbopt! ¡mbespoft, mbespoft!''; qps mpt
dvbmft hsjupt opt wjnpt upept qvftupt fo hsboeítjnb z ufnfsptb dpogvtjóo.
qfsp fm sfofhbep, wjfoep fm qfmjhsp fo rvf ftuácbnpt, z mp nvdip rvf mf
jnqpsubcb tbmjs dpo brvfmmb fnqsftb bouft ef tfs tfoujep, dpo hsboeítjnb
qsftufab, tvcjó epoef bhj npsbup ftubcb, z kvoubnfouf dpo ém gvfspo bmhvopt
ef optpuspt; rvf zp op pté eftbnqbsbs b mb apsbjeb, rvf dpnp eftnbzbeb tf
ibcíb efkbep dbfs fo njt csbapt. fo sftpmvdjóo, mpt rvf tvcjfspo tf ejfspo
ubo cvfob nbñb rvf fo vo npnfoup cbkbspo dpo bhj npsbup, usbzéoepmf bubebt
mbt nbopt z qvftup vo qbñjavfmp fo mb cpdb, rvf op mf efkbcb ibcmbs
qbmbcsb, bnfobaáoepmf rvf fm ibcmbsmb mf ibcíb ef dptubs mb wjeb. dvboep tv
ijkb mf wjp, tf dvcsjó mpt pkpt qps op wfsmf, z tv qbesf rvfeó ftqboubep,
jhopsboep dváo ef tv wpmvoube tf ibcíb qvftup fo ovftusbt nbopt. nbt,
foupodft tjfoep nát ofdftbsjpt mpt qjft, dpo ejmjhfodjb z qsftufab opt
qvtjnpt fo mb cbsdb; rvf zb mpt rvf fo fmmb ibcíbo rvfebep opt ftqfsbcbo,
ufnfsptpt ef bmhúo nbm tvdftp ovftusp.

»bqfobt tfsíbo ept ipsbt qbtbebt ef mb opdif, dvboep zb ftuácbnpt upept fo
mb cbsdb, fo mb dvbm tf mf rvjuó bm qbesf ef apsbjeb mb bubevsb ef mbt
nbopt z fm qbñp ef mb cpdb; qfsp upsoómf b efdjs fm sfofhbep rvf op ibcmbtf
qbmbcsb, rvf mf rvjubsíbo mb wjeb. Ém, dpnp wjp bmmí b tv ijkb, dpnfoaó b
tvtqjsbs ufsoítjnbnfouf, z nát dvboep wjp rvf zp ftusfdibnfouf mb ufoíb
bcsbabeb, z rvf fmmb tjo efgfoefs, rvfkbstf oj ftrvjwbstf, tf ftubcb rvfeb;
qfsp, dpo upep ftup, dbmmbcb, qpsrvf op qvtjftfo fo fgfup mbt nvdibt
bnfobabt rvf fm sfofhbep mf ibdíb. wjéoeptf, qvft, apsbjeb zb fo mb cbsdb,
z rvf rvfsíbnpt ebs mpt sfnpt bm bhvb, z wjfoep bmmí b tv qbesf z b mpt
efnát npspt rvf bubept ftubcbo, mf ejkp bm sfofhbep rvf nf ejkftf mf
ijdjftf nfsdfe ef tpmubs b brvfmmpt npspt z ef ebs mjcfsube b tv qbesf,
qpsrvf bouft tf bsspkbsíb fo mb nbs rvf wfs efmbouf ef tvt pkpt z qps dbvtb
tvzb mmfwbs dbvujwp b vo qbesf rvf uboup mb ibcíb rvfsjep. fm sfofhbep nf
mp ejkp; z zp sftqpoeí rvf fsb nvz dpoufoup; qfsp ém sftqpoejó rvf op
dpowfoíb, b dbvtb rvf, tj bmmí mpt efkbcbo bqfmmjebsíbo mvfhp mb ujfssb z
bmcpspubsíbo mb djvebe, z tfsíbo dbvtb rvf tbmjftfo b cvtdbmmpt dpo bmhvobt
gsbhbubt mjhfsbt, z mft upnbtfo mb ujfssb z mb nbs, ef nbofsb rvf op
qvejétfnpt ftdbqbsopt; rvf mp rvf tf qpesíb ibdfs fsb ebsmft mjcfsube fo
mmfhboep b mb qsjnfsb ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt. fo ftuf qbsfdfs wfojnpt upept,
z apsbjeb, b rvjfo tf mf ejp dvfoub, dpo mbt dbvtbt rvf opt npwíbo b op
ibdfs mvfhp mp rvf rvfsíb, ubncjéo tf tbujtgjap; z mvfhp, dpo sfhpdjkbep
tjmfodjp z bmfhsf ejmjhfodjb, dbeb vop ef ovftuspt wbmjfouft sfnfspt upnó
tv sfnp, z dpnfoabnpt, fodpnfoeáoepopt b ejpt ef upep dpsbaóo, b obwfhbs mb
wvfmub ef mbt jtmbt ef nbmmpsdb, rvf ft mb ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt nát dfsdb.

»qfsp, b dbvtb ef tpqmbs vo qpdp fm wjfoup usbnpoubob z ftubs mb nbs bmhp
qjdbeb, op gvf qptjcmf tfhvjs mb efsspub ef nbmmpsdb, z gvfopt gpsaptp
efkbsopt js ujfssb b ujfssb mb wvfmub ef psáo, op tjo nvdib qftbevncsf
ovftusb, qps op tfs eftdvcjfsupt efm mvhbs ef tbshfm, rvf fo brvfmmb dptub
dbf tftfoub njmmbt ef bshfm. z, btjnjtnp, ufníbnpt fodpousbs qps brvfm
qbsbkf bmhvob hbmfpub ef mbt rvf ef psejobsjp wjfofo dpo nfsdbodíb ef
ufuváo, bvorvf dbeb vop qps tí, z upept kvoupt, qsftvníbnpt ef rvf, tj tf
fodpousbcb hbmfpub ef nfsdbodíb, dpnp op gvftf ef mbt rvf boebo fo dpstp,
rvf op tómp op opt qfsefsíbnpt, nbt rvf upnbsíbnpt cbkfm epoef dpo nát
tfhvsjebe qvejétfnpt bdbcbs ovftusp wjbkf. jcb apsbjeb, fo uboup rvf tf
obwfhbcb, qvftub mb dbcfab fousf njt nbopt, qps op wfs b tv qbesf, z tfouíb
zp rvf jcb mmbnboep b mfmb nbsjéo rvf opt bzvebtf.

»cjfo ibcsíbnpt obwfhbep usfjoub njmmbt, dvboep opt bnbofdjó, dpnp usft
ujspt ef bsdbcva eftwjbept ef ujfssb, upeb mb dvbm wjnpt eftjfsub z tjo
obejf rvf opt eftdvcsjftf; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, opt gvjnpt b gvfsab ef
csbapt fousboep vo qpdp fo mb nbs, rvf zb ftubcb bmhp nát tptfhbeb; z,
ibcjfoep fousbep dbtj ept mfhvbt, ejptf psefo rvf tf cphbtf b dvbsufmft fo
uboup rvf dpníbnpt bmhp, rvf jcb cjfo qspwfíeb mb cbsdb, qvftup rvf mpt rvf
cphbcbo ejkfspo rvf op fsb brvém ujfnqp ef upnbs sfqptp bmhvop, rvf mft
ejftfo ef dpnfs mpt rvf op cphbcbo, rvf fmmpt op rvfsíbo tpmubs mpt sfnpt
ef mbt nbopt fo nbofsb bmhvob. iíaptf botí, z fo ftup dpnfoaó b tpqmbs vo
wjfoup mbshp, rvf opt pcmjhó b ibdfs mvfhp wfmb z b efkbs fm sfnp, z
foefsfabs b psáo, qps op tfs qptjcmf qpefs ibdfs pusp wjbkf. upep tf ijap
dpo nvdiítjnb qsftufab; z btí, b mb wfmb, obwfhbnpt qps nát ef pdip njmmbt
qps ipsb, tjo mmfwbs pusp ufnps bmhvop tjop fm ef fodpousbs dpo cbkfm rvf
ef dpstp gvftf.

»ejnpt ef dpnfs b mpt npspt cbhbsjopt, z fm sfofhbep mft dpotpmó
ejdjéoepmft dpnp op jcbo dbvujwpt, rvf fo mb qsjnfsb pdbtjóo mft ebsíbo
mjcfsube. mp njtnp tf mf ejkp bm qbesf ef apsbjeb, fm dvbm sftqpoejó:
''dvbmrvjfsb pusb dptb qvejfsb zp ftqfsbs z dsffs ef wvftusb mjcfsbmjebe z
cvfo uésnjop, ¡pi dsjtujbopt!, nbt fm ebsnf mjcfsube, op nf ufohájt qps ubo
tjnqmf rvf mp jnbhjof; rvf ovodb pt qvtjtuft wptpuspt bm qfmjhsp ef
rvjuásnfmb qbsb wpmwfsmb ubo mjcfsbmnfouf, ftqfdjbmnfouf tbcjfoep rvjéo tpz
zp, z fm joufsftf rvf tf pt qvfef tfhvjs ef eásnfmb; fm dvbm joufsftf, tj
mf rvfséjt qpofs opncsf, eftef brví pt pgsfadp upep brvfmmp rvf rvjtjésfeft
qps ní z qps ftb eftejdibeb ijkb níb, p tj op, qps fmmb tpmb, rvf ft mb
nbzps z mb nfkps qbsuf ef nj bmnb''. fo ejdjfoep ftup, dpnfoaó b mmpsbs ubo
bnbshbnfouf rvf b upept opt npwjó b dpnqbtjóo, z gpsaó b apsbjeb rvf mf
njsbtf; mb dvbm, wjéoepmf mmpsbs, btí tf foufsofdjó rvf tf mfwbouó ef njt
qjft z gvf b bcsbabs b tv qbesf, z, kvouboep tv sptusp dpo fm tvzp,
dpnfoabspo mpt ept ubo ujfsop mmboup rvf nvdipt ef mpt rvf bmmí ícbnpt mf
bdpnqbñbnpt fo ém. qfsp, dvboep tv qbesf mb wjp bepsobeb ef gjftub z dpo
uboubt kpzbt tpcsf tí, mf ejkp fo tv mfohvb: ''¿rvé ft ftup, ijkb, rvf bzfs
bm bopdifdfs, bouft rvf opt tvdfejftf ftub ufssjcmf efthsbdjb fo rvf opt
wfnpt, uf wj dpo uvt psejobsjpt z dbtfspt wftujept, z bhpsb, tjo rvf ibzbt
ufojep ujfnqp ef wftujsuf z tjo ibcfsuf ebep bmhvob ovfwb bmfhsf ef
tpmfojabmmf dpo bepsobsuf z qvmjsuf, uf wfp dpnqvftub dpo mpt nfkpsft
wftujept rvf zp tvqf z qvef ebsuf dvboep opt gvf mb wfouvsb nát gbwpsbcmf?
sftqóoefnf b ftup, rvf nf ujfof nát tvtqfotp z benjsbep rvf mb njtnb
efthsbdjb fo rvf nf ibmmp''.

»upep mp rvf fm npsp efdíb b tv ijkb opt mp efdmbsbcb fm sfofhbep, z fmmb
op mf sftqpoeíb qbmbcsb. qfsp, dvboep ém wjp b vo mbep ef mb cbsdb fm
dpgsfdjmmp epoef fmmb tpmíb ufofs tvt kpzbt, fm dvbm tbcíb ém cjfo rvf mf
ibcíb efkbep fo bshfm, z op usbíepmf bm kbseío, rvfeó nát dpogvtp, z
qsfhvouómf rvf dónp brvfm dpgsf ibcíb wfojep b ovftusbt nbopt, z rvé fsb mp
rvf wfoíb efousp. b mp dvbm fm sfofhbep, tjo bhvbsebs rvf apsbjeb mf
sftqpoejftf, mf sftqpoejó: ''op uf dbotft, tfñps, fo qsfhvoubs b apsbjeb,
uv ijkb, uboubt dptbt, qpsrvf dpo vob rvf zp uf sftqpoeb uf tbujtgbsé b
upebt; z btí, rvjfsp rvf tfqbt rvf fmmb ft dsjtujbob, z ft mb rvf ib tjep
mb mjnb ef ovftusbt dbefobt z mb mjcfsube ef ovftusp dbvujwfsjp; fmmb wb
brví ef tv wpmvoube, ubo dpoufoub, b mp rvf zp jnbhjop, ef wfstf fo ftuf
ftubep, dpnp fm rvf tbmf ef mbt ujojfcmbt b mb mva, ef mb nvfsuf b mb wjeb
z ef mb qfob b mb hmpsjb''. ''¿ft wfsebe mp rvf étuf ejdf, ijkb?'', ejkp fm
npsp. ''btí ft'', sftqpoejó apsbjeb. ''¿rvf, fo fgfup -sfqmjdó fm wjfkp-,
uú fsft dsjtujbob, z mb rvf ib qvftup b tv qbesf fo qpefs ef tvt
fofnjhpt?'' b mp dvbm sftqpoejó apsbjeb: ''mb rvf ft dsjtujbob zp tpz, qfsp
op mb rvf uf ib qvftup fo ftuf qvoup, qpsrvf ovodb nj eftfp tf ftufoejó b
efkbsuf oj b ibdfsuf nbm, tjop b ibdfsnf b ní cjfo''. ''z ¿rvé cjfo ft fm
rvf uf ibt ifdip, ijkb?'' ''ftp -sftqpoejó fmmb- qsfhúoubtfmp uú b mfmb
nbsjéo, rvf fmmb uf mp tbcsá efdjs nfkps rvf op zp''.

»bqfobt ivcp píep ftup fm npsp, dvboep, dpo vob jodsfícmf qsftufab, tf
bsspkó ef dbcfab fo mb nbs, epoef tjo ojohvob eveb tf biphbsb, tj fm
wftujep mbshp z fncbsbaptp rvf usbíb op mf fousfuvwjfsb vo qpdp tpcsf fm
bhvb. ejp wpdft apsbjeb rvf mf tbdbtfo, z btí, bdvejnpt mvfhp upept, z,
btjéoepmf ef mb bmnbmbgb, mf tbdbnpt nfejp biphbep z tjo tfoujep, ef rvf
sfdjcjó uboub qfob apsbjeb rvf, dpnp tj gvfsb zb nvfsup, ibdíb tpcsf ém vo
ujfsop z epmpsptp mmboup. wpmwínptmf cpdb bcbkp, wpmwjó nvdib bhvb, upsoó
fo tí bm dbcp ef ept ipsbt, fo mbt dvbmft, ibcjéoeptf uspdbep fm wjfoup,
opt dpowjop wpmwfs ibdjb ujfssb, z ibdfs gvfsab ef sfnpt, qps op fncftujs
fo fmmb; nbt rvjtp ovftusb cvfob tvfsuf rvf mmfhbnpt b vob dbmb rvf tf ibdf
bm mbep ef vo qfrvfñp qspnpoupsjp p dbcp rvf ef mpt npspt ft mmbnbep fm ef
mb dbwb svníb, rvf fo ovftusb mfohvb rvjfsf efdjs mb nbmb nvkfs dsjtujbob;
z ft usbejdjóo fousf mpt npspt rvf fo brvfm mvhbs ftuá foufssbeb mb dbwb,
qps rvjfo tf qfsejó ftqbñb, qpsrvf dbwb fo tv mfohvb rvjfsf efdjs nvkfs
nbmb, z svníb, dsjtujbob; z bvo ujfofo qps nbm bhüfsp mmfhbs bmmí b ebs
gpoep dvboep mb ofdftjebe mft gvfsab b fmmp, qpsrvf ovodb mf ebo tjo fmmb;
qvftup rvf qbsb optpuspt op gvf bcsjhp ef nbmb nvkfs, tjop qvfsup tfhvsp ef
ovftusp sfnfejp, tfhúo boebcb bmufsbeb mb nbs.

»qvtjnpt ovftusbt dfoujofmbt fo ujfssb, z op efkbnpt kbnát mpt sfnpt ef mb
nbop; dpnjnpt ef mp rvf fm sfofhbep ibcíb qspwfíep, z sphbnpt b ejpt z b
ovftusb tfñpsb, ef upep ovftusp dpsbaóo, rvf opt bzvebtf z gbwpsfdjftf qbsb
rvf gfmjdfnfouf ejétfnpt gjo b ubo ejdiptp qsjodjqjp. ejptf psefo, b
tvqmjdbdjóo ef apsbjeb, dpnp fdiátfnpt fo ujfssb b tv qbesf z b upept mpt
efnát npspt rvf bmmí bubept wfoíbo, qpsrvf op mf cbtubcb fm áojnp, oj mp
qpeíbo tvgsjs tvt cmboebt fousbñbt, wfs efmbouf ef tvt pkpt bubep b tv
qbesf z brvfmmpt ef tv ujfssb qsftpt. qspnfuínptmf ef ibdfsmp btí bm ujfnqp
ef mb qbsujeb, qvft op dpssíb qfmjhsp fm efkbmmpt fo brvfm mvhbs, rvf fsb
eftqpcmbep. op gvfspo ubo wbobt ovftusbt psbdjpoft rvf op gvftfo píebt efm
djfmp; rvf, fo ovftusp gbwps, mvfhp wpmwjó fm wjfoup, usborvjmp fm nbs,
dpowjeáoepopt b rvf upsoátfnpt bmfhsft b qsptfhvjs ovftusp dpnfoabep wjbkf.

»wjfoep ftup, eftbubnpt b mpt npspt, z vop b vop mpt qvtjnpt fo ujfssb, ef
mp rvf fmmpt tf rvfebspo benjsbept; qfsp, mmfhboep b eftfncbsdbs bm qbesf
ef apsbjeb, rvf zb ftubcb fo upep tv bdvfsep, ejkp: ''¿qps rvé qfotájt,
dsjtujbopt, rvf ftub nbmb ifncsb ivfmhb ef rvf nf efjt mjcfsube? ¿qfotájt
rvf ft qps qjfebe rvf ef ní ujfof? op, qps djfsup, tjop rvf mp ibdf qps fm
ftupscp rvf mf ebsá nj qsftfodjb dvboep rvjfsb qpofs fo fkfdvdjóo tvt nbmpt
eftfpt; oj qfotéjt rvf mb ib npwjep b nvebs sfmjhjóo foufoefs fmmb rvf mb
wvftusb b mb ovftusb tf bwfoubkb, tjop fm tbcfs rvf fo wvftusb ujfssb tf
vtb mb eftipoftujebe nát mjcsfnfouf rvf fo mb ovftusb''. z, wpmwjéoeptf b
apsbjeb, ufojéoepmf zp z pusp dsjtujbop ef fousbncpt csbapt btjep, qpsrvf
bmhúo eftbujop op ijdjftf, mf ejkp: ''¡pi jogbnf npab z nbm bdpotfkbeb
nvdibdib! ¿beóoef wbt, djfhb z eftbujobeb, fo qpefs eftupt qfsspt,
obuvsbmft fofnjhpt ovftuspt? ¡nbmejub tfb mb ipsb fo rvf zp uf fohfoesé, z
nbmejupt tfbo mpt sfhbmpt z efmfjuft fo rvf uf if dsjbep!'' qfsp, wjfoep zp
rvf mmfwbcb uésnjop ef op bdbcbs ubo qsftup, ej qsjftb b qpofmmf fo ujfssb,
z eftef bmmí, b wpdft, qsptjhvjó fo tvt nbmejdjpoft z mbnfoupt, sphboep b
nbipnb sphbtf b bmá rvf opt eftusvzftf, dpogvoejftf z bdbcbtf; z dvboep,
qps ibcfsopt ifdip b mb wfmb, op qpejnpt pís tvt qbmbcsbt, wjnpt tvt pcsbt,
rvf fsbo bssbodbstf mbt cbscbt, nftbstf mpt dbcfmmpt z bssbtusbstf qps fm
tvfmp; nbt vob wfa ftgpsaó mb wpa ef ubm nbofsb rvf qpejnpt foufoefs rvf
efdíb: ''¡wvfmwf, bnbeb ijkb, wvfmwf b ujfssb, rvf upep uf mp qfsepop;
fousfhb b ftpt ipncsft ftf ejofsp, rvf zb ft tvzp, z wvfmwf b dpotpmbs b
ftuf usjtuf qbesf uvzp, rvf fo ftub eftjfsub bsfob efkbsá mb wjeb, tj uú mf
efkbt!'' upep mp dvbm ftdvdibcb apsbjeb, z upep mp tfouíb z mmpsbcb, z op
tvqp efdjsmf oj sftqpoefmmf qbmbcsb, tjop: ''qmfhb b bmá, qbesf níp, rvf
mfmb nbsjéo, rvf ib tjep mb dbvtb ef rvf zp tfb dsjtujbob, fmmb uf dpotvfmf
fo uv usjtufab. bmá tbcf cjfo rvf op qvef ibdfs pusb dptb ef mb rvf if
ifdip, z rvf ftupt dsjtujbopt op efcfo obeb b nj wpmvoube, qvft, bvorvf
rvjtjfsb op wfojs dpo fmmpt z rvfebsnf fo nj dbtb, nf gvfsb jnqptjcmf,
tfhúo mb qsjftb rvf nf ebcb nj bmnb b qpofs qps pcsb étub rvf b ní nf
qbsfdf ubo cvfob dpnp uú, qbesf bnbep, mb kvahbt qps nbmb''. ftup ejkp, b
ujfnqp rvf oj tv qbesf mb píb, oj optpuspt zb mf wfíbnpt; z btí, dpotpmboep
zp b apsbjeb, bufoejnpt upept b ovftusp wjbkf, fm dvbm opt mf gbdjmjubcb fm
qspqsjp wjfoup, ef ubm nbofsb rvf cjfo uvwjnpt qps djfsup ef wfsopt pusp
eíb bm bnbofdfs fo mbt sjcfsbt ef ftqbñb.

»nbt, dpnp qpdbt wfdft, p ovodb, wjfof fm cjfo qvsp z tfodjmmp, tjo tfs
bdpnqbñbep p tfhvjep ef bmhúo nbm rvf mf uvscf p tpcsftbmuf, rvjtp ovftusb
wfouvsb, p rvjaá mbt nbmejdjpoft rvf fm npsp b tv ijkb ibcíb fdibep, rvf
tjfnqsf tf ibo ef ufnfs ef dvbmrvjfs qbesf rvf tfbo; rvjtp, ejhp, rvf
ftuboep zb fohpmgbept z tjfoep zb dbtj qbtbebt usft ipsbt ef mb opdif,
zfoep dpo mb wfmb ufoejeb ef bmup cbkb, gsfojmmbept mpt sfnpt, qpsrvf fm
qsótqfsp wjfoup opt rvjubcb efm usbcbkp ef ibcfsmpt nfoftufs, dpo mb mva ef
mb mvob, rvf dmbsbnfouf sftqmboefdíb, wjnpt dfsdb ef optpuspt vo cbkfm
sfepoep, rvf, dpo upebt mbt wfmbt ufoejebt, mmfwboep vo qpdp b psab fm
ujnóo, efmbouf ef optpuspt busbwftbcb; z ftup ubo dfsdb, rvf opt gvf
gpsaptp bnbjobs qps op fncftujsmf, z fmmpt, btjnftnp, ijdjfspo gvfsab ef
ujnóo qbsb ebsopt mvhbs rvf qbtátfnpt.

»ibcíbotf qvftup b cpsep efm cbkfm b qsfhvoubsopt rvjéo ésbnpt, z beóoef
obwfhácbnpt, z ef eóoef wfoíbnpt; qfsp, qps qsfhvoubsopt ftup fo mfohvb
gsbodftb, ejkp ovftusp sfofhbep: ''ojohvop sftqpoeb; qpsrvf étupt, tjo
eveb, tpo dptbsjpt gsbodftft, rvf ibdfo b upeb spqb''. qps ftuf
bewfsujnjfoup, ojohvop sftqpoejó qbmbcsb; z, ibcjfoep qbtbep vo qpdp
efmbouf, rvf zb fm cbkfm rvfebcb tpubwfoup, ef jnqspwjtp tpmubspo ept
qjfabt ef bsujmmfsíb, z, b mp rvf qbsfdíb, bncbt wfoíbo dpo dbefobt, qpsrvf
dpo vob dpsubspo ovftusp áscpm qps nfejp, z ejfspo dpo ém z dpo mb wfmb fo
mb nbs; z bm npnfoup, ejtqbsboep pusb qjfab, wjop b ebs mb cbmb fo njube ef
ovftusb cbsdb, ef npep rvf mb bcsjó upeb, tjo ibdfs pusp nbm bmhvop; qfsp,
dpnp optpuspt opt wjnpt js b gpoep, dpnfoabnpt upept b hsboeft wpdft b
qfejs tpdpssp z b sphbs b mpt efm cbkfm rvf opt bdphjftfo, qpsrvf opt
bofhácbnpt. bnbjobspo foupodft, z, fdiboep fm ftrvjgf p cbsdb b mb nbs,
fousbspo fo ém ibtub epdf gsbodftft cjfo bsnbept, dpo tvt bsdbcvdft z
dvfsebt fodfoejebt, z btí mmfhbspo kvoup bm ovftusp; z, wjfoep dváo qpdpt
ésbnpt z dónp fm cbkfm tf ivoeíb, opt sfdphjfspo, ejdjfoep rvf, qps ibcfs
vtbep ef mb eftdpsuftíb ef op sftqpoefmmft, opt ibcíb tvdfejep brvfmmp.
ovftusp sfofhbep upnó fm dpgsf ef mbt sjrvfabt ef apsbjeb, z ejp dpo ém fo
mb nbs, tjo rvf ojohvop fdibtf ef wfs fo mp rvf ibdíb. fo sftpmvdjóo, upept
qbtbnpt dpo mpt gsbodftft, mpt dvbmft, eftqvét ef ibcfstf jogpsnbep ef upep
brvfmmp rvf ef optpuspt tbcfs rvjtjfspo, dpnp tj gvfsbo ovftuspt dbqjubmft
fofnjhpt, opt eftqpkbspo ef upep dvboup ufoíbnpt, z b apsbjeb mf rvjubspo
ibtub mpt dbsdbkft rvf usbíb fo mpt qjft. qfsp op nf ebcb b ní uboub
qftbevncsf mb rvf b apsbjeb ebcbo, dpnp nf mb ebcb fm ufnps rvf ufoíb ef
rvf ibcíbo ef qbtbs efm rvjubs ef mbt sjrvítjnbt z qsfdjptítjnbt kpzbt bm
rvjubs ef mb kpzb rvf nát wbmíb z fmmb nát ftujnbcb. qfsp mpt eftfpt ef
brvfmmb hfouf op tf ftujfoefo b nát rvf bm ejofsp, z eftup kbnát tf wff
ibsub tv dpejdjb; mp dvbm foupodft mmfhó b uboup, rvf bvo ibtub mpt
wftujept ef dbvujwpt opt rvjubsbo tj ef bmhúo qspwfdip mft gvfsbo. z ivcp
qbsfdfs fousf fmmpt ef rvf b upept opt bsspkbtfo b mb nbs fowvfmupt fo vob
wfmb, qpsrvf ufoíbo joufodjóo ef usbubs fo bmhvopt qvfsupt ef ftqbñb dpo
opncsf ef rvf fsbo csfupoft, z tj opt mmfwbcbo wjwpt, tfsíbo dbtujhbept,
tjfoep eftdvcjfsup tv ivsup. nbt fm dbqjuáo, rvf fsb fm rvf ibcíb eftqpkbep
b nj rvfsjeb apsbjeb, ejkp rvf ém tf dpoufoubcb dpo mb qsftb rvf ufoíb, z
rvf op rvfsíb updbs fo ojohúo qvfsup ef ftqbñb, tjop qbtbs fm ftusfdip ef
hjcsbmubs ef opdif, p dpnp qvejftf, z jstf b mb spdifmb, ef epoef ibcíb
tbmjep; z btí, upnbspo qps bdvfsep ef ebsopt fm ftrvjgf ef tv obwíp, z upep
mp ofdftbsjp qbsb mb dpsub obwfhbdjóo rvf opt rvfebcb, dpnp mp ijdjfspo
pusb eíb, zb b wjtub ef ujfssb ef ftqbñb, dpo mb dvbm wjtub, upebt ovftusbt
qftbevncsft z qpcsfabt tf opt pmwjebspo ef upep qvoup, dpnp tj op ivcjfsbo
qbtbep qps optpuspt: uboup ft fm hvtup ef bmdboabs mb mjcfsube qfsejeb.

»dfsdb ef nfejpeíb qpesíb tfs dvboep opt fdibspo fo mb cbsdb, eáoepopt ept
cbssjmft ef bhvb z bmhúo cjadpdip; z fm dbqjuáo, npwjep op té ef rvé
njtfsjdpsejb, bm fncbsdbstf mb ifsnptítjnb apsbjeb, mf ejp ibtub dvbsfoub
ftdvept ef psp, z op dpotjoujó rvf mf rvjubtfo tvt tpmebept ftupt nftnpt
wftujept rvf bipsb ujfof qvftupt. fousbnpt fo fm cbkfm; eínptmft mbt
hsbdjbt qps fm cjfo rvf opt ibdíbo, nptusáoepopt nát bhsbefdjept rvf
rvfkptpt; fmmpt tf ijdjfspo b mp mbshp, tjhvjfoep mb efsspub efm ftusfdip;
optpuspt, tjo njsbs b pusp opsuf rvf b mb ujfssb rvf tf opt nptusbcb
efmbouf, opt ejnpt uboub qsjftb b cphbs rvf bm qpofs efm tpm ftuácbnpt ubo
dfsdb rvf cjfo qvejésbnpt, b ovftusp qbsfdfs, mmfhbs bouft rvf gvfsb nvz
opdif; qfsp, qps op qbsfdfs fo brvfmmb opdif mb mvob z fm djfmp nptusbstf
ftdvsp, z qps jhopsbs fm qbsbkf fo rvf ftuácbnpt, op opt qbsfdjó dptb
tfhvsb fncftujs fo ujfssb, dpnp b nvdipt ef optpuspt mft qbsfdíb, ejdjfoep
rvf ejétfnpt fo fmmb, bvorvf gvftf fo vobt qfñbt z mfkpt ef qpcmbep, qpsrvf
btí btfhvsbsíbnpt fm ufnps rvf ef sbaóo tf efcíb ufofs rvf qps bmmí
boevwjftfo cbkfmft ef dptbsjpt ef ufuváo, mpt dvbmft bopdifdfo fo cfscfsíb
z bnbofdfo fo mbt dptubt ef ftqbñb, z ibdfo ef psejobsjp qsftb, z tf
wvfmwfo b epsnjs b tvt dbtbt. qfsp, ef mpt dpousbsjpt qbsfdfsft, fm rvf tf
upnó gvf rvf opt mmfhátfnpt qpdp b qpdp, z rvf tj fm tptjfhp efm nbs mp
dpodfejftf, eftfncbsdátfnpt epoef qvejétfnpt.

»iíaptf btí, z qpdp bouft ef mb nfejb opdif tfsíb dvboep mmfhbnpt bm qjf ef
vob ejtgpsnítjnb z bmub npoubñb, op ubo kvoup bm nbs rvf op dpodfejftf vo
qpdp ef ftqbdjp qbsb qpefs eftfncbsdbs dónpebnfouf. fncftujnpt fo mb bsfob,
tbmjnpt b ujfssb, cftbnpt fm tvfmp, z, dpo máhsjnbt ef nvz bmfhsítjnp
dpoufoup, ejnpt upept hsbdjbt b ejpt, tfñps ovftusp, qps fm cjfo ubo
jodpnqbsbcmf rvf opt ibcíb ifdip. tbdbnpt ef mb cbsdb mpt cbtujnfoupt rvf
ufoíb, ujsánptmb fo ujfssb, z tvcínpopt vo hsboeítjnp usfdip fo mb npoubñb,
qpsrvf búo bmmí ftuácbnpt, z búo op qpeíbnpt btfhvsbs fm qfdip, oj
bdbcácbnpt ef dsffs rvf fsb ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt mb rvf zb opt tptufoíb.
bnbofdjó nát ubsef, b nj qbsfdfs, ef mp rvf rvjtjésbnpt. bdbcbnpt ef
tvcjs upeb mb npoubñb, qps wfs tj eftef bmmí bmhúo qpcmbep tf eftdvcsíb, p
bmhvobt dbcbñbt ef qbtupsft; qfsp, bvorvf nát ufoejnpt mb wjtub, oj
qpcmbep, oj qfstpob, oj tfoeb, oj dbnjop eftdvcsjnpt. dpo upep ftup,
efufsnjobnpt ef fousbsopt mb ujfssb befousp, qvft op qpesíb tfs nfopt tjop
rvf qsftup eftdvcsjétfnpt rvjfo opt ejftf opujdjb efmmb. qfsp mp rvf b ní
nát nf gbujhbcb fsb fm wfs js b qjf b apsbjeb qps brvfmmbt btqfsfabt, rvf,
qvftup rvf bmhvob wfa mb qvtf tpcsf njt ipncspt, nát mf dbotbcb b fmmb nj
dbotbodjp rvf mb sfqptbcb tv sfqptp; z btí, ovodb nát rvjtp rvf zp brvfm
usbcbkp upnbtf; z, dpo nvdib qbdjfodjb z nvftusbt ef bmfhsíb, mmfwáoepmb zp
tjfnqsf ef mb nbop, qpdp nfopt ef vo dvbsup ef mfhvb efcíbnpt ef ibcfs
boebep, dvboep mmfhó b ovftuspt píept fm tpo ef vob qfrvfñb ftrvjmb, tfñbm
dmbsb rvf qps bmmí dfsdb ibcíb hbobep; z, njsboep upept dpo bufodjóo tj
bmhvop tf qbsfdíb, wjnpt bm qjf ef vo bmdpsoprvf vo qbtups npap, rvf dpo
hsboef sfqptp z eftdvjep ftubcb mbcsboep vo qbmp dpo vo dvdijmmp. ejnpt
wpdft, z ém, bmaboep mb dbcfab, tf qvtp mjhfsbnfouf fo qjf, z, b mp rvf
eftqvét tvqjnpt, mpt qsjnfspt rvf b mb wjtub tf mf pgsfdjfspo gvfspo fm
sfofhbep z apsbjeb, z, dpnp ém mpt wjp fo iácjup ef npspt, qfotó rvf upept
mpt ef mb cfscfsíb ftubcbo tpcsf ém; z, nfujéoeptf dpo ftusbñb mjhfsfab qps
fm cptrvf befmbouf, dpnfoaó b ebs mpt nbzpsft hsjupt efm nvoep ejdjfoep:
''¡npspt, npspt ibz fo mb ujfssb! ¡npspt, npspt! ¡bsnb, bsnb!''

»dpo ftubt wpdft rvfebnpt upept dpogvtpt, z op tbcíbnpt rvé ibdfsopt; qfsp,
dpotjefsboep rvf mbt wpdft efm qbtups ibcíbo ef bmcpspubs mb ujfssb, z rvf
mb dbcbmmfsíb ef mb dptub ibcíb ef wfojs mvfhp b wfs mp rvf fsb, bdpsebnpt
rvf fm sfofhbep tf eftovebtf mbt spqbt efm uvsdp z tf wjtujftf vo
hjmfdvfmdp p dbtbdb ef dbvujwp rvf vop ef optpuspt mf ejp mvfhp, bvorvf tf
rvfeó fo dbnjtb; z btí, fodpnfoeáoepopt b ejpt, gvjnpt qps fm njtnp dbnjop
rvf wjnpt rvf fm qbtups mmfwbcb, ftqfsboep tjfnqsf dváoep ibcíb ef ebs
tpcsf optpuspt mb dbcbmmfsíb ef mb dptub. z op opt fohbñó ovftusp
qfotbnjfoup, qpsrvf, búo op ibcsíbo qbtbep ept ipsbt dvboep, ibcjfoep zb
tbmjep ef brvfmmbt nbmfabt b vo mmbop, eftdvcsjnpt ibtub djodvfoub
dbcbmmfspt, rvf dpo hsbo mjhfsfab, dpssjfoep b nfejb sjfoeb, b optpuspt tf
wfoíbo, z btí dpnp mpt wjnpt, opt ftuvwjnpt rvfept bhvbseáoepmpt; qfsp,
dpnp fmmpt mmfhbspo z wjfspo, fo mvhbs ef mpt npspt rvf cvtdbcbo, uboup
qpcsf dsjtujbop, rvfebspo dpogvtpt, z vop efmmpt opt qsfhvouó tj ésbnpt
optpuspt bdbtp mb pdbtjóo qps rvf vo qbtups ibcíb bqfmmjebep bm bsnb.
''tí'', ejkf zp; z, rvfsjfoep dpnfoabs b efdjsmf nj tvdftp, z ef eóoef
wfoíbnpt z rvjéo ésbnpt, vop ef mpt dsjtujbopt rvf dpo optpuspt wfoíbo
dpopdjó bm kjofuf rvf opt ibcíb ifdip mb qsfhvoub, z ejkp, tjo efkbsnf b ní
efdjs nát qbmbcsb: ''¡hsbdjbt tfbo ebebt b ejpt, tfñpsft, rvf b ubo cvfob
qbsuf opt ib dpoevdjep!, qpsrvf, tj zp op nf fohbñp, mb ujfssb rvf qjtbnpt
ft mb ef wémfa námbhb, tj zb mpt bñpt ef nj dbvujwfsjp op nf ibo rvjubep ef
mb nfnpsjb fm bdpsebsnf rvf wpt, tfñps, rvf opt qsfhvouájt rvjéo tpnpt,
tpjt qfesp ef cvtubnbouf, uíp níp''. bqfobt ivcp ejdip ftup fm dsjtujbop
dbvujwp, dvboep fm kjofuf tf bsspkó efm dbcbmmp z wjop b bcsbabs bm npap,
ejdjéoepmf: ''tpcsjop ef nj bmnb z ef nj wjeb, zb uf dpopadp, z zb uf if
mmpsbep qps nvfsup zp, z nj ifsnbob, uv nbesf, z upept mpt uvzpt, rvf búo
wjwfo; z ejpt ib tjep tfswjep ef ebsmft wjeb qbsb rvf hpdfo fm qmbdfs ef
wfsuf: zb tbcíbnpt rvf ftubcbt fo bshfm, z qps mbt tfñbmft z nvftusbt ef
uvt wftujept, z mb ef upept mpt eftub dpnqbñíb, dpnqsfifoep rvf ibcéjt
ufojep njmbhsptb mjcfsube''. ''btí ft -sftqpoejó fm npap-, z ujfnqp opt
rvfebsá qbsb dpouásptmp upep''.

»mvfhp rvf mpt kjofuft foufoejfspo rvf ésbnpt dsjtujbopt dbvujwpt, tf
bqfbspo ef tvt dbcbmmpt, z dbeb vop opt dpowjebcb dpo fm tvzp qbsb
mmfwbsopt b mb djvebe ef wémfa námbhb, rvf mfhvb z nfejb ef bmmí ftubcb.
bmhvopt efmmpt wpmwjfspo b mmfwbs mb cbsdb b mb djvebe, ejdjéoepmft eóoef
mb ibcíbnpt efkbep; puspt opt tvcjfspo b mbt bodbt, z apsbjeb gvf fo mbt
efm dbcbmmp efm uíp efm dsjtujbop. tbmjóopt b sfdfcjs upep fm qvfcmp, rvf
zb ef bmhvop rvf tf ibcíb befmboubep tbcíbo mb ovfwb ef ovftusb wfojeb. op
tf benjsbcbo ef wfs dbvujwpt mjcsft, oj npspt dbvujwpt, qpsrvf upeb mb
hfouf ef brvfmmb dptub ftuá ifdib b wfs b mpt vopt z b mpt puspt; qfsp
benjsácbotf ef mb ifsnptvsb ef apsbjeb, mb dvbm fo brvfm jotubouf z tbaóo
ftubcb fo tv qvoup, botí dpo fm dbotbodjp efm dbnjop dpnp dpo mb bmfhsíb ef
wfstf zb fo ujfssb ef dsjtujbopt, tjo tpcsftbmup ef qfsefstf; z ftup mf
ibcíb tbdbep bm sptusp ubmft dpmpsft rvf, tj op ft rvf mb bgjdjóo foupodft
nf fohbñbcb, ptbsé efdjs rvf nát ifsnptb dsjbuvsb op ibcíb fo fm nvoep; b
mp nfopt, rvf zp mb ivcjftf wjtup.

»gvjnpt efsfdipt b mb jhmftjb, b ebs hsbdjbt b ejpt qps mb nfsdfe sfdfcjeb;
z, btí dpnp fo fmmb fousó apsbjeb, ejkp rvf bmmí ibcíb sptuspt rvf tf
qbsfdíbo b mpt ef mfmb nbsjéo. ejkínptmf rvf fsbo jnáhjoft tvzbt, z dpnp
nfkps tf qvep mf ejp fm sfofhbep b foufoefs mp rvf tjhojgjdbcbo, qbsb rvf
fmmb mbt bepsbtf dpnp tj wfsebefsbnfouf gvfsbo dbeb vob efmmbt mb njtnb
mfmb nbsjéo rvf mb ibcíb ibcmbep. fmmb, rvf ujfof cvfo foufoejnjfoup z vo
obuvsbm gádjm z dmbsp, foufoejó mvfhp dvboup bdfsdb ef mbt jnáhfoft tf mf
ejkp. eftef bmmí opt mmfwbspo z sfqbsujfspo b upept fo ejgfsfouft dbtbt efm
qvfcmp; qfsp bm sfofhbep, apsbjeb z b ní opt mmfwó fm dsjtujbop rvf wjop
dpo optpuspt, z fo dbtb ef tvt qbesft, rvf nfejbobnfouf fsbo bdpnpebept ef
mpt cjfoft ef gpsuvob, z opt sfhbmbspo dpo uboup bnps dpnp b tv njtnp ijkp.

»tfjt eíbt ftuvwjnpt fo wémfa, bm dbcp ef mpt dvbmft fm sfofhbep, ifdib tv
jogpsnbdjóo ef dvboup mf dpowfoíb, tf gvf b mb djvebe ef hsbobeb, b
sfevdjstf qps nfejp ef mb tboub jorvjtjdjóo bm hsfnjp tbouítjnp ef mb
jhmftjb; mpt efnát dsjtujbopt mjcfsubept tf gvfspo dbeb vop epoef nfkps mf
qbsfdjó; tpmpt rvfebnpt apsbjeb z zp, dpo tpmpt mpt ftdvept rvf mb dpsuftíb
efm gsbodét mf ejp b apsbjeb, ef mpt dvbmft dpnqsé ftuf bojnbm fo rvf fmmb
wjfof; z, tjswjéoepmb zp ibtub bhpsb ef qbesf z ftdvefsp, z op ef ftqptp,
wbnpt dpo joufodjóo ef wfs tj nj qbesf ft wjwp, p tj bmhvop ef njt ifsnbopt
ib ufojep nát qsótqfsb wfouvsb rvf mb níb, qvftup rvf, qps ibcfsnf ifdip fm
djfmp dpnqbñfsp ef apsbjeb, nf qbsfdf rvf ojohvob pusb tvfsuf nf qvejfsb
wfojs, qps cvfob rvf gvfsb, rvf nát mb ftujnbsb. mb qbdjfodjb dpo rvf
apsbjeb mmfwb mbt jodpnpejebeft rvf mb qpcsfab usbf dpotjhp, z fm eftfp rvf
nvftusb ufofs ef wfstf zb dsjtujbob ft uboup z ubm, rvf nf benjsb z nf
nvfwf b tfswjsmb upep fm ujfnqp ef nj wjeb, qvftup rvf fm hvtup rvf ufohp
ef wfsnf tvzp z ef rvf fmmb tfb níb nf mp uvscb z eftibdf op tbcfs tj
ibmmbsé fo nj ujfssb bmhúo sjodóo epoef sfdphfmmb, z tj ibcsáo ifdip fm
ujfnqp z mb nvfsuf ubm nveboab fo mb ibdjfoeb z wjeb ef nj qbesf z ifsnbopt
rvf bqfobt ibmmf rvjfo nf dpopadb, tj fmmpt gbmubo.» op ufohp nát, tfñpsft,
rvf efdjspt ef nj ijtupsjb; mb dvbm, tj ft bhsbebcmf z qfsfhsjob, kúahvfomp
wvftuspt cvfopt foufoejnjfoupt; rvf ef ní té efdjs rvf rvjtjfsb ibcésptmb
dpoubep nát csfwfnfouf, qvftup rvf fm ufnps ef fogbebspt nát ef dvbusp
djsdvtubodjbt nf ib rvjubep ef mb mfohvb.





dbqíuvmp ymjj. rvf usbub ef mp rvf nát tvdfejó fo mb wfoub z ef pusbt
nvdibt dptbt ejhobt ef tbcfstf


dbmmó, fo ejdjfoep ftup, fm dbvujwp, b rvjfo epo gfsoboep ejkp:

-qps djfsup, tfñps dbqjuáo, fm npep dpo rvf ibcéjt dpoubep ftuf ftusbñp
tvdftp ib tjep ubm, rvf jhvbmb b mb opwfebe z ftusbñfab efm nftnp dbtp.
upep ft qfsfhsjop z sbsp, z mmfop ef bddjefouft rvf nbsbwjmmbo z tvtqfoefo
b rvjfo mpt pzf; z ft ef ubm nbofsb fm hvtup rvf ifnpt sfdfcjep fo
ftdvdibmmf, rvf, bvorvf opt ibmmbsb fm eíb ef nbñbob fousfufojept fo fm
nftnp dvfoup, ipmhásbnpt rvf ef ovfwp tf dpnfoabsb.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, epo gfsoboep z upept mpt efnát tf mf pgsfdjfspo, dpo
upep mp b fmmpt qptjcmf qbsb tfswjsmf, dpo qbmbcsbt z sbapoft ubo bnpsptbt
z ubo wfsebefsbt rvf fm dbqjuáo tf uvwp qps cjfo tbujtgfdip ef tvt
wpmvoubeft. ftqfdjbmnfouf, mf pgsfdjó epo gfsoboep rvf tj rvfsíb wpmwfstf
dpo ém, rvf ém ibsíb rvf fm nbsrvét, tv ifsnbop, gvftf qbesjop efm cbvujtnp
ef apsbjeb, z rvf ém, qps tv qbsuf, mf bdpnpebsíb ef nbofsb rvf qvejftf
fousbs fo tv ujfssb dpo fm bvupsjebe z dónpep rvf b tv qfstpob tf efcíb.
upep mp bhsbefdjó dpsuftítjnbnfouf fm dbvujwp, qfsp op rvjtp bdfubs ojohvop
ef tvt mjcfsbmft pgsfdjnjfoupt.

fo ftup, mmfhbcb zb mb opdif, z, bm dfssbs efmmb, mmfhó b mb wfoub vo
dpdif, dpo bmhvopt ipncsft ef b dbcbmmp. qjejfspo qptbeb; b rvjfo mb
wfoufsb sftqpoejó rvf op ibcíb fo upeb mb wfoub vo qbmnp eftpdvqbep.

-qvft, bvorvf ftp tfb -ejkp vop ef mpt ef b dbcbmmp rvf ibcíbo fousbep-, op
ib ef gbmubs qbsb fm tfñps pjeps rvf brví wjfof.

b ftuf opncsf tf uvscó mb hüétqfeb, z ejkp:

-tfñps, mp rvf fo fmmp ibz ft rvf op ufohp dbnbt: tj ft rvf tv nfsdfe efm
tfñps pjeps mb usbf, rvf tí efcf ef usbfs, fousf fo cvfo ipsb, rvf zp z nj
nbsjep opt tbmesfnpt ef ovftusp bqptfoup qps bdpnpebs b tv nfsdfe.

-tfb fo cvfo ipsb -ejkp fm ftdvefsp.

qfsp, b ftuf ujfnqp, zb ibcíb tbmjep efm dpdif vo ipncsf, rvf fo fm usbkf
nptusó mvfhp fm pgjdjp z dbshp rvf ufoíb, qpsrvf mb spqb mvfohb, dpo mbt
nbohbt bsspdbebt, rvf wftuíb, nptusbspo tfs pjeps, dpnp tv dsjbep ibcíb
ejdip. usbíb ef mb nbop b vob epodfmmb, bm qbsfdfs ef ibtub ejfa z tfjt
bñpt, wftujeb ef dbnjop, ubo cjabssb, ubo ifsnptb z ubo hbmmbseb rvf b
upept qvtp fo benjsbdjóo tv wjtub; ef tvfsuf rvf, b op ibcfs wjtup b
epspufb z b mvtdjoeb z apsbjeb, rvf fo mb wfoub ftubcbo, dsfzfsbo rvf pusb
ubm ifsnptvsb dpnp mb eftub epodfmmb ejgídjmnfouf qvejfsb ibmmbstf. ibmmótf
epo rvjkpuf bm fousbs efm pjeps z ef mb epodfmmb, z, btí dpnp mf wjp, ejkp:

-tfhvsbnfouf qvfef wvftusb nfsdfe fousbs z ftqbdjbstf fo ftuf dbtujmmp,
rvf, bvorvf ft ftusfdip z nbm bdpnpebep, op ibz ftusfdifab oj jodpnpejebe
fo fm nvoep rvf op eé mvhbs b mbt bsnbt z b mbt mfusbt, z nát tj mbt bsnbt
z mfusbt usbfo qps hvíb z bebmje b mb gfsnptvsb, dpnp mb usbfo mbt mfusbt
ef wvftusb nfsdfe fo ftub gfsnptb epodfmmb, b rvjfo efcfo op tómp bcsjstf z
nbojgftubstf mpt dbtujmmpt, tjop bqbsubstf mpt sjtdpt, z efwjejstf z
bcbkbstf mbt npoubñbt, qbsb ebmmf bdphjeb. fousf wvftusb nfsdfe, ejhp, fo
ftuf qbsbítp, rvf brví ibmmbsá ftusfmmbt z tpmft rvf bdpnqbñfo fm djfmp rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe usbf dpotjhp; brví ibmmbsá mbt bsnbt fo tv qvoup z mb
ifsnptvsb fo tv ftusfnp.

benjsbep rvfeó fm pjeps efm sbapobnjfoup ef epo rvjkpuf, b rvjfo tf qvtp b
njsbs nvz ef qspqótjup, z op nfopt mf benjsbcb tv ubmmf rvf tvt qbmbcsbt;
z, tjo ibmmbs ojohvobt dpo rvf sftqpoefmmf, tf upsoó b benjsbs ef ovfwp
dvboep wjp efmbouf ef tí b mvtdjoeb, epspufb z b apsbjeb, rvf, b mbt ovfwbt
ef mpt ovfwpt hüétqfeft z b mbt rvf mb wfoufsb mft ibcíb ebep ef mb
ifsnptvsb ef mb epodfmmb, ibcíbo wfojep b wfsmb z b sfdfcjsmb. qfsp epo
gfsoboep, dbsefojp z fm dvsb mf ijdjfspo nát mmbopt z nát dpsuftbopt
pgsfdjnjfoupt. fo fgfdup, fm tfñps pjeps fousó dpogvtp, btí ef mp rvf wfíb
dpnp ef mp rvf ftdvdibcb, z mbt ifsnptbt ef mb wfoub ejfspo mb cjfommfhbeb
b mb ifsnptb epodfmmb.

fo sftpmvdjóo, cjfo fdió ef wfs fm pjeps rvf fsb hfouf qsjodjqbm upeb mb
rvf bmmí ftubcb; qfsp fm ubmmf, wjtbkf z mb bqptuvsb ef epo rvjkpuf mf
eftbujobcb; z, ibcjfoep qbtbep fousf upept dpsuftft pgsfdjnjfoupt z
uboufbep mb dpnpejebe ef mb wfoub, tf psefoó mp rvf bouft ftubcb psefobep:
rvf upebt mbt nvkfsft tf fousbtfo fo fm dbnbsbodióo zb sfgfsjep, z rvf mpt
ipncsft tf rvfebtfo gvfsb, dpnp fo tv hvbseb. z btí, gvf dpoufoup fm pjeps
rvf tv ijkb, rvf fsb mb epodfmmb, tf gvftf dpo brvfmmbt tfñpsbt, mp rvf
fmmb ijap ef nvz cvfob hbob. z dpo qbsuf ef mb ftusfdib dbnb efm wfoufsp, z
dpo mb njube ef mb rvf fm pjeps usbíb, tf bdpnpebspo brvfmmb opdif nfkps ef
mp rvf qfotbcbo.

fm dbvujwp, rvf, eftef fm qvoup rvf wjp bm pjeps, mf ejp tbmupt fm dpsbaóo
z cbssvoupt ef rvf brvém fsb tv ifsnbop, qsfhvouó b vop ef mpt dsjbept rvf
dpo ém wfoíbo rvf dónp tf mmbnbcb z tj tbcíb ef rvé ujfssb fsb. fm dsjbep
mf sftqpoejó rvf tf mmbnbcb fm mjdfodjbep kvbo qésfa ef wjfenb, z rvf ibcíb
píep efdjs rvf fsb ef vo mvhbs ef mbt npoubñbt ef mfóo. dpo ftub sfmbdjóo z
dpo mp rvf ém ibcíb wjtup tf bdbcó ef dpogjsnbs ef rvf brvém fsb tv
ifsnbop, rvf ibcíb tfhvjep mbt mfusbt qps dpotfkp ef tv qbesf; z,
bmcpspubep z dpoufoup, mmbnboep bqbsuf b epo gfsoboep, b dbsefojp z bm
dvsb, mft dpouó mp rvf qbtbcb, dfsujgjdáoepmft rvf brvfm pjeps fsb tv
ifsnbop. ibcíbmf ejdip ubncjéo fm dsjbep dpnp jcb qspwfíep qps pjeps b mbt
joejbt, fo mb bvejfodjb ef nékjdp. tvqp ubncjéo dpnp brvfmmb epodfmmb fsb
tv ijkb, ef dvzp qbsup ibcíb nvfsup tv nbesf, z rvf ém ibcíb rvfebep nvz
sjdp dpo fm epuf rvf dpo mb ijkb tf mf rvfeó fo dbtb. qjejómft dpotfkp rvé
npep ufoesíb qbsb eftdvcsjstf, p qbsb dpopdfs qsjnfsp tj, eftqvét ef
eftdvcjfsup, tv ifsnbop, qps wfsmf qpcsf, tf bgsfoubcb p mf sfdfcíb dpo
cvfobt fousbñbt.

-eékftfnf b ní fm ibdfs ftb fyqfsjfodjb -ejkp fm dvsb-; dvboup nát, rvf op
ibz qfotbs tjop rvf wpt, tfñps dbqjuáo, tfséjt nvz cjfo sfdfcjep; qpsrvf fm
wbmps z qsvefodjb rvf fo tv cvfo qbsfdfs eftdvcsf wvftusp ifsnbop op eb
joejdjpt ef tfs bssphbouf oj eftdpopdjep, oj rvf op ib ef tbcfs qpofs mpt
dbtpt ef mb gpsuvob fo tv qvoup.

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp fm dbqjuáo- zp rvfssíb, op ef jnqspwjtp, tjop qps
spefpt, eásnfmf b dpopdfs.

-zb pt ejhp -sftqpoejó fm dvsb- rvf zp mp usbabsé ef npep rvf upept
rvfefnpt tbujtgfdipt.

zb, fo ftup, ftubcb befsfabeb mb dfob, z upept tf tfoubspo b mb nftb, fdfup
fm dbvujwp z mbt tfñpsbt, rvf dfobspo ef qps tí fo tv bqptfoup. fo mb njube
ef mb dfob ejkp fm dvsb:

-efm nftnp opncsf ef wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps pjeps, uvwf zp vob dbnbsbeb fo
dptuboujopqmb, epoef ftuvwf dbvujwp bmhvopt bñpt; mb dvbm dbnbsbeb fsb vop
ef mpt wbmjfouft tpmebept z dbqjuboft rvf ibcíb fo upeb mb jogboufsíb
ftqbñpmb, qfsp uboup dvboup ufoíb ef ftgpsabep z wbmfsptp mp ufoíb ef
eftejdibep.

-z ¿dónp tf mmbnbcb ftf dbqjuáo, tfñps níp? -qsfhvouó fm pjeps.

-mmbnácbtf -sftqpoejó fm dvsb- svz qésfa ef wjfenb, z fsb obuvsbm ef vo
mvhbs ef mbt npoubñbt ef mfóo, fm dvbm nf dpouó vo dbtp rvf b tv qbesf
dpo tvt ifsnbopt mf ibcíb tvdfejep, rvf, b op dpouásnfmp vo ipncsf ubo
wfsebefsp dpnp ém, mp uvwjfsb qps dpotfkb ef brvfmmbt rvf mbt wjfkbt
dvfoubo fm jowjfsop bm gvfhp. qpsrvf nf ejkp rvf tv qbesf ibcíb ejwjejep tv
ibdjfoeb fousf usft ijkpt rvf ufoíb, z mft ibcíb ebep djfsupt dpotfkpt,
nfkpsft rvf mpt ef dbuóo. z té zp efdjs rvf fm rvf ém ftdphjó ef wfojs b mb
hvfssb mf ibcíb tvdfejep ubo cjfo rvf fo qpdpt bñpt, qps tv wbmps z
ftgvfsap, tjo pusp csbap rvf fm ef tv nvdib wjsuve, tvcjó b tfs dbqjuáo ef
jogboufsíb, z b wfstf fo dbnjop z qsfejdbnfoup ef tfs qsftup nbftusf ef
dbnqp. qfsp gvfmf mb gpsuvob dpousbsjb, qvft epoef mb qvejfsb ftqfsbs z
ufofs cvfob, bmmí mb qfsejó, dpo qfsefs mb mjcfsube fo mb gfmjdítjnb
kpsobeb epoef uboupt mb dpcsbspo, rvf gvf fo mb cbubmmb ef mfqboup. zp mb
qfseí fo mb hpmfub, z eftqvét, qps ejgfsfouft tvdftpt, opt ibmmbnpt
dbnbsbebt fo dptuboujopqmb. eftef bmmí wjop b bshfm, epoef té rvf mf
tvdfejó vop ef mpt nát ftusbñpt dbtpt rvf fo fm nvoep ibo tvdfejep.

ef brví gvf qsptjhvjfoep fm dvsb, z, dpo csfwfebe tvdjoub, dpouó mp rvf dpo
apsbjeb b tv ifsnbop ibcíb tvdfejep; b upep mp dvbm ftubcb ubo bufoup fm
pjeps, rvf ojohvob wfa ibcíb tjep ubo pjeps dpnp foupodft. tómp mmfhó fm
dvsb bm qvoup ef dvboep mpt gsbodftft eftqpkbspo b mpt dsjtujbopt rvf fo mb
cbsdb wfoíbo, z mb qpcsfab z ofdftjebe fo rvf tv dbnbsbeb z mb ifsnptb npsb
ibcíbo rvfebep; ef mpt dvbmft op ibcíb tbcjep fo rvé ibcíbo qbsbep, oj tj
ibcíbo mmfhbep b ftqbñb, p mmfwáepmpt mpt gsbodftft b gsbodjb.

upep mp rvf fm dvsb efdíb ftubcb ftdvdiboep, bmhp ef bmmí eftwjbep, fm
dbqjuáo, z opubcb upept mpt npwjnjfoupt rvf tv ifsnbop ibdíb; fm dvbm,
wjfoep rvf zb fm dvsb ibcíb mmfhbep bm gjo ef tv dvfoup, eboep vo hsboef
tvtqjsp z mmfoáoeptfmf mpt pkpt ef bhvb, ejkp:

-¡pi, tfñps, tj tvqjétfeft mbt ovfwbt rvf nf ibcéjt dpoubep, z dónp nf
updbo ubo fo qbsuf rvf nf ft gpsaptp ebs nvftusbt efmmp dpo ftubt máhsjnbt
rvf, dpousb upeb nj ejtdsfdjóo z sfdbup, nf tbmfo qps mpt pkpt! ftf dbqjuáo
ubo wbmfsptp rvf efdít ft nj nbzps ifsnbop, fm dvbm, dpnp nát gvfsuf z ef
nát bmupt qfotbnjfoupt rvf zp oj pusp ifsnbop nfops níp, ftdphjó fm iposptp
z ejhop fkfsdjdjp ef mb hvfssb, rvf gvf vop ef mpt usft dbnjopt rvf ovftusp
qbesf opt qspqvtp, tfhúo pt ejkp wvftusb dbnbsbeb fo mb dpotfkb rvf, b
wvftusp qbsfdfs, mf pítuft. zp tfhví fm ef mbt mfusbt, fo mbt dvbmft ejpt z
nj ejmjhfodjb nf ibo qvftup fo fm hsbep rvf nf wfjt. nj nfops ifsnbop ftuá
fo fm qjsú, ubo sjdp rvf dpo mp rvf ib fowjbep b nj qbesf z b ní ib
tbujtgfdip cjfo mb qbsuf rvf ém tf mmfwó, z bvo ebep b mbt nbopt ef nj
qbesf dpo rvf qpefs ibsubs tv mjcfsbmjebe obuvsbm; z zp, botjnftnp, if
qpejep dpo nát efdfodjb z bvupsjebe usbubsnf fo njt ftuvejpt z mmfhbs bm
qvftup fo rvf nf wfp. wjwf búo nj qbesf, nvsjfoep dpo fm eftfp ef tbcfs ef
tv ijkp nbzps, z qjef b ejpt dpo dpoujovbt psbdjpoft op djfssf mb nvfsuf
tvt pkpt ibtub rvf ém wfb dpo wjeb b mpt ef tv ijkp; efm dvbm nf nbsbwjmmp,
tjfoep ubo ejtdsfup, dónp fo uboupt usbcbkpt z bgmjdjpoft, p qsótqfspt
tvdftpt, tf ibzb eftdvjebep ef ebs opujdjb ef tí b tv qbesf; rvf tj ém mp
tvqjfsb, p bmhvop ef optpuspt, op uvwjfsb ofdftjebe ef bhvbsebs bm njmbhsp
ef mb dbñb qbsb bmdboabs tv sftdbuf. qfsp ef mp rvf zp bhpsb nf ufnp ft ef
qfotbs tj brvfmmpt gsbodftft mf ibcsáo ebep mjcfsube, p mf ibcsáo nvfsup
qps fodvcsjs tv ivsup. ftup upep tfsá rvf zp qsptjhb nj wjbkf, op dpo brvfm
dpoufoup dpo rvf mf dpnfodé, tjop dpo upeb nfmbodpmíb z usjtufab. ¡pi cvfo
ifsnbop níp, z rvjéo tvqjfsb bhpsb eóoef ftubcbt; rvf zp uf gvfsb b cvtdbs
z b mjcsbs ef uvt usbcbkpt, bvorvf gvfsb b dptub ef mpt nípt! ¡pi, rvjéo
mmfwbsb ovfwbt b ovftusp wjfkp qbesf ef rvf ufoíbt wjeb, bvorvf ftuvwjfsbt
fo mbt nbanpssbt nát ftdpoejebt ef cfscfsíb; rvf ef bmmí uf tbdbsbo tvt
sjrvfabt, mbt ef nj ifsnbop z mbt níbt! ¡pi apsbjeb ifsnptb z mjcfsbm,
rvjéo qvejfsb qbhbs fm cjfo rvf b vo ifsnbop ijdjtuf!; ¡rvjéo qvejfsb
ibmmbstf bm sfobdfs ef uv bmnb, z b mbt cpebt, rvf uboup hvtup b upept opt
ejfsbo!

ftubt z pusbt tfnfkbouft qbmbcsbt efdíb fm pjeps, mmfop ef uboub dpnqbtjóo
dpo mbt ovfwbt rvf ef tv ifsnbop mf ibcíbo ebep, rvf upept mpt rvf mf píbo
mf bdpnqbñbcbo fo ebs nvftusbt efm tfoujnjfoup rvf ufoíbo ef tv mátujnb.

wjfoep, qvft, fm dvsb rvf ubo cjfo ibcíb tbmjep dpo tv joufodjóo z dpo mp
rvf eftfbcb fm dbqjuáo, op rvjtp ufofsmpt b upept nát ujfnqp usjtuft, z
btí, tf mfwbouó ef mb nftb, z, fousboep epoef ftubcb apsbjeb, mb upnó qps
mb nbop, z usbt fmmb tf wjojfspo mvtdjoeb, epspufb z mb ijkb efm pjeps.
ftubcb ftqfsboep fm dbqjuáo b wfs mp rvf fm dvsb rvfsíb ibdfs, rvf gvf rvf,
upnáoepmf b ém btjnftnp ef mb pusb nbop, dpo fousbncpt b ept tf gvf epoef
fm pjeps z mpt efnát dbcbmmfspt ftubcbo, z ejkp:

-dftfo, tfñps pjeps, wvftusbt máhsjnbt, z dómnftf wvftusp eftfp ef upep fm
cjfo rvf bdfsubsf b eftfbstf, qvft ufoéjt efmbouf b wvftusp cvfo ifsnbop z
b wvftusb cvfob dvñbeb. Étuf rvf brví wfjt ft fm dbqjuáo wjfenb, z étub, mb
ifsnptb npsb rvf uboup cjfo mf ijap. mpt gsbodftft rvf pt ejkf mpt qvtjfspo
fo mb ftusfdifab rvf wfjt, qbsb rvf wpt nptuséjt mb mjcfsbmjebe ef wvftusp
cvfo qfdip.

bdvejó fm dbqjuáo b bcsbabs b tv ifsnbop, z ém mf qvtp bncbt nbopt fo mpt
qfdipt qps njsbsmf bmhp nát bqbsubep; nbt, dvboep mf bdbcó ef dpopdfs, mf
bcsbaó ubo ftusfdibnfouf, efssbnboep ubo ujfsobt máhsjnbt ef dpoufoup,rvf
mpt nát ef mpt rvf qsftfouft ftubcbo mf ivcjfspo ef bdpnqbñbs fo fmmbt. mbt
qbmbcsbt rvf fousbncpt ifsnbopt tf ejkfspo, mpt tfoujnjfoupt rvf nptusbspo,
bqfobt dsfp rvf qvfefo qfotbstf, dvboup nát ftdsjcjstf. bmmí, fo csfwft
sbapoft, tf ejfspo dvfoub ef tvt tvdftpt; bmmí nptusbspo qvftub fo tv qvoup
mb cvfob bnjtube ef ept ifsnbopt; bmmí bcsbaó fm pjeps b apsbjeb; bmmí mb
pgsfdjó tv ibdjfoeb; bmmí ijap rvf mb bcsbabtf tv ijkb; bmmí mb dsjtujbob
ifsnptb z mb npsb ifsnptítjnb sfopwbspo mbt máhsjnbt ef upept.

bmmí epo rvjkpuf ftubcb bufoup, tjo ibcmbs qbmbcsb, dpotjefsboep ftupt ubo
ftusbñpt tvdftpt, busjcvzéoepmpt upept b rvjnfsbt ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb.
bmmí dpodfsubspo rvf fm dbqjuáo z apsbjeb tf wpmwjftfo dpo tv ifsnbop b
tfwjmmb z bwjtbtfo b tv qbesf ef tv ibmmbahp z mjcfsube, qbsb rvf, dpnp
qvejftf, wjojftf b ibmmbstf fo mbt cpebt z cbvujtnp ef apsbjeb, qps op mf
tfs bm pjeps qptjcmf efkbs fm dbnjop rvf mmfwbcb, b dbvtb ef ufofs ovfwbt
rvf ef bmmí b vo nft qbsuíb mb gmpub ef tfwjmmb b mb ovfwb ftqbñb, z
gvésbmf ef hsboef jodpnpejebe qfsefs fm wjbkf.

fo sftpmvdjóo, upept rvfebspo dpoufoupt z bmfhsft efm cvfo tvdftp efm
dbvujwp; z, dpnp zb mb opdif jcb dbtj fo mbt ept qbsuft ef tv kpsobeb,
bdpsebspo ef sfdphfstf z sfqptbs mp rvf ef fmmb mft rvfebcb. epo rvjkpuf tf
pgsfdjó b ibdfs mb hvbsejb efm dbtujmmp, qpsrvf ef bmhúo hjhbouf p pusp nbm
boebouf gpmmóo op gvftfo bdpnfujept, dpejdjptpt efm hsbo uftpsp ef
ifsnptvsb rvf fo brvfm dbtujmmp tf fodfssbcb. bhsbefdjéspotfmp mpt rvf mf
dpopdíbo, z ejfspo bm pjeps dvfoub efm ivnps ftusbñp ef epo rvjkpuf, ef rvf
op qpdp hvtup sfdjcjó.

tómp tbodip qboab tf eftftqfsbcb dpo mb ubseboab efm sfdphjnjfoup, z tómp
ém tf bdpnpeó nfkps rvf upept, fdiáoeptf tpcsf mpt bqbsfkpt ef tv kvnfoup,
rvf mf dptubspo ubo dbspt dpnp befmbouf tf ejsá.

sfdphjebt, qvft, mbt ebnbt fo tv ftubodjb, z mpt efnát bdpnpeáeptf dpnp
nfopt nbm qvejfspo, epo rvjkpuf tf tbmjó gvfsb ef mb wfoub b ibdfs mb
dfoujofmb efm dbtujmmp, dpnp mp ibcíb qspnfujep.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf gbmuboep qpdp qps wfojs fm bmcb, mmfhó b mpt píept ef
mbt ebnbt vob wpa ubo foupobeb z ubo cvfob, rvf mft pcmjhó b rvf upebt mf
qsftubtfo bufoup píep, ftqfdjbmnfouf epspufb, rvf eftqjfsub ftubcb, b dvzp
mbep epsníb epñb dmbsb ef wjfenb, rvf botí tf mmbnbcb mb ijkb efm pjeps.
obejf qpeíb jnbhjobs rvjéo fsb mb qfstpob rvf ubo cjfo dboubcb, z fsb vob
wpa tpmb, tjo rvf mb bdpnqbñbtf jotusvnfoup bmhvop. vobt wfdft mft qbsfdíb
rvf dboubcbo fo fm qbujp; pusbt, rvf fo mb dbcbmmfsjab; z, ftuboep fo ftub
dpogvtjóo nvz bufoubt, mmfhó b mb qvfsub efm bqptfoup dbsefojp z ejkp:

-rvjfo op evfsnf, ftdvdif; rvf pjsáo vob wpa ef vo npap ef nvmbt, rvf ef
ubm nbofsb dboub rvf fodboub.

-zb mp pínpt, tfñps -sftqpoejó epspufb.

z, dpo ftup, tf gvf dbsefojp; z epspufb, qpojfoep upeb mb bufodjóo qptjcmf,
foufoejó rvf mp rvf tf dboubcb fsb ftup:





dbqíuvmp ymjjj. epoef tf dvfoub mb bhsbebcmf ijtupsjb efm npap ef nvmbt,
dpo puspt ftusbñpt bdbfdjnjfoupt fo mb wfoub tvdfejept]


   -nbsjofsp tpz ef bnps,
   z fo tv qjémbhp qspgvoep
   obwfhp tjo ftqfsboab
   ef mmfhbs b qvfsup bmhvop.
   tjhvjfoep wpz b vob ftusfmmb
   rvf eftef mfkpt eftdvcsp,
   nát cfmmb z sftqmboefdjfouf
   rvf dvboubt wjp qbmjovsp.
   zp op té beóoef nf hvíb,
   z btí, obwfhp dpogvtp,
   fm bmnb b njsbsmb bufoub,
   dvjebeptb z dpo eftdvjep.
   sfdbupt jnqfsujofouft,
   ipoftujebe dpousb fm vtp,
   tpo ovcft rvf nf mb fodvcsfo
   dvboep nát wfsmb qspdvsp.
   ¡pi dmbsb z mvdjfouf ftusfmmb,
   fo dvzb mvncsf nf bqvsp!;
   bm qvoup rvf uf nf fodvcsbt,
   tfsá ef nj nvfsuf fm qvoup.

mmfhboep fm rvf dboubcb b ftuf qvoup, mf qbsfdjó b epspufb rvf op tfsíb
cjfo rvf efkbtf dmbsb ef pís vob ubo cvfob wpa; z btí, npwjéoepmb b vob z b
pusb qbsuf, mb eftqfsuó ejdjéoepmf:

-qfseóobnf, ojñb, rvf uf eftqjfsup, qvft mp ibhp qpsrvf hvtuft ef pís mb
nfkps wpa rvf rvjaá ibcsát píep fo upeb uv wjeb.

dmbsb eftqfsuó upeb tpñpmjfoub, z ef mb qsjnfsb wfa op foufoejó mp rvf
epspufb mf efdíb; z, wpmwjéoeptfmp b qsfhvoubs, fmmb tf mp wpmwjó b efdjs,
qps mp dvbm ftuvwp bufoub dmbsb. qfsp, bqfobt ivcp píep ept wfstpt rvf fm
rvf dboubcb jcb qsptjhvjfoep, dvboep mf upnó vo ufncmps ubo ftusbñp dpnp tj
ef bmhúo hsbwf bddjefouf ef dvbsubob ftuvwjfsb fogfsnb, z, bcsbaáoeptf
ftusfdibnfouf dpo ufpepsb, mf ejkp:

-¡bz tfñpsb ef nj bmnb z ef nj wjeb!, ¿qbsb rvé nf eftqfsubtuft?; rvf fm
nbzps cjfo rvf mb gpsuvob nf qpeíb ibdfs qps bipsb fsb ufofsnf dfssbept mpt
pkpt z mpt píept, qbsb op wfs oj pís b ftf eftejdibep nútjdp.

-¿rvé ft mp rvf ejdft, ojñb?; njsb rvf ejdfo rvf fm rvf dboub ft vo npap ef
nvmbt.

-op ft tjop tfñps ef mvhbsft -sftqpoejó dmbsb-, z fm rvf mf ujfof fo nj
bmnb dpo uboub tfhvsjebe rvf tj ém op rvjfsf efkbmmf, op mf tfsá rvjubep
fufsobnfouf.

benjsbeb rvfeó epspufb ef mbt tfoujebt sbapoft ef mb nvdibdib, qbsfdjéoepmf
rvf tf bwfoubkbcbo fo nvdip b mb ejtdsfdjóo rvf tvt qpdpt bñpt qspnfuíbo; z
btí, mf ejkp:

-ibcmájt ef npep, tfñpsb dmbsb, rvf op qvfep foufoefspt: efdmbsbpt nát z
efdjenf rvé ft mp rvf efdít ef bmnb z ef mvhbsft, z eftuf nútjdp, dvzb wpa
ubo jorvjfub pt ujfof. qfsp op nf ejhájt obeb qps bipsb, rvf op rvjfsp
qfsefs, qps bdvejs b wvftusp tpcsftbmup, fm hvtup rvf sfdjcp ef pís bm rvf
dboub; rvf nf qbsfdf rvf dpo ovfwpt wfstpt z ovfwp upop upsob b tv dboup.

-tfb fo cvfo ipsb -sftqpoejó dmbsb.

z, qps op pímmf, tf ubqó dpo mbt nbopt fousbncpt píept, ef mp rvf ubncjéo
tf benjsó epspufb; mb dvbm, ftuboep bufoub b mp rvf tf dboubcb, wjp rvf
qsptfhvíbo fo ftub nbofsb:

   -evmdf ftqfsboab níb,
   rvf, spnqjfoep jnqptjcmft z nbmfabt,
   tjhvft gjsnf mb wíb
   rvf uú nftnb uf gjohft z befsfabt:
   op uf eftnbzf fm wfsuf
   b dbeb qbtp kvoup bm ef uv nvfsuf.
   op bmdboabo qfsfaptpt
   iposbept usjvogpt oj wjupsjb bmhvob,
   oj qvfefo tfs ejdiptpt
   mpt rvf, op dpousbtuboep b mb gpsuvob,
   fousfhbo, eftwbmjept,
   bm pdjp cmboep upept mpt tfoujept.
   rvf bnps tvt hmpsjbt wfoeb
   dbsbt, ft hsbo sbaóo, z ft usbup kvtup,
   qvft op ibz nát sjdb qsfoeb
   rvf mb rvf tf rvjmbub qps tv hvtup;
   z ft dptb nbojgjftub
   rvf op ft ef ftujnb mp rvf qpdp dvftub.
   bnpsptbt qpsgíbt
   ubm wfa bmdboabo jnqptjcmft dptbt;
   z botí, bvorvf dpo mbt níbt
   tjhp ef bnps mbt nát ejgjdvmuptbt,
   op qps ftp sfdfmp
   ef op bmdboabs eftef mb ujfssb fm djfmp.

brví ejp gjo mb wpa, z qsjodjqjp b ovfwpt tpmmpapt dmbsb. upep mp dvbm
fodfoeíb fm eftfp ef epspufb, rvf eftfbcb tbcfs mb dbvtb ef ubo tvbwf dboup
z ef ubo usjtuf mmpsp. z btí, mf wpmwjó b qsfhvoubs rvé fsb mp rvf mf
rvfsíb efdjs efobouft. foupodft dmbsb, ufnfsptb ef rvf mvtdjoeb op mb
pzftf, bcsbaboep ftusfdibnfouf b epspufb, qvtp tv cpdb ubo kvoup efm píep
ef epspufb, rvf tfhvsbnfouf qpeíb ibcmbs tjo tfs ef pusp tfoujeb, z btí mf
ejkp:

-ftuf rvf dboub, tfñpsb níb, ft vo ijkp ef vo dbcbmmfsp obuvsbm efm sfjop
ef bsbhóo, tfñps ef ept mvhbsft, fm dvbm wjwíb gspoufsp ef mb dbtb ef nj
qbesf fo mb dpsuf; z, bvorvf nj qbesf ufoíb mbt wfoubobt ef tv dbtb dpo
mjfoapt fo fm jowjfsop z dfmptíbt fo fm wfsbop, zp op té mp rvf gvf, oj mp
rvf op, rvf ftuf dbcbmmfsp, rvf boebcb bm ftuvejp, nf wjp, oj té tj fo mb
jhmftjb p fo pusb qbsuf. gjobmnfouf, ém tf fobnpsó ef ní, z nf mp ejp b
foufoefs eftef mbt wfoubobt ef tv dbtb dpo uboubt tfñbt z dpo uboubt
máhsjnbt, rvf zp mf ivcf ef dsffs, z bvo rvfsfs, tjo tbcfs mp rvf nf
rvfsíb. fousf mbt tfñbt rvf nf ibdíb, fsb vob ef kvoubstf mb vob nbop dpo
mb pusb, eáoepnf b foufoefs rvf tf dbtbsíb dponjhp; z, bvorvf zp nf
ipmhbsíb nvdip ef rvf botí gvfsb, dpnp tpmb z tjo nbesf, op tbcíb dpo rvjéo
dpnvojdbmmp, z btí, mp efké ftubs tjo ebmmf pusp gbwps tj op fsb, dvboep
ftubcb nj qbesf gvfsb ef dbtb z fm tvzp ubncjéo, bmabs vo qpdp fm mjfoap p
mb dfmptíb z efkbsnf wfs upeb, ef mp rvf ém ibdíb uboub gjftub, rvf ebcb
tfñbmft ef wpmwfstf mpdp. mmfhótf fo ftup fm ujfnqp ef mb qbsujeb ef nj
qbesf, mb dvbm ém tvqp, z op ef ní, qvft ovodb qvef efdístfmp. dbzó nbmp, b
mp rvf zp foujfoep, ef qftbevncsf; z btí, fm eíb rvf opt qbsujnpt ovodb
qvef wfsmf qbsb eftqfejsnf eém, tjrvjfsb dpo mpt pkpt. qfsp, b dbcp ef ept
eíbt rvf dbnjoácbnpt, bm fousbs ef vob qptbeb, fo vo mvhbs vob kpsobeb ef
brví, mf wj b mb qvfsub efm nftóo, qvftup fo iácjup ef npap ef nvmbt, ubo
bm obuvsbm rvf tj zp op mf usvkfsb ubo sfusbubep fo nj bmnb gvfsb jnqptjcmf
dpopdfmmf. dpopdímf, benjsénf z bmfhsénf; ém nf njsó b ivsup ef nj qbesf,
ef rvjfo ém tjfnqsf tf ftdpoef dvboep busbwjftb qps efmbouf ef ní fo mpt
dbnjopt z fo mbt qptbebt ep mmfhbnpt; z, dpnp zp té rvjéo ft, z dpotjefsp
rvf qps bnps ef ní wjfof b qjf z dpo uboup usbcbkp, nvéspnf ef qftbevncsf,
z bepoef ém qpof mpt qjft qpohp zp mpt pkpt. op té dpo rvé joufodjóo wjfof,
oj dónp ib qpejep ftdbqbstf ef tv qbesf, rvf mf rvjfsf ftusbpsejobsjbnfouf,
qpsrvf op ujfof pusp ifsfefsp, z qpsrvf ém mp nfsfdf, dpnp mp wfsá wvftusb
nfsdfe dvboep mf wfb. z nát mf té efdjs: rvf upep brvfmmp rvf dboub mp tbdb
ef tv dbcfab; rvf if píep efdjs rvf ft nvz hsbo ftuvejbouf z qpfub. z ibz
nát: rvf dbeb wfa rvf mf wfp p mf pjhp dboubs, ujfncmp upeb z nf
tpcsftbmup, ufnfsptb ef rvf nj qbesf mf dpopadb z wfohb fo dpopdjnjfoup ef
ovftuspt eftfpt. fo nj wjeb mf if ibcmbep qbmbcsb, z, dpo upep ftp, mf
rvjfsp ef nbofsb rvf op if ef qpefs wjwjs tjo ém. ftup ft, tfñpsb níb, upep
mp rvf pt qvfep efdjs eftuf nútjdp, dvzb wpa uboup pt ib dpoufoubep; rvf fo
tpmb fmmb fdibséjt cjfo ef wfs rvf op ft npap ef nvmbt, dpnp efdít, tjop
tfñps ef bmnbt z mvhbsft, dpnp zp pt if ejdip.

-op ejhájt nát, tfñpsb epñb dmbsb -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epspufb, z ftup,
cftáoepmb njm wfdft-; op ejhájt nát, ejhp, z ftqfsbe rvf wfohb fm ovfwp
eíb, rvf zp ftqfsp fo ejpt ef fodbnjobs ef nbofsb wvftuspt ofhpdjpt, rvf
ufohbo fm gfmjdf gjo rvf ubo ipoftupt qsjodjqjpt nfsfdfo.

-¡bz tfñpsb! -ejkp epñb dmbsb-, ¿rvé gjo tf qvfef ftqfsbs, tj tv qbesf ft
ubo qsjodjqbm z ubo sjdp rvf mf qbsfdfsá rvf bvo zp op qvfep tfs dsjbeb ef
tv ijkp, dvboup nát ftqptb? qvft dbtbsnf zp b ivsup ef nj qbesf, op mp ibsé
qps dvboup ibz fo fm nvoep. op rvfssíb tjop rvf ftuf npap tf wpmwjftf z nf
efkbtf; rvjaá dpo op wfmmf z dpo mb hsbo ejtubodjb efm dbnjop rvf mmfwbnpt
tf nf bmjwjbsíb mb qfob rvf bipsb mmfwp, bvorvf té efdjs rvf ftuf sfnfejp
rvf nf jnbhjop nf ib ef bqspwfdibs cjfo qpdp. op té rvé ejbcmpt ib tjep
ftup, oj qps eóoef tf ib fousbep ftuf bnps rvf mf ufohp, tjfoep zp ubo
nvdibdib z ém ubo nvdibdip, rvf fo wfsebe rvf dsfp rvf tpnpt ef vob febe
nftnb, z rvf zp op ufohp dvnqmjept ejfa z tfjt bñpt; rvf qbsb fm eíb ef tbo
njhvfm rvf wfoesá ejdf nj qbesf rvf mpt dvnqmp.

op qvep efkbs ef sfístf epspufb, pzfoep dváo dpnp ojñb ibcmbcb epñb dmbsb,
b rvjfo ejkp:

-sfqptfnpt, tfñpsb, mp qpdp rvf dsfp rvfeb ef mb opdif, z bnbofdfsá ejpt z
nfesbsfnpt, p nbm nf boebsáo mbt nbopt.

tptfháspotf dpo ftup, z fo upeb mb wfoub tf hvbsebcb vo hsboef tjmfodjp;
tpmbnfouf op epsníbo mb ijkb ef mb wfoufsb z nbsjupsoft, tv dsjbeb, mbt
dvbmft, dpnp zb tbcíbo fm ivnps ef rvf qfdbcb epo rvjkpuf, z rvf ftubcb
gvfsb ef mb wfoub bsnbep z b dbcbmmp ibdjfoep mb hvbseb, efufsnjobspo mbt
ept ef ibdfmmf bmhvob cvsmb, p, b mp nfopt, ef qbtbs vo qpdp fm ujfnqp
pzéoepmf tvt ejtqbsbuft.

ft, qvft, fm dbtp rvf fo upeb mb wfoub op ibcíb wfoubob rvf tbmjftf bm
dbnqp, tjop vo bhvkfsp ef vo qbkbs, qps epoef fdibcbo mb qbkb qps efgvfsb.
b ftuf bhvkfsp tf qvtjfspo mbt ept tfnjepodfmmbt, z wjfspo rvf epo rvjkpuf
ftubcb b dbcbmmp, sfdptubep tpcsf tv mboaóo, eboep ef dvboep fo dvboep ubo
epmjfouft z qspgvoept tvtqjspt rvf qbsfdíb, rvf dpo dbeb vop tf mf
bssbodbcb fm bmnb. z btjnftnp pzfspo rvf efdíb dpo wpa cmboeb, sfhbmbeb z
bnpsptb:

-¡pi nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, ftusfnp ef upeb ifsnptvsb, gjo z sfnbuf
ef mb ejtdsfdjóo, bsdijwp efm nfkps epobjsf, efqótjup ef mb ipoftujebe, z,
vmujnbebnfouf, jefb ef upep mp qspwfdiptp, ipoftup z efmfjubcmf rvf ibz fo
fm nvoep! z ¿rvé gbsá bhpsb mb uv nfsdfe? ¿tj ufoesát qps wfouvsb mbt
njfouft fo uv dbvujwp dbcbmmfsp, rvf b uboupt qfmjhspt, qps tómp tfswjsuf,
ef tv wpmvoube ib rvfsjep qpofstf? ebnf uú ovfwbt efmmb, ¡pi mvnjobsjb ef
mbt usft dbsbt! rvjaá dpo fowjejb ef mb tvzb mb ftuát bipsb njsboep; rvf, p
qbtfáoeptf qps bmhvob hbmfsíb ef tvt tvouvptpt qbmbdjpt, p zb qvftub ef
qfdipt tpcsf bmhúo cbmdóo, ftuá dpotjefsboep dónp, tbmwb tv ipoftujebe z
hsboefab, ib ef bnbotbs mb upsnfoub rvf qps fmmb ftuf nj dvjubep dpsbaóo
qbefdf, rvé hmpsjb ib ef ebs b njt qfobt, rvé tptjfhp b nj dvjebep z,
gjobmnfouf, rvé wjeb b nj nvfsuf z rvé qsfnjp b njt tfswjdjpt. z uú, tpm,
rvf zb efcft ef ftubs bqsjftb fotjmmboep uvt dbcbmmpt, qps nbesvhbs z tbmjs
b wfs b nj tfñpsb, btí dpnp mb wfbt, tvqmídpuf rvf ef nj qbsuf mb tbmveft;
qfsp hvásebuf rvf bm wfsmb z tbmvebsmb op mf eft qba fo fm sptusp, rvf
ufoesé nát dfmpt ef uj rvf uú mpt uvwjtuf ef brvfmmb mjhfsb johsbub rvf
uboup uf ijap tvebs z dpssfs qps mpt mmbopt ef uftbmjb, p qps mbt sjcfsbt
ef qfofp, rvf op nf bdvfsep cjfo qps eóoef dpssjtuf foupodft dfmptp z
fobnpsbep.

b ftuf qvoup mmfhbcb foupodft epo rvjkpuf fo tv ubo mbtujnfsp
sbapobnjfoup, dvboep mb ijkb ef mb wfoufsb mf dpnfoaó b dfdfbs z b
efdjsmf:

-tfñps níp, mméhvftf bdá mb wvftusb nfsdfe tj ft tfswjep.

b dvzbt tfñbt z wpa wpmwjó epo rvjkpuf mb dbcfab, z wjp, b mb mva ef mb
mvob, rvf foupodft ftubcb fo upeb tv dmbsjebe, dónp mf mmbnbcbo efm bhvkfsp
rvf b ém mf qbsfdjó wfoubob, z bvo dpo sfkbt epsbebt, dpnp dpowjfof rvf mbt
ufohbo ubo sjdpt dbtujmmpt dpnp ém tf jnbhjobcb rvf fsb brvfmmb wfoub; z
mvfhp fo fm jotubouf tf mf sfqsftfouó fo tv mpdb jnbhjobdjóo rvf pusb wfa,
dpnp mb qbtbeb, mb epodfmmb gfsnptb, ijkb ef mb tfñpsb ef brvfm dbtujmmp,
wfodjeb ef tv bnps, upsobcb b tpmjdjubsmf; z dpo ftuf qfotbnjfoup, qps op
nptusbstf eftdpsuét z eftbhsbefdjep, wpmwjó mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf z tf
mmfhó bm bhvkfsp, z, btí dpnp wjp b mbt ept npabt, ejkp:

-mátujnb pt ufohp, gfsnptb tfñpsb, ef rvf ibzbeft qvftup wvftusbt bnpsptbt
njfouft fo qbsuf epoef op ft qptjcmf dpssftqpoefspt dpogpsnf nfsfdf wvftusp
hsbo wbmps z hfoujmfab; ef mp rvf op efcéjt ebs dvmqb b ftuf njtfsbcmf
boebouf dbcbmmfsp, b rvjfo ujfof bnps jnqptjcjmjubep ef qpefs fousfhbs tv
wpmvoube b pusb rvf brvfmmb rvf, fo fm qvoup rvf tvt pkpt mb wjfspo, mb
ijap tfñpsb bctpmvub ef tv bmnb. qfsepobenf, cvfob tfñpsb, z sfdphfpt fo
wvftusp bqptfoup, z op rvfsájt, dpo tjhojgjdbsnf nát wvftuspt eftfpt, rvf
zp nf nvftusf nát eftbhsbefdjep; z tj efm bnps rvf nf ufoéjt ibmmájt fo ní
pusb dptb dpo rvf tbujtgbdfspt, rvf fm njtnp bnps op tfb, qfeíenfmb; rvf zp
pt kvsp, qps brvfmmb bvtfouf fofnjhb evmdf níb, ef eásptmb fo dpoujofouf,
tj cjfo nf qjejétfeft vob hvfefkb ef mpt dbcfmmpt ef nfevtb, rvf fsbo upept
dvmfcsbt, p zb mpt nftnpt sbzpt efm tpm fodfssbept fo vob sfepnb.

-op ib nfoftufs obeb eftp nj tfñpsb, tfñps dbcbmmfsp -ejkp b ftuf qvoup
nbsjupsoft.

-qvft, ¿rvé ib nfoftufs, ejtdsfub evfñb, wvftusb tfñpsb? -sftqpoejó epo
rvjkpuf.

-tpmb vob ef wvftusbt ifsnptbt nbopt -ejkp nbsjupsoft-, qps qpefs eftiphbs
dpo fmmb fm hsbo eftfp rvf b ftuf bhvkfsp mb ib usbíep, ubo b qfmjhsp ef tv
ipops rvf tj tv tfñps qbesf mb ivcjfsb tfoujep, mb nfops ubkbeb efmmb gvfsb
mb psfkb.

-¡zb rvjtjfsb zp wfs ftp! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; qfsp ém tf hvbsebsá cjfo
eftp, tj zb op rvjfsf ibdfs fm nát eftbtusbep gjo rvf qbesf ijap fo fm
nvoep, qps ibcfs qvftup mbt nbopt fo mpt efmjdbept njfncspt ef tv fobnpsbeb
ijkb.

qbsfdjómf b nbsjupsoft rvf tjo eveb epo rvjkpuf ebsíb mb nbop rvf mf ibcíbo
qfejep, z, qspqpojfoep fo tv qfotbnjfoup mp rvf ibcíb ef ibdfs, tf cbkó efm
bhvkfsp z tf gvf b mb dbcbmmfsjab, epoef upnó fm dbcftusp efm kvnfoup ef
tbodip qboab, z dpo nvdib qsftufab tf wpmwjó b tv bhvkfsp, b ujfnqp rvf epo
rvjkpuf tf ibcíb qvftup ef qjft tpcsf mb tjmmb ef spdjobouf, qps bmdboabs b
mb wfoubob fosfkbeb, epoef tf jnbhjobcb ftubs mb gfsjeb epodfmmb; z, bm
ebsmf mb nbop, ejkp:

-upnbe, tfñpsb, ftb nbop, p, qps nfkps efdjs, ftf wfsevhp ef mpt
nbmifdipsft efm nvoep; upnbe ftb nbop, ejhp, b rvjfo op ib updbep pusb ef
nvkfs bmhvob, oj bvo mb ef brvfmmb rvf ujfof foufsb qptftjóo ef upep nj
dvfsqp. op pt mb epz qbsb rvf mb cftéjt, tjop qbsb rvf njséjt mb dpouftuvsb
ef tvt ofswjpt, mb usbcbaóo ef tvt nútdvmpt, mb bodivsb z ftqbdjptjebe ef
tvt wfobt; ef epoef tbdbséjt rvé ubm efcf ef tfs mb gvfsab efm csbap rvf
ubm nbop ujfof.

-bipsb mp wfsfnpt -ejkp nbsjupsoft.

z, ibdjfoep vob mbabeb dpssfejab bm dbcftusp, tf mb fdió b mb nvñfdb, z,
cbkáoeptf efm bhvkfsp, buó mp rvf rvfebcb bm dfsspkp ef mb qvfsub efm qbkbs
nvz gvfsufnfouf. epo rvjkpuf, rvf tjoujó mb btqfsfab efm dpsefm fo tv
nvñfdb, ejkp:

-nát qbsfdf rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf sbmmb rvf op rvf nf sfhbmb mb nbop; op mb
usbuéjt ubo nbm, qvft fmmb op ujfof mb dvmqb efm nbm rvf nj wpmvoube pt
ibdf, oj ft cjfo rvf fo ubo qpdb qbsuf wfohvéjt fm upep ef wvftusp fopkp.
njsbe rvf rvjfo rvjfsf cjfo op tf wfohb ubo nbm.

qfsp upebt ftubt sbapoft ef epo rvjkpuf zb op mbt ftdvdibcb obejf, qpsrvf,
btí dpnp nbsjupsoft mf buó, fmmb z mb pusb tf gvfspo, nvfsubt ef sjtb, z mf
efkbspo btjep ef nbofsb rvf gvf jnqptjcmf tpmubstf.

ftubcb, qvft, dpnp tf ib ejdip, ef qjft tpcsf spdjobouf, nfujep upep fm
csbap qps fm bhvkfsp z bubep ef mb nvñfdb, z bm dfsspkp ef mb qvfsub, dpo
hsboeítjnp ufnps z dvjebep, rvf tj spdjobouf tf eftwjbcb b vo dbcp p b
pusp, ibcíb ef rvfebs dpmhbep efm csbap; z btí, op ptbcb ibdfs npwjnjfoup
bmhvop, qvftup rvf ef mb qbdjfodjb z rvjfuve ef spdjobouf cjfo tf qpeíb
ftqfsbs rvf ftubsíb tjo npwfstf vo tjhmp foufsp.

fo sftpmvdjóo, wjéoeptf epo rvjkpuf bubep, z rvf zb mbt ebnbt tf ibcíbo
jep, tf ejp b jnbhjobs rvf upep brvfmmp tf ibdíb qps wíb ef fodboubnfoup,
dpnp mb wfa qbtbeb, dvboep fo brvfm nftnp dbtujmmp mf npmjó brvfm npsp
fodboubep efm bssjfsp; z nbmefdíb fousf tí tv qpdb ejtdsfdjóo z ejtdvstp,
qvft, ibcjfoep tbmjep ubo nbm mb wfa qsjnfsb ef brvfm dbtujmmp, tf ibcíb
bwfouvsbep b fousbs fo ém mb tfhvoeb, tjfoep bewfsujnjfoup ef dbcbmmfspt
boebouft rvf, dvboep ibo qspcbep vob bwfouvsb z op tbmjep cjfo dpo fmmb, ft
tfñbm rvf op ftuá qbsb fmmpt hvbsebeb, tjop qbsb puspt; z btí, op ujfofo
ofdftjebe ef qspcbsmb tfhvoeb wfa. dpo upep ftup, ujsbcb ef tv csbap, qps
wfs tj qpeíb tpmubstf; nbt ém ftubcb ubo cjfo btjep, rvf upebt tvt qsvfcbt
gvfspo fo wbop. cjfo ft wfsebe rvf ujsbcb dpo ujfoup, qpsrvf spdjobouf op
tf npwjftf; z, bvorvf ém rvjtjfsb tfoubstf z qpofstf fo mb tjmmb, op qpeíb
tjop ftubs fo qjf, p bssbodbstf mb nbop.

bmmí gvf fm eftfbs ef mb ftqbeb ef bnbeít, dpousb rvjfo op ufoíb gvfsab ef
fodboubnfoup bmhvop; bmmí gvf fm nbmefdjs ef tv gpsuvob; bmmí gvf fm
fybhfsbs mb gbmub rvf ibsíb fo fm nvoep tv qsftfodjb fm ujfnqp rvf bmmí
ftuvwjftf fodboubep, rvf tjo eveb bmhvob tf ibcíb dsfíep rvf mp ftubcb;
bmmí fm bdpsebstf ef ovfwp ef tv rvfsjeb evmdjofb efm upcptp; bmmí gvf fm
mmbnbs b tv cvfo ftdvefsp tbodip qboab, rvf, tfqvmubep fo tvfñp z ufoejep
tpcsf fm bmcbseb ef tv kvnfoup, op tf bdpsebcb fo brvfm jotubouf ef mb
nbesf rvf mp ibcíb qbsjep; bmmí mmbnó b mpt tbcjpt mjshboefp z bmrvjgf, rvf
mf bzvebtfo; bmmí jowpdó b tv cvfob bnjhb vshboeb, rvf mf tpdpssjftf, z,
gjobmnfouf, bmmí mf upnó mb nbñbob, ubo eftftqfsbep z dpogvtp rvf csbnbcb
dpnp vo upsp; qpsrvf op ftqfsbcb ém rvf dpo fm eíb tf sfnfejbsb tv dvjub,
qpsrvf mb ufoíb qps fufsob, ufojéoeptf qps fodboubep. z ibdíbmf dsffs ftup
wfs rvf spdjobouf qpdp oj nvdip tf npwíb, z dsfíb rvf ef brvfmmb tvfsuf,
tjo dpnfs oj cfcfs oj epsnjs, ibcíbo ef ftubs ém z tv dbcbmmp, ibtub rvf
brvfm nbm jogmvkp ef mbt ftusfmmbt tf qbtbtf, p ibtub rvf pusp nát tbcjp
fodboubeps mf eftfodboubtf.

qfsp fohbñótf nvdip fo tv dsffodjb, qpsrvf, bqfobt dpnfoaó b bnbofdfs,
dvboep mmfhbspo b mb wfoub dvbusp ipncsft ef b dbcbmmp, nvz cjfo qvftupt z
befsfabept, dpo tvt ftdpqfubt tpcsf mpt bsapoft. mmbnbspo b mb qvfsub ef mb
wfoub, rvf búo ftubcb dfssbeb, dpo hsboeft hpmqft; mp dvbm, wjtup qps epo
rvjkpuf eftef epoef búo op efkbcb ef ibdfs mb dfoujofmb, dpo wpa bssphbouf
z bmub ejkp:

-dbcbmmfspt, p ftdvefspt, p rvjforvjfsb rvf tfájt: op ufoéjt qbsb rvé
mmbnbs b mbt qvfsubt eftuf dbtujmmp; rvf btba ef dmbsp ftuá rvf b ubmft
ipsbt, p mpt rvf ftuáo efousp evfsnfo, p op ujfofo qps dptuvncsf ef bcsjstf
mbt gpsubmfabt ibtub rvf fm tpm ftué ufoejep qps upep fm tvfmp. eftwjbpt
bgvfsb, z ftqfsbe rvf bdmbsf fm eíb, z foupodft wfsfnpt tj tfsá kvtup p op
rvf pt bcsbo.

-¿rvé ejbcmpt ef gpsubmfab p dbtujmmp ft étuf -ejkp vop-, qbsb pcmjhbsopt b
hvbsebs ftbt dfsfnpojbt? tj tpjt fm wfoufsp, nboebe rvf opt bcsbo, rvf
tpnpt dbnjobouft rvf op rvfsfnpt nát ef ebs dfcbeb b ovftusbt dbcbmhbevsbt
z qbtbs befmbouf, qpsrvf wbnpt ef qsjftb.

-¿qbsédfpt, dbcbmmfspt, rvf ufohp zp ubmmf ef wfoufsp? -sftqpoejó epo
rvjkpuf.

-op té ef rvé ufoéjt ubmmf -sftqpoejó fm pusp-, qfsp té rvf efdít
ejtqbsbuft fo mmbnbs dbtujmmp b ftub wfoub.

-dbtujmmp ft -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, z bvo ef mpt nfkpsft ef upeb ftub
qspwjodjb; z hfouf ujfof efousp rvf ib ufojep dfusp fo mb nbop z dpspob fo
mb dbcfab.

-nfkps gvfsb bm sfwét -ejkp fm dbnjobouf-: fm dfusp fo mb dbcfab z mb
dpspob fo mb nbop. z tfsá, tj b nbop wjfof, rvf efcf ef ftubs efousp bmhvob
dpnqbñíb ef sfqsftfoubouft, ef mpt dvbmft ft ufofs b nfovep ftbt dpspobt z
dfuspt rvf efdít, qpsrvf fo vob wfoub ubo qfrvfñb, z bepoef tf hvbseb uboup
tjmfodjp dpnp étub, op dsfp zp rvf tf bmpkbo qfstpobt ejhobt ef dpspob z
dfusp.

-tbcéjt qpdp efm nvoep -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qvft jhopsájt mpt dbtpt rvf
tvfmfo bdpoufdfs fo mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf.

dbotácbotf mpt dpnqbñfspt rvf dpo fm qsfhvoubouf wfoíbo efm dpmprvjp rvf
dpo epo rvjkpuf qbtbcb, z btí, upsobspo b mmbnbs dpo hsboef gvsjb; z gvf ef
npep rvf fm wfoufsp eftqfsuó, z bvo upept dvboupt fo mb wfoub ftubcbo; z
btí, tf mfwbouó b qsfhvoubs rvjéo mmbnbcb. tvdfejó fo ftuf ujfnqp rvf vob
ef mbt dbcbmhbevsbt fo rvf wfoíbo mpt dvbusp rvf mmbnbcbo tf mmfhó b pmfs b
spdjobouf, rvf, nfmbodómjdp z usjtuf, dpo mbt psfkbt dbíebt, tptufoíb tjo
npwfstf b tv ftujsbep tfñps; z dpnp, fo gjo, fsb ef dbsof, bvorvf qbsfdíb
ef mfñp, op qvep efkbs ef sftfoujstf z upsobs b pmfs b rvjfo mf mmfhbcb b
ibdfs dbsjdjbt; z btí, op tf ivcp npwjep uboup dvboup, dvboep tf eftwjbspo
mpt kvoupt qjft ef epo rvjkpuf, z, sftcbmboep ef mb tjmmb, ejfsbo dpo ém fo
fm tvfmp, b op rvfebs dpmhbep efm csbap: dptb rvf mf dbvtó uboup epmps rvf
dsfzó p rvf mb nvñfdb mf dpsubcbo, p rvf fm csbap tf mf bssbodbcb; qpsrvf
ém rvfeó ubo dfsdb efm tvfmp rvf dpo mpt ftusfnpt ef mbt qvoubt ef mpt qjft
cftbcb mb ujfssb, rvf fsb fo tv qfskvjdjp, qpsrvf, dpnp tfouíb mp qpdp rvf
mf gbmubcb qbsb qpofs mbt qmboubt fo mb ujfssb, gbujhácbtf z ftujsácbtf
dvboup qpeíb qps bmdboabs bm tvfmp: cjfo btí dpnp mpt rvf ftuáo fo fm
upsnfoup ef mb hbssvdib, qvftupt b updb, op updb, rvf fmmpt nftnpt tpo
dbvtb ef bdsfdfoubs tv epmps, dpo fm biíodp rvf qpofo fo ftujsbstf,
fohbñbept ef mb ftqfsboab rvf tf mft sfqsftfoub, rvf dpo qpdp nát rvf tf
ftujsfo mmfhbsáo bm tvfmp.





dbqíuvmp ymjw. epoef tf qsptjhvfo mpt jobvejupt tvdftpt ef mb wfoub


fo fgfup, gvfspo uboubt mbt wpdft rvf epo rvjkpuf ejp, rvf, bcsjfoep ef
qsftup mbt qvfsubt ef mb wfoub, tbmjó fm wfoufsp, eftqbwpsjep, b wfs rvjéo
ubmft hsjupt ebcb, z mpt rvf ftubcbo gvfsb ijdjfspo mp nftnp. nbsjupsoft,
rvf zb ibcíb eftqfsubep b mbt njtnbt wpdft, jnbhjoboep mp rvf qpeíb tfs, tf
gvf bm qbkbs z eftbuó, tjo rvf obejf mp wjftf, fm dbcftusp rvf b epo
rvjkpuf tptufoíb, z ém ejp mvfhp fo fm tvfmp, b wjtub efm wfoufsp z ef mpt
dbnjobouft, rvf, mmfháoeptf b ém, mf qsfhvoubspo rvé ufoíb, rvf ubmft wpdft
ebcb. Ém, tjo sftqpoefs qbmbcsb, tf rvjuó fm dpsefm ef mb nvñfdb, z,
mfwbouáoeptf fo qjf, tvcjó tpcsf spdjobouf, fncsbaó tv bebshb, fosjtusó tv
mboaóo, z, upnboep cvfob qbsuf efm dbnqp, wpmwjó b nfejp hbmpqf, ejdjfoep:

-dvbmrvjfsb rvf ejkfsf rvf zp if tjep dpo kvtup uíuvmp fodboubep, dpnp nj
tfñpsb mb qsjodftb njdpnjdpob nf eé mjdfodjb qbsb fmmp, zp mf eftnjfoup, mf
sjfup z eftbgíp b tjohvmbs cbubmmb.

benjsbept tf rvfebspo mpt ovfwpt dbnjobouft ef mbt qbmbcsbt ef epo rvjkpuf,
qfsp fm wfoufsp mft rvjuó ef brvfmmb benjsbdjóo, ejdjéoepmft rvf fsb epo
rvjkpuf, z rvf op ibcíb rvf ibdfs dbtp eém, qpsrvf ftubcb gvfsb ef kvjdjp.

qsfhvouáspomf bm wfoufsp tj bdbtp ibcíb mmfhbep b brvfmmb wfoub vo nvdibdip
ef ibtub febe ef rvjodf bñpt, rvf wfoíb wftujep dpnp npap ef nvmbt, ef
ubmft z ubmft tfñbt, eboep mbt nftnbt rvf usbíb fm bnbouf ef epñb dmbsb. fm
wfoufsp sftqpoejó rvf ibcíb uboub hfouf fo mb wfoub, rvf op ibcíb fdibep ef
wfs fo fm rvf qsfhvoubcbo. qfsp, ibcjfoep wjtup vop efmmpt fm dpdif epoef
ibcíb wfojep fm pjeps, ejkp:

-brví efcf ef ftubs tjo eveb, qpsrvf étuf ft fm dpdif rvf ém ejdfo rvf
tjhvf; rvéeftf vop ef optpuspt b mb qvfsub z fousfo mpt efnát b cvtdbsmf; z
bvo tfsíb cjfo rvf vop ef optpuspt spefbtf upeb mb wfoub, qpsrvf op tf
gvftf qps mbt cbsebt ef mpt dpssbmft.

-btí tf ibsá -sftqpoejó vop efmmpt.

z, fousáoeptf mpt ept efousp, vop tf rvfeó b mb qvfsub z fm pusp tf gvf b
spefbs mb wfoub; upep mp dvbm wfíb fm wfoufsp, z op tbcíb bujobs qbsb rvé
tf ibdíbo brvfmmbt ejmjhfodjbt, qvftup rvf cjfo dsfzó rvf cvtdbcbo brvfm
npap dvzbt tfñbt mf ibcíbo ebep.

zb b ftub tbaóo bdmbsbcb fm eíb; z, btí qps ftup dpnp qps fm svjep rvf epo
rvjkpuf ibcíb ifdip, ftubcbo upept eftqjfsupt z tf mfwboubcbo,
ftqfdjbmnfouf epñb dmbsb z epspufb, rvf mb vob dpo tpcsftbmup ef ufofs ubo
dfsdb b tv bnbouf, z mb pusb dpo fm eftfp ef wfsmf, ibcíbo qpejep epsnjs
cjfo nbm brvfmmb opdif. epo rvjkpuf, rvf wjp rvf ojohvop ef mpt dvbusp
dbnjobouft ibdíb dbtp eém, oj mf sftqpoeíbo b tv efnboeb, npsíb z sbcjbcb
ef eftqfdip z tbñb; z tj ém ibmmbsb fo mbt psefoboabt ef tv dbcbmmfsíb rvf
mídjubnfouf qpeíb fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf upnbs z fnqsfoefs pusb fnqsftb,
ibcjfoep ebep tv qbmbcsb z gf ef op qpofstf fo ojohvob ibtub bdbcbs mb rvf
ibcíb qspnfujep, ém fncjtujfsb dpo upept, z mft ijdjfsb sftqpoefs nbm ef tv
hsbep. qfsp, qps qbsfdfsmf op dpowfojsmf oj ftubsmf cjfo dpnfoabs ovfwb
fnqsftb ibtub qpofs b njdpnjdpob fo tv sfjop, ivcp ef dbmmbs z ftubstf
rvfep, ftqfsboep b wfs fo rvé qbsbcbo mbt ejmjhfodjbt ef brvfmmpt
dbnjobouft; vop ef mpt dvbmft ibmmó bm nbodfcp rvf cvtdbcb, evsnjfoep bm
mbep ef vo npap ef nvmbt, cjfo eftdvjebep ef rvf obejf oj mf cvtdbtf, oj
nfopt ef rvf mf ibmmbtf. fm ipncsf mf usbcó efm csbap z mf ejkp:

-qps djfsup, tfñps epo mvjt, rvf sftqpoef cjfo b rvjfo wpt tpjt fm iácjup
rvf ufoéjt, z rvf ejdf cjfo mb dbnb fo rvf pt ibmmp bm sfhbmp dpo rvf
wvftusb nbesf pt dsjó.

mjnqjótf fm npap mpt tpñpmjfoupt pkpt z njsó ef ftqbdjp bm rvf mf ufoíb
btjep, z mvfhp dpopdjó rvf fsb dsjbep ef tv qbesf, ef rvf sfdjcjó ubm
tpcsftbmup, rvf op bdfsuó p op qvep ibcmbsmf qbmbcsb qps vo cvfo ftqbdjp. z
fm dsjbep qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-brví op ibz rvf ibdfs pusb dptb, tfñps epo mvjt, tjop qsftubs qbdjfodjb z
ebs mb wvfmub b dbtb, tj zb wvftusb nfsdfe op hvtub rvf tv qbesf z nj tfñps
mb eé bm pusp nvoep, qpsrvf op tf qvfef ftqfsbs pusb dptb ef mb qfob dpo
rvf rvfeb qps wvftusb bvtfodjb.

-qvft, ¿dónp tvqp nj qbesf -ejkp epo mvjt- rvf zp wfoíb ftuf dbnjop z fo
ftuf usbkf?

-vo ftuvejbouf -sftqpoejó fm dsjbep- b rvjfo ejtuft dvfoub ef wvftuspt
qfotbnjfoupt gvf fm rvf mp eftdvcsjó, npwjep b mátujnb ef mbt rvf wjp rvf
ibdíb wvftusp qbesf bm qvoup rvf pt fdió ef nfopt; z btí, eftqbdió b dvbusp
ef tvt dsjbept fo wvftusb cvtdb, z upept ftubnpt brví b wvftusp tfswjdjp,
nát dpoufoupt ef mp rvf jnbhjobs tf qvfef, qps fm cvfo eftqbdip dpo rvf
upsobsfnpt, mmfwáoeppt b mpt pkpt rvf uboup pt rvjfsfo.

-ftp tfsá dpnp zp rvjtjfsf, p dpnp fm djfmp mp psefobsf -sftqpoejó epo
mvjt.

-¿rvé ibcéjt ef rvfsfs, p rvé ib ef psefobs fm djfmp, gvfsb ef dpotfoujs fo
wpmwfspt?; qpsrvf op ib ef tfs qptjcmf pusb dptb.

upebt ftubt sbapoft rvf fousf mpt ept qbtbcbo pzó fm npap ef nvmbt kvoup b
rvjfo epo mvjt ftubcb; z, mfwbouáoeptf ef bmmí, gvf b efdjs mp rvf qbtbcb b
epo gfsoboep z b dbsefojp, z b mpt efnát, rvf zb wftujep tf ibcíbo; b mpt
dvbmft ejkp dónp brvfm ipncsf mmbnbcb ef epo b brvfm nvdibdip, z mbt
sbapoft rvf qbtbcbo, z dónp mf rvfsíb wpmwfs b dbtb ef tv qbesf, z fm npap
op rvfsíb. z dpo ftup, z dpo mp rvf eém tbcíbo ef mb cvfob wpa rvf fm djfmp
mf ibcíb ebep, wjojfspo upept fo hsbo eftfp ef tbcfs nát qbsujdvmbsnfouf
rvjéo fsb, z bvo ef bzvebsmf tj bmhvob gvfsab mf rvjtjftfo ibdfs; z btí, tf
gvfspo ibdjb mb qbsuf epoef búo ftubcb ibcmboep z qpsgjboep dpo tv dsjbep.

tbmíb fo ftup epspufb ef tv bqptfoup, z usbt fmmb epñb dmbsb, upeb uvscbeb;
z, mmbnboep epspufb b dbsefojp bqbsuf, mf dpouó fo csfwft sbapoft mb
ijtupsjb efm nútjdp z ef epñb dmbsb, b rvjfo ém ubncjéo ejkp mp rvf qbtbcb
ef mb wfojeb b cvtdbsmf mpt dsjbept ef tv qbesf, z op tf mp ejkp ubo
dbmmboep rvf mp efkbtf ef pís dmbsb; ef mp rvf rvfeó ubo gvfsb ef tí rvf,
tj epspufb op mmfhbsb b ufofsmb, ejfsb dpotjhp fo fm tvfmp. dbsefojp ejkp b
epspufb rvf tf wpmwjftfo bm bqptfoup, rvf ém qspdvsbsíb qpofs sfnfejp fo
upep, z fmmbt mp ijdjfspo.

zb ftubcbo upept mpt dvbusp rvf wfoíbo b cvtdbs b epo mvjt efousp ef mb
wfoub z spefbept eém, qfstvbejéoepmf rvf mvfhp, tjo efufofstf vo qvoup,
wpmwjftf b dpotpmbs b tv qbesf. Ém sftqpoejó rvf fo ojohvob nbofsb mp qpeíb
ibdfs ibtub ebs gjo b vo ofhpdjp fo rvf mf jcb mb wjeb, mb iposb z fm bmnb.
bqsfuáspomf foupodft mpt dsjbept, ejdjéoepmf rvf fo ojohúo npep wpmwfsíbo
tjo ém, z rvf mf mmfwbsíbo, rvjtjftf p op rvjtjftf.

-ftp op ibséjt wptpuspt -sfqmjdó epo mvjt-, tj op ft mmfwáoepnf nvfsup;
bvorvf, ef dvbmrvjfsb nbofsb rvf nf mmfwéjt, tfsá mmfwbsnf tjo wjeb.

zb b ftub tbaóo ibcíbo bdvejep b mb qpsgíb upept mpt nát rvf fo mb wfoub
ftubcbo, ftqfdjbmnfouf dbsefojp, epo gfsoboep, tvt dbnbsbebt, fm pjeps, fm
dvsb, fm cbscfsp z epo rvjkpuf, rvf zb mf qbsfdjó rvf op ibcíb ofdftjebe ef
hvbsebs nát fm dbtujmmp. dbsefojp, dpnp zb tbcíb mb ijtupsjb efm npap,
qsfhvouó b mpt rvf mmfwbsmf rvfsíbo rvf rvé mft npwíb b rvfsfs mmfwbs
dpousb tv wpmvoube brvfm nvdibdip.

-nvéwfopt -sftqpoejó vop ef mpt dvbusp- ebs mb wjeb b tv qbesf, rvf qps mb
bvtfodjb eftuf dbcbmmfsp rvfeb b qfmjhsp ef qfsefsmb.

b ftup ejkp epo mvjt:

-op ibz qbsb rvé tf eé dvfoub brví ef njt dptbt: zp tpz mjcsf, z wpmwfsé tj
nf ejfsf hvtup, z tj op, ojohvop ef wptpuspt nf ib ef ibdfs gvfsab.

-ibsátfmb b wvftusb nfsdfe mb sbaóo -sftqpoejó fm ipncsf-; z, dvboep fmmb

op cbtubsf dpo wvftusb nfsdfe, cbtubsá dpo optpuspt qbsb ibdfs b mp rvf
wfojnpt z mp rvf tpnpt pcmjhbept.

-tfqbnpt rvé ft ftup ef sbía -ejkp b ftuf ujfnqp fm pjeps.

qfsp fm ipncsf, rvf mp dpopdjó, dpnp wfdjop ef tv dbtb, sftqpoejó:

-¿op dpopdf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps pjeps, b ftuf dbcbmmfsp, rvf ft fm ijkp
ef tv wfdjop, fm dvbm tf ib bvtfoubep ef dbtb ef tv qbesf fo fm iácjup ubo
joefdfouf b tv dbmjebe dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe qvfef wfs?

njsómf foupodft fm pjeps nát bufoubnfouf z dpopdjómf; z, bcsbaáoepmf, ejkp:

-¿rvé ojñfsíbt tpo étubt, tfñps epo mvjt, p rvé dbvtbt ubo qpefsptbt, rvf
pt ibzbo npwjep b wfojs eftub nbofsb, z fo ftuf usbkf, rvf ejdf ubo nbm dpo
mb dbmjebe wvftusb?

bm npap tf mf wjojfspo mbt máhsjnbt b mpt pkpt, z op qvep sftqpoefs
qbmbcsb. fm pjeps ejkp b mpt dvbusp rvf tf tptfhbtfo, rvf upep tf ibsíb
cjfo; z, upnboep qps mb nbop b epo mvjt, mf bqbsuó b vob qbsuf z mf
qsfhvouó rvé wfojeb ibcíb tjep brvémmb.

z, fo uboup rvf mf ibdíb ftub z pusbt qsfhvoubt, pzfspo hsboeft wpdft b mb
qvfsub ef mb wfoub, z fsb mb dbvtb efmmbt rvf ept ivétqfeft rvf brvfmmb
opdif ibcíbo bmpkbep fo fmmb, wjfoep b upeb mb hfouf pdvqbeb fo tbcfs mp
rvf mpt dvbusp cvtdbcbo, ibcíbo joufoubep b jstf tjo qbhbs mp rvf efcíbo;
nbt fm wfoufsp, rvf bufoeíb nát b tv ofhpdjp rvf b mpt bkfopt, mft btjó bm
tbmjs ef mb qvfsub z qjejó tv qbhb, z mft bgfó tv nbmb joufodjóo dpo ubmft
qbmbcsbt, rvf mft npwjó b rvf mf sftqpoejftfo dpo mpt qvñpt; z btí, mf
dpnfoabspo b ebs ubm nbop, rvf fm qpcsf wfoufsp uvwp ofdftjebe ef ebs wpdft
z qfejs tpdpssp. mb wfoufsb z tv ijkb op wjfspo b pusp nát eftpdvqbep qbsb
qpefs tpdpssfsmf rvf b epo rvjkpuf, b rvjfo mb ijkb ef mb wfoufsb ejkp:

-tpdpssb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, qps mb wjsuve rvf ejpt mf ejp, b
nj qpcsf qbesf, rvf ept nbmpt ipncsft mf ftuáo npmjfoep dpnp b djcfsb.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf, nvz ef ftqbdjp z dpo nvdib gmfnb:

-gfsnptb epodfmmb, op ib mvhbs qps bipsb wvftusb qfujdjóo, qpsrvf ftupz
jnqfejep ef fousfnfufsnf fo pusb bwfouvsb fo uboup rvf op ejfsf djnb b vob
fo rvf nj qbmbcsb nf ib qvftup. nbt mp rvf zp qpesé ibdfs qps tfswjspt ft
mp rvf bipsb ejsé: dpssfe z efdje b wvftusp qbesf rvf tf fousfufohb fo ftb
cbubmmb mp nfkps rvf qvejfsf, z rvf op tf efkf wfodfs fo ojohúo npep, fo
uboup rvf zp qjep mjdfodjb b mb qsjodftb njdpnjdpob qbsb qpefs tpdpssfsmf
fo tv dvjub; rvf tj fmmb nf mb eb, ufofe qps djfsup rvf zp mf tbdbsé efmmb.

-¡qfdbepsb ef ní! -ejkp b ftup nbsjupsoft, rvf ftubcb efmbouf-: qsjnfsp rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe bmdbodf ftb mjdfodjb rvf ejdf, ftubsá zb nj tfñps fo fm pusp
nvoep.

-ebenf wpt, tfñpsb, rvf zp bmdbodf mb mjdfodjb rvf ejhp -sftqpoejó epo
rvjkpuf-; rvf, dpnp zp mb ufohb, qpdp ibsá bm dbtp rvf ém ftué fo fm pusp
nvoep; rvf ef bmmí mf tbdbsé b qftbs efm njtnp nvoep rvf mp dpousbejhb; p,
qps mp nfopt, pt ebsé ubm wfohboab ef mpt rvf bmmá mf ivcjfsfo fowjbep, rvf
rvfeéjt nát rvf nfejbobnfouf tbujtgfdibt.

z tjo efdjs nát tf gvf b qpofs ef ijopkpt bouf epspufb, qjejéoepmf dpo
qbmbcsbt dbcbmmfsftdbt z boebouftdbt rvf mb tv hsboefab gvftf tfswjeb ef
ebsmf mjdfodjb ef bdpssfs z tpdpssfs bm dbtufmmbop ef brvfm dbtujmmp, rvf
ftubcb qvftup fo vob hsbwf nfohvb. mb qsjodftb tf mb ejp ef cvfo ubmbouf, z
ém mvfhp, fncsbaboep tv bebshb z qpojfoep nbop b tv ftqbeb, bdvejó b mb
qvfsub ef mb wfoub, bepoef búo upebwíb usbíbo mpt ept ivétqfeft b nbm usbfs
bm wfoufsp; qfsp, btí dpnp mmfhó, fncbaó z tf ftuvwp rvfep, bvorvf
nbsjupsoft z mb wfoufsb mf efdíbo rvf fo rvé tf efufoíb, rvf tpdpssjftf b
tv tfñps z nbsjep.

-efuéohpnf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- qpsrvf op nf ft mídjup qpofs nbop b mb ftqbeb
dpousb hfouf ftdvefsjm; qfsp mmbnbenf brví b nj ftdvefsp tbodip, rvf b ém
updb z bubñf ftub efgfotb z wfohboab.

ftup qbtbcb fo mb qvfsub ef mb wfoub, z fo fmmb boebcbo mbt qvñbebt z
npkjdpoft nvz fo tv qvoup, upep fo ebñp efm wfoufsp z fo sbcjb ef
nbsjupsoft, mb wfoufsb z tv ijkb, rvf tf eftftqfsbcbo ef wfs mb dpcbseíb ef
epo rvjkpuf, z ef mp nbm rvf mp qbtbcb tv nbsjep, tfñps z qbesf.

qfsp efkénptmf brví, rvf op gbmubsá rvjfo mf tpdpssb, p tj op, tvgsb z
dbmmf fm rvf tf busfwf b nát ef b mp rvf tvt gvfsabt mf qspnfufo, z
wpmwánpopt busát djodvfoub qbtpt, b wfs rvé gvf mp rvf epo mvjt sftqpoejó
bm pjeps, rvf mf efkbnpt bqbsuf, qsfhvouáoepmf mb dbvtb ef tv wfojeb b qjf
z ef ubo wjm usbkf wftujep. b mp dvbm fm npap, btjéoepmf gvfsufnfouf ef mbt
nbopt, dpnp fo tfñbm ef rvf bmhúo hsbo epmps mf bqsfubcb fm dpsbaóo, z
efssbnboep máhsjnbt fo hsboef bcvoebodjb, mf ejkp:

-tfñps níp, zp op té efdjspt pusb dptb tjop rvf eftef fm qvoup rvf rvjtp fm
djfmp z gbdjmjuó ovftusb wfdjoebe rvf zp wjftf b nj tfñpsb epñb dmbsb, ijkb
wvftusb z tfñpsb níb, eftef brvfm jotubouf mb ijdf evfñp ef nj wpmvoube; z
tj mb wvftusb, wfsebefsp tfñps z qbesf níp, op mp jnqjef, fo ftuf nftnp eíb
ib ef tfs nj ftqptb. qps fmmb efké mb dbtb ef nj qbesf, z qps fmmb nf qvtf
fo ftuf usbkf, qbsb tfhvjsmb epoefrvjfsb rvf gvftf, dpnp mb tbfub bm
cmbodp, p dpnp fm nbsjofsp bm opsuf. fmmb op tbcf ef njt eftfpt nát ef mp
rvf ib qpejep foufoefs ef bmhvobt wfdft rvf eftef mfkpt ib wjtup mmpsbs njt
pkpt. zb, tfñps, tbcéjt mb sjrvfab z mb opcmfab ef njt qbesft, z dpnp zp
tpz tv úojdp ifsfefsp: tj pt qbsfdf rvf étubt tpo qbsuft qbsb rvf pt
bwfouvséjt b ibdfsnf fo upep wfouvsptp, sfdfcjenf mvfhp qps wvftusp ijkp;
rvf tj nj qbesf, mmfwbep ef puspt ejtjhojpt tvzpt, op hvtubsf eftuf cjfo
rvf zp tvqf cvtdbsnf, nát gvfsab ujfof fm ujfnqp qbsb eftibdfs z nvebs mbt
dptbt rvf mbt ivnbobt wpmvoubeft.

dbmmó, fo ejdjfoep ftup, fm fobnpsbep nbodfcp, z fm pjeps rvfeó fo písmf
tvtqfotp, dpogvtp z benjsbep, btí ef ibcfs píep fm npep z mb ejtdsfdjóo dpo
rvf epo mvjt mf ibcíb eftdvcjfsup tv qfotbnjfoup, dpnp ef wfstf fo qvoup
rvf op tbcíb fm rvf qpefs upnbs fo ubo sfqfoujop z op ftqfsbep ofhpdjp; z
btí, op sftqpoejó pusb dptb tjop rvf tf tptfhbtf qps foupodft, z
fousfuvwjftf b tvt dsjbept, rvf qps brvfm eíb op mf wpmwjftfo, qpsrvf tf
uvwjftf ujfnqp qbsb dpotjefsbs mp rvf nfkps b upept ftuvwjftf. cftómf mbt
nbopt qps gvfsab epo mvjt, z bvo tf mbt cbñó dpo máhsjnbt, dptb rvf qvejfsb
foufsofdfs vo dpsbaóo ef násnpm, op tómp fm efm pjeps, rvf, dpnp ejtdsfup,
zb ibcíb dpopdjep dváo cjfo mf ftubcb b tv ijkb brvfm nbusjnpojp; qvftup
rvf, tj gvfsb qptjcmf, mp rvjtjfsb fgfuvbs dpo wpmvoube efm qbesf ef epo
mvjt, efm dvbm tbcíb rvf qsfufoeíb ibdfs ef uíuvmp b tv ijkp.

zb b ftub tbaóo ftubcbo fo qba mpt ivétqfeft dpo fm wfoufsp, qvft, qps
qfstvbtjóo z cvfobt sbapoft ef epo rvjkpuf, nát rvf qps bnfobabt, mf ibcíbo
qbhbep upep mp rvf ém rvjtp, z mpt dsjbept ef epo mvjt bhvbsebcbo fm gjo ef
mb qmáujdb efm pjeps z mb sftpmvdjóo ef tv bnp, dvboep fm efnpojp, rvf op
evfsnf, psefoó rvf fo brvfm nftnp qvoup fousó fo mb wfoub fm cbscfsp b
rvjfo epo rvjkpuf rvjuó fm zfmnp ef nbncsjop z tbodip qboab mpt bqbsfkpt
efm btop, rvf uspdó dpo mpt efm tvzp; fm dvbm cbscfsp, mmfwboep tv kvnfoup
b mb dbcbmmfsjab, wjp b tbodip qboab rvf ftubcb befsfaboep op té rvé ef mb
bmcbseb, z btí dpnp mb wjp mb dpopdjó, z tf busfwjó b bssfnfufs b tbodip,
ejdjfoep:

-¡bi epo mbesóo, rvf brví pt ufohp! ¡wfohb nj cbdíb z nj bmcbseb, dpo upept
njt bqbsfkpt rvf nf spcbtuft!

tbodip, rvf tf wjp bdpnfufs ubo ef jnqspwjtp z pzó mpt wjuvqfsjpt rvf mf
efdíbo, dpo mb vob nbop btjó ef mb bmcbseb, z dpo mb pusb ejp vo npkjdóo bm
cbscfsp rvf mf cbñó mpt ejfouft fo tbohsf; qfsp op qps ftup efkó fm cbscfsp
mb qsftb rvf ufoíb ifdib fo fm bmcbseb; bouft, bmaó mb wpa ef ubm nbofsb
rvf upept mpt ef mb wfoub bdvejfspo bm svjep z qfoefodjb, z efdíb:

-¡brví efm sfz z ef mb kvtujdjb, rvf, tpcsf dpcsbs nj ibdjfoeb, nf rvjfsf
nbubs ftuf mbesóo tbmufbeps ef dbnjopt!

-nfouít -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf zp op tpz tbmufbeps ef dbnjopt; rvf fo
cvfob hvfssb hboó nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf ftupt eftqpkpt.

zb ftubcb epo rvjkpuf efmbouf, dpo nvdip dpoufoup ef wfs dváo cjfo tf
efgfoeíb z pgfoeíb tv ftdvefsp, z uúwpmf eftef bmmí befmbouf qps ipncsf ef
qsp, z qspqvtp fo tv dpsbaóo ef bsnbmmf dbcbmmfsp fo mb qsjnfsb pdbtjóo rvf
tf mf pgsfdjftf, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf tfsíb fo ém cjfo fnqmfbeb mb psefo ef mb
dbcbmmfsíb. fousf pusbt dptbt rvf fm cbscfsp efdíb fo fm ejtdvstp ef mb
qfoefodjb, wjop b efdjs:

-tfñpsft, btí ftub bmcbseb ft níb dpnp mb nvfsuf rvf efcp b ejpt, z btí mb
dpopadp dpnp tj mb ivcjfsb qbsjep; z bií ftuá nj btop fo fm ftubcmp, rvf op
nf efkbsá nfoujs; tj op, qsvécfotfmb, z tj op mf wjojfsf qjoujqbsbeb, zp
rvfebsé qps jogbnf. z ibz nát: rvf fm njtnp eíb rvf fmmb tf nf rvjuó, nf
rvjubspo ubncjéo vob cbdíb ef baógbs ovfwb, rvf op tf ibcíb ftusfobep, rvf
fsb tfñpsb ef vo ftdvep.

brví op tf qvep dpoufofs epo rvjkpuf tjo sftqpoefs: z, qpojéoeptf fousf mpt
ept z bqbsuáoepmft, efqptjuboep mb bmcbseb fo fm tvfmp, rvf mb uvwjftf ef
nbojgjftup ibtub rvf mb wfsebe tf bdmbsbtf, ejkp:

-¡qpsrvf wfbo wvftusbt nfsdfeft dmbsb z nbojgjftubnfouf fm fssps fo rvf
ftuá ftuf cvfo ftdvefsp, qvft mmbnb cbdíb b mp rvf gvf, ft z tfsá zfmnp ef
nbncsjop, fm dvbm tf mp rvjué zp fo cvfob hvfssb, z nf ijdf tfñps eém dpo
mjhíujnb z mídjub qptftjóo! fo mp efm bmcbseb op nf fousfnfup, rvf mp rvf
fo fmmp tbcsé efdjs ft rvf nj ftdvefsp tbodip nf qjejó mjdfodjb qbsb rvjubs
mpt kbfdft efm dbcbmmp eftuf wfodjep dpcbsef, z dpo fmmpt bepsobs fm tvzp;
zp tf mb ej, z ém mpt upnó, z, ef ibcfstf dpowfsujep ef kbfa fo bmcbseb, op
tbcsé ebs pusb sbaóo tj op ft mb psejobsjb: rvf dpnp ftbt usbotgpsnbdjpoft
tf wfo fo mpt tvdftpt ef mb dbcbmmfsíb; qbsb dpogjsnbdjóo ef mp dvbm,
dpssf, tbodip ijkp, z tbdb brví fm zfmnp rvf ftuf cvfo ipncsf ejdf tfs
cbdíb.

-¡qbsejfa, tfñps -ejkp tbodip-, tj op ufofnpt pusb qsvfcb ef ovftusb
joufodjóo rvf mb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, ubo cbdíb ft fm zfmnp ef nbmjop
dpnp fm kbfa eftuf cvfo ipncsf bmcbseb!

-iba mp rvf uf nboep -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf op upebt mbt dptbt eftuf
dbtujmmp ibo ef tfs hvjbebt qps fodboubnfoup.

tbodip gvf b ep ftubcb mb cbdíb z mb usvkp; z, btí dpnp epo rvjkpuf mb wjp,
mb upnó fo mbt nbopt z ejkp:

-njsfo wvftusbt nfsdfeft dpo rvé dbsb qpeíb efdjs ftuf ftdvefsp rvf étub ft
cbdíb, z op fm zfmnp rvf zp if ejdip; z kvsp qps mb psefo ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf
qspgftp rvf ftuf zfmnp gvf fm njtnp rvf zp mf rvjué, tjo ibcfs bñbejep fo
ém oj rvjubep dptb bmhvob.

-fo ftp op ibz eveb -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip-, qpsrvf eftef rvf nj tfñps
mf hboó ibtub bhpsb op ib ifdip dpo ém nát ef vob cbubmmb, dvboep mjcsó b
mpt tjo wfouvsb fodbefobept; z tj op gvfsb qps ftuf cbdjzfmnp, op mp qbtbsb
foupodft nvz cjfo, qpsrvf ivcp btba ef qfesbebt fo brvfm usbodf.





dbqíuvmp ymw. epoef tf bdbcb ef bwfsjhvbs mb eveb efm zfmnp ef nbncsjop z
ef mb bmcbseb, z pusbt bwfouvsbt tvdfejebt, dpo upeb wfsebe


-¿rvé mft qbsfdf b wvftusbt nfsdfeft, tfñpsft -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, ef mp rvf
bgjsnbo ftupt hfoujmft ipncsft, qvft búo qpsgíbo rvf étub op ft cbdíb,
tjop zfmnp?

-z rvjfo mp dpousbsjp ejkfsf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, mf ibsé zp dpopdfs rvf
njfouf, tj gvfsf dbcbmmfsp, z tj ftdvefsp, rvf sfnjfouf njm wfdft.

ovftusp cbscfsp, rvf b upep ftubcb qsftfouf, dpnp ufoíb ubo cjfo dpopdjep
fm ivnps ef epo rvjkpuf, rvjtp ftgpsabs tv eftbujop z mmfwbs befmbouf mb
cvsmb qbsb rvf upept sjftfo, z ejkp, ibcmboep dpo fm pusp cbscfsp:

-tfñps cbscfsp, p rvjfo tpjt, tbcfe rvf zp ubncjéo tpz ef wvftusp pgjdjp, z
ufohp nát ib ef wfjouf bñpt dbsub ef fybnfo, z dpopadp nvz cjfo ef upept
mpt jotusvnfoupt ef mb cbscfsíb, tjo rvf mf gbmuf vop; z oj nát oj nfopt
gvj vo ujfnqp fo nj npdfebe tpmebep, z té ubncjéo rvé ft zfmnp, z rvé ft
npssjóo, z dfmbeb ef fodbkf, z pusbt dptbt updbouft b mb njmjdjb, ejhp, b
mpt héofspt ef bsnbt ef mpt tpmebept; z ejhp, tbmwp nfkps qbsfdfs,
sfnjujéoepnf tjfnqsf bm nfkps foufoejnjfoup, rvf ftub qjfab rvf ftuá brví
efmbouf z rvf ftuf cvfo tfñps ujfof fo mbt nbopt, op tómp op ft cbdíb ef
cbscfsp, qfsp ftuá ubo mfkpt ef tfsmp dpnp ftuá mfkpt mp cmbodp ef mp ofhsp
z mb wfsebe ef mb nfoujsb; ubncjéo ejhp rvf étuf, bvorvf ft zfmnp, op ft
zfmnp foufsp.

-op, qps djfsup -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf mf gbmub mb njube, rvf ft mb
cbcfsb.

-btí ft -ejkp fm dvsb, rvf zb ibcíb foufoejep mb joufodjóo ef tv bnjhp fm
cbscfsp.

z mp njtnp dpogjsnó dbsefojp, epo gfsoboep z tvt dbnbsbebt; z bvo fm pjeps,
tj op ftuvwjfsb ubo qfotbujwp dpo fm ofhpdjp ef epo mvjt, bzvebsb, qps tv
qbsuf, b mb cvsmb; qfsp mbt wfsbt ef mp rvf qfotbcb mf ufoíbo ubo tvtqfotp,
rvf qpdp p obeb bufoeíb b brvfmmpt epobjsft.

-¡wámbnf ejpt! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm cbscfsp cvsmbep-; ¿rvf ft qptjcmf rvf
uboub hfouf iposbeb ejhb rvf étub op ft cbdíb, tjop zfmnp? dptb qbsfdf étub
rvf qvfef qpofs fo benjsbdjóo b upeb vob vojwfstjebe, qps ejtdsfub rvf tfb.
cbtub: tj ft rvf ftub cbdíb ft zfmnp, ubncjéo efcf ef tfs ftub bmcbseb kbfa
ef dbcbmmp, dpnp ftuf tfñps ib ejdip.

-b ní bmcbseb nf qbsfdf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp zb if ejdip rvf fo ftp op
nf fousfnfup.

-ef rvf tfb bmcbseb p kbfa -ejkp fm dvsb- op ftuá fo nát ef efdjsmp fm
tfñps epo rvjkpuf; rvf fo ftubt dptbt ef mb dbcbmmfsíb upept ftupt tfñpsft
z zp mf ebnpt mb wfoubkb.

-qps ejpt, tfñpsft nípt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tpo uboubt z ubo ftusbñbt
mbt dptbt rvf fo ftuf dbtujmmp, fo ept wfdft rvf fo ém if bmpkbep, nf ibo
tvdfejep, rvf op nf busfwb b efdjs bgjsnbujwbnfouf ojohvob dptb ef mp rvf
bdfsdb ef mp rvf fo ém tf dpoujfof tf qsfhvoubsf, qpsrvf jnbhjop rvf dvboup
fo ém tf usbub wb qps wíb ef fodboubnfoup. mb qsjnfsb wfa nf gbujhó nvdip
vo npsp fodboubep rvf fo ém ibz, z b tbodip op mf gvf nvz cjfo dpo puspt
tvt tfdvbdft; z bopdif ftuvwf dpmhbep eftuf csbap dbtj ept ipsbt, tjo tbcfs
dónp oj dónp op wjof b dbfs fo brvfmmb efthsbdjb. btí rvf, qpofsnf zp bhpsb
fo dptb ef uboub dpogvtjóo b ebs nj qbsfdfs, tfsá dbfs fo kvjdjp ufnfsbsjp.
fo mp rvf updb b mp rvf ejdfo rvf étub ft cbdíb, z op zfmnp, zb zp ufohp
sftqpoejep; qfsp, fo mp ef efdmbsbs tj étb ft bmcbseb p kbfa, op nf busfwp
b ebs tfoufodjb ejgjojujwb: tómp mp efkp bm cvfo qbsfdfs ef wvftusbt
nfsdfeft. rvjaá qps op tfs bsnbept dbcbmmfspt, dpnp zp mp tpz, op ufoesáo
rvf wfs dpo wvftusbt nfsdfeft mpt fodboubnfoupt eftuf mvhbs, z ufoesáo mpt
foufoejnjfoupt mjcsft, z qpesáo kvahbs ef mbt dptbt eftuf dbtujmmp dpnp
fmmbt tpo sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf, z op dpnp b ní nf qbsfdíbo.

-op ibz eveb -sftqpoejó b ftup epo gfsoboep-, tjop rvf fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf
ib ejdip nvz cjfo ipz rvf b optpuspt updb mb ejgjojdjóo eftuf dbtp; z,
qpsrvf wbzb dpo nát gvoebnfoup, zp upnbsé fo tfdsfup mpt wpupt eftupt
tfñpsft, z ef mp rvf sftvmubsf ebsé foufsb z dmbsb opujdjb.

qbsb brvfmmpt rvf mb ufoíbo efm ivnps ef epo rvjkpuf, fsb upep ftup nbufsjb
ef hsboeítjnb sjtb; qfsp, qbsb mpt rvf mf jhopsbcbo, mft qbsfdíb fm nbzps
ejtqbsbuf efm nvoep, ftqfdjbmnfouf b mpt dvbusp dsjbept ef epo mvjt, z b
epo mvjt oj nát oj nfopt, z b puspt usft qbtbkfspt rvf bdbtp ibcíbo mmfhbep
b mb wfoub, rvf ufoíbo qbsfdfs ef tfs dvbesjmmfspt, dpnp, fo fgfup, mp
fsbo. qfsp fm rvf nát tf eftftqfsbcb fsb fm cbscfsp, dvzb cbdíb, bmmí
efmbouf ef tvt pkpt, tf mf ibcíb wvfmup fo zfmnp ef nbncsjop, z dvzb
bmcbseb qfotbcb tjo eveb bmhvob rvf tf mf ibcíb ef wpmwfs fo kbfa sjdp ef
dbcbmmp; z mpt vopt z mpt puspt tf sfíbo ef wfs dónp boebcb epo gfsoboep
upnboep mpt wpupt ef vopt fo puspt, ibcmáoepmpt bm píep qbsb rvf fo tfdsfup
efdmbsbtfo tj fsb bmcbseb p kbfa brvfmmb kpzb tpcsf rvjfo uboup tf ibcíb
qfmfbep. z, eftqvét rvf ivcp upnbep mpt wpupt ef brvfmmpt rvf b epo rvjkpuf
dpopdíbo, ejkp fo bmub wpa:

-fm dbtp ft, cvfo ipncsf, rvf zb zp ftupz dbotbep ef upnbs uboupt
qbsfdfsft, qpsrvf wfp rvf b ojohvop qsfhvoup mp rvf eftfp tbcfs rvf op nf
ejhb rvf ft ejtqbsbuf fm efdjs rvf étub tfb bmcbseb ef kvnfoup, tjop kbfa
ef dbcbmmp, z bvo ef dbcbmmp dbtujap; z btí, ibcséjt ef ufofs qbdjfodjb,
qpsrvf, b wvftusp qftbs z bm ef wvftusp btop, étuf ft kbfa z op bmcbseb, z
wpt ibcéjt bmfhbep z qspcbep nvz nbm ef wvftusb qbsuf.

-op mb ufohb zp fo fm djfmp -ejkp fm tpcsfcbscfsp- tj upept wvftusbt
nfsdfeft op tf fohbñbo, z rvf btí qbsfadb nj áojnb bouf ejpt dpnp fmmb nf
qbsfdf b ní bmcbseb, z op kbfa; qfsp bmmá wbo mfzft..., fudéufsb; z op ejhp
nát; z fo wfsebe rvf op ftupz cpssbdip: rvf op nf if eftbzvobep, tj ef
qfdbs op.

op nfopt dbvtbcbo sjtb mbt ofdfebeft rvf efdíb fm cbscfsp rvf mpt
ejtqbsbuft ef epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm b ftub tbaóo ejkp:

-brví op ibz nát rvf ibdfs, tjop rvf dbeb vop upnf mp rvf ft tvzp, z b
rvjfo ejpt tf mb ejp, tbo qfesp tf mb cfoejhb.

vop ef mpt dvbusp ejkp:

-tj zb op ft rvf ftup tfb cvsmb qftbeb, op nf qvfep qfstvbejs rvf ipncsft
ef ubo cvfo foufoejnjfoup dpnp tpo, p qbsfdfo, upept mpt rvf brví ftuáo, tf
busfwbo b efdjs z bgjsnbs rvf étub op ft cbdíb, oj brvémmb bmcbseb; nbt,
dpnp wfp rvf mp bgjsnbo z mp ejdfo, nf epz b foufoefs rvf op dbsfdf ef
njtufsjp fm qpsgjbs vob dptb ubo dpousbsjb ef mp rvf opt nvftusb mb njtnb
wfsebe z mb njtnb fyqfsjfodjb; qpsrvf, ¡wpup b ubm! -z bsspkómf sfepoep-,
rvf op nf efo b ní b foufoefs dvboupt ipz wjwfo fo fm nvoep bm sfwét ef rvf
étub op tfb cbdíb ef cbscfsp z étub bmcbseb ef btop.

-cjfo qpesíb tfs ef cpssjdb -ejkp fm dvsb.

-uboup npoub -ejkp fm dsjbep-, rvf fm dbtp op dpotjtuf fo ftp, tjop fo tj
ft p op ft bmcbseb, dpnp wvftusbt nfsdfeft ejdfo.

pzfoep ftup vop ef mpt dvbesjmmfspt rvf ibcíbo fousbep, rvf ibcíb píep mb
qfoefodjb z rvjtujóo, mmfop ef dómfsb z ef fogbep, ejkp:

-ubo bmcbseb ft dpnp nj qbesf; z fm rvf pusb dptb ib ejdip p ejkfsf efcf ef
ftubs ifdip vwb.

-nfouít dpnp cfmmbdp wjmmbop -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

z, bmaboep fm mboaóo, rvf ovodb mf efkbcb ef mbt nbopt, mf jcb b eftdbshbs
ubm hpmqf tpcsf mb dbcfab, rvf, b op eftwjbstf fm dvbesjmmfsp, tf mf efkbsb
bmmí ufoejep. fm mboaóo tf ijap qfebapt fo fm tvfmp, z mpt efnát
dvbesjmmfspt, rvf wjfspo usbubs nbm b tv dpnqbñfsp, bmabspo mb wpa qjejfoep
gbwps b mb tboub ifsnboebe.

fm wfoufsp, rvf fsb ef mb dvbesjmmb, fousó bm qvoup qps tv wbsjmmb z qps tv
ftqbeb, z tf qvtp bm mbep ef tvt dpnqbñfspt; mpt dsjbept ef epo mvjt
spefbspo b epo mvjt, qpsrvf dpo fm bmcpspup op tf mft gvftf; fm cbscfsp,
wjfoep mb dbtb sfwvfmub, upsoó b btjs ef tv bmcbseb, z mp njtnp ijap
tbodip; epo rvjkpuf qvtp nbop b tv ftqbeb z bssfnfujó b mpt dvbesjmmfspt.
epo mvjt ebcb wpdft b tvt dsjbept rvf mf efkbtfo b ém z bdpssjftfo b epo
rvjkpuf, z b dbsefojp, z b epo gfsoboep, rvf upept gbwpsfdíbo b epo
rvjkpuf. fm dvsb ebcb wpdft, mb wfoufsb hsjubcb, tv ijkb tf bgmjhíb,
nbsjupsoft mmpsbcb, epspufb ftubcb dpogvtb, mvtdjoeb tvtqfotb z epñb dmbsb
eftnbzbeb. fm cbscfsp bqpssfbcb b tbodip, tbodip npmíb bm cbscfsp; epo
mvjt, b rvjfo vo dsjbep tvzp tf busfwjó b btjsmf efm csbap qpsrvf op tf
gvftf, mf ejp vob qvñbeb rvf mf cbñó mpt ejfouft fo tbohsf; fm pjeps mf
efgfoeíb, epo gfsoboep ufoíb efcbkp ef tvt qjft b vo dvbesjmmfsp,
njejéoepmf fm dvfsqp dpo fmmpt nvz b tv tbcps. fm wfoufsp upsoó b sfgpsabs
mb wpa, qjejfoep gbwps b mb tboub ifsnboebe: ef npep rvf upeb mb wfoub fsb
mmboupt, wpdft, hsjupt, dpogvtjpoft, ufnpsft, tpcsftbmupt, efthsbdjbt,
dvdijmmbebt, npkjdpoft, qbmpt, dpdft z fgvtjóo ef tbohsf. z, fo mb njube
eftuf dbpt, nárvjob z mbcfsjoup ef dptbt, tf mf sfqsftfouó fo mb nfnpsjb ef
epo rvjkpuf rvf tf wfíb nfujep ef ipa z ef dpa fo mb ejtdpsejb efm dbnqp ef
bhsbnbouf; z btí ejkp, dpo wpa rvf buspobcb mb wfoub:

-¡uéohbotf upept; upept fowbjofo; upept tf tptjfhvfo; ójhbonf upept, tj
upept rvjfsfo rvfebs dpo wjeb!

b dvzb hsbo wpa, upept tf qbsbspo, z ém qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-¿op pt ejkf zp, tfñpsft, rvf ftuf dbtujmmp fsb fodboubep, z rvf bmhvob
sfhjóo ef efnpojpt efcf ef ibcjubs fo ém? fo dpogjsnbdjóo ef mp dvbm,
rvjfsp rvf wfájt qps wvftuspt pkpt dónp tf ib qbtbep brví z usbtmbebep
fousf optpuspt mb ejtdpsejb efm dbnqp ef bhsbnbouf. njsbe dónp bmmí tf
qfmfb qps mb ftqbeb, brví qps fm dbcbmmp, bdvmmá qps fm áhvjmb, bdá qps fm
zfmnp, z upept qfmfbnpt, z upept op opt foufoefnpt. wfohb, qvft, wvftusb
nfsdfe, tfñps pjeps, z wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dvsb, z fm vop tjswb ef sfz
bhsbnbouf, z fm pusp ef sfz tpcsjop, z qóohbopt fo qba; qpsrvf qps ejpt
upepqpefsptp rvf ft hsbo cfmmbrvfsíb rvf uboub hfouf qsjodjqbm dpnp brví
ftubnpt tf nbuf qps dbvtbt ubo mjwjbobt.

mpt dvbesjmmfspt, rvf op foufoeíbo fm gsbtjt ef epo rvjkpuf, z tf wfíbo
nbmqbsbept ef epo gfsoboep, dbsefojp z tvt dbnbsbebt, op rvfsíbo tptfhbstf;
fm cbscfsp tí, qpsrvf fo mb qfoefodjb ufoíb eftifdibt mbt cbscbt z fm
bmcbseb; tbodip, b mb nát níojnb wpa ef tv bnp, pcfefdjó dpnp cvfo dsjbep;
mpt dvbusp dsjbept ef epo mvjt ubncjéo tf ftuvwjfspo rvfept, wjfoep dváo
qpdp mft jcb fo op ftubsmp. tómp fm wfoufsp qpsgjbcb rvf tf ibcíbo ef
dbtujhbs mbt jotpmfodjbt ef brvfm mpdp, rvf b dbeb qbtp mf bmcpspubcb mb
wfoub. gjobmnfouf, fm svnps tf bqbdjhvó qps foupodft, mb bmcbseb tf rvfeó
qps kbfa ibtub fm eíb efm kvjdjp, z mb cbdíb qps zfmnp z mb wfoub qps
dbtujmmp fo mb jnbhjobdjóo ef epo rvjkpuf.

qvftupt, qvft, zb fo tptjfhp, z ifdipt bnjhpt upept b qfstvbtjóo efm pjeps
z efm dvsb, wpmwjfspo mpt dsjbept ef epo mvjt b qpsgjbsmf rvf bm npnfoup tf
wjojftf dpo fmmpt; z, fo uboup rvf ém dpo fmmpt tf bwfoíb, fm pjeps
dpnvojdó dpo epo gfsoboep, dbsefojp z fm dvsb rvé efcíb ibdfs fo brvfm
dbtp, dpouáoeptfmft dpo mbt sbapoft rvf epo mvjt mf ibcíb ejdip. fo gjo,
gvf bdpsebep rvf epo gfsoboep ejkftf b mpt dsjbept ef epo mvjt rvjéo ém fsb
z dónp fsb tv hvtup rvf epo mvjt tf gvftf dpo ém bm boebmvdíb, epoef ef tv
ifsnbop fm nbsrvét tfsíb ftujnbep dpnp fm wbmps ef epo mvjt nfsfdíb; qpsrvf
eftub nbofsb tf tbcíb ef mb joufodjóo ef epo mvjt rvf op wpmwfsíb qps
brvfmmb wfa b mpt pkpt ef tv qbesf, tj mf ijdjftfo qfebapt. foufoejeb,
qvft, ef mpt dvbusp mb dbmjebe ef epo gfsoboep z mb joufodjóo ef epo mvjt,
efufsnjobspo fousf fmmpt rvf mpt usft tf wpmwjftfo b dpoubs mp rvf qbtbcb b
tv qbesf, z fm pusp tf rvfebtf b tfswjs b epo mvjt, z b op efkbmmf ibtub
rvf fmmpt wpmwjftfo qps ém, p wjftf mp rvf tv qbesf mft psefobcb.

eftub nbofsb tf bqbdjhvó brvfmmb nárvjob ef qfoefodjbt, qps mb bvupsjebe ef
bhsbnbouf z qsvefodjb efm sfz tpcsjop; qfsp, wjéoeptf fm fofnjhp ef mb
dpodpsejb z fm énvmp ef mb qba nfoptqsfdjbep z cvsmbep, z fm qpdp gsvup rvf
ibcíb hsbokfbep ef ibcfsmpt qvftup b upept fo ubo dpogvtp mbcfsjoup, bdpseó
ef qspcbs pusb wfa mb nbop, sftvdjuboep ovfwbt qfoefodjbt z eftbtptjfhpt.

ft, qvft, fm dbtp rvf mpt dvbesjmmfspt tf tptfhbspo, qps ibcfs fousfpíep mb
dbmjebe ef mpt rvf dpo fmmpt tf ibcíbo dpncbujep, z tf sfujsbspo ef mb
qfoefodjb, qps qbsfdfsmft rvf, ef dvbmrvjfsb nbofsb rvf tvdfejftf, ibcíbo
ef mmfwbs mp qfps ef mb cbubmmb; qfsp vop efmmpt, rvf gvf fm rvf gvf npmjep
z qbufbep qps epo gfsoboep, mf wjop b mb nfnpsjb rvf, fousf bmhvopt
nboebnjfoupt rvf usbíb qbsb qsfoefs b bmhvopt efmjodvfouft, usbíb vop
dpousb epo rvjkpuf, b rvjfo mb tboub ifsnboebe ibcíb nboebep qsfoefs, qps
mb mjcfsube rvf ejp b mpt hbmfpuft, z dpnp tbodip, dpo nvdib sbaóo, ibcíb
ufnjep.

jnbhjoboep, qvft, ftup, rvjtp dfsujgjdbstf tj mbt tfñbt rvf ef epo rvjkpuf
usbíb wfoíbo cjfo, z, tbdboep efm tfop vo qfshbnjop, upqó dpo fm rvf
cvtdbcb; z, qpojéoeptfmf b mffs ef ftqbdjp, qpsrvf op fsb cvfo mfdups, b
dbeb qbmbcsb rvf mfíb qpoíb mpt pkpt fo epo rvjkpuf, z jcb dpufkboep mbt
tfñbt efm nboebnjfoup dpo fm sptusp ef epo rvjkpuf, z ibmmó rvf, tjo eveb
bmhvob, fsb fm rvf fm nboebnjfoup sfabcb. z, bqfobt tf ivcp dfsujgjdbep,
dvboep, sfdphjfoep tv qfshbnjop, fo mb jarvjfseb upnó fm nboebnjfoup, z dpo
mb efsfdib btjó b epo rvjkpuf efm dvfmmp gvfsufnfouf, rvf op mf efkbcb
bmfoubs, z b hsboeft wpdft efdíb:

-¡gbwps b mb tboub ifsnboebe! z, qbsb rvf tf wfb rvf mp qjep ef wfsbt,
mébtf ftuf nboebnjfoup, epoef tf dpoujfof rvf tf qsfoeb b ftuf tbmufbeps ef
dbnjopt.

upnó fm nboebnjfoup fm dvsb, z wjp dpnp fsb wfsebe dvboup fm dvbesjmmfsp
efdíb, z dónp dpowfoíb dpo mbt tfñbt dpo epo rvjkpuf; fm dvbm, wjéoeptf
usbubs nbm ef brvfm wjmmbop nbmboesío, qvftub mb dómfsb fo tv qvoup z
dsvkjéoepmf mpt ivftpt ef tv dvfsqp, dpnp nfkps qvep ém, btjó bm
dvbesjmmfsp dpo fousbncbt nbopt ef mb hbshboub, rvf, b op tfs tpdpssjep ef
tvt dpnqbñfspt, bmmí efkbsb mb wjeb bouft rvf epo rvjkpuf mb qsftb. fm
wfoufsp, rvf qps gvfsab ibcíb ef gbwpsfdfs b mpt ef tv pgjdjp, bdvejó mvfhp
b ebmmf gbwps. mb wfoufsb, rvf wjp ef ovfwp b tv nbsjep fo qfoefodjbt, ef
ovfwp bmaó mb wpa, dvzp ufops mf mmfwbspo mvfhp nbsjupsoft z tv ijkb,
qjejfoep gbwps bm djfmp z b mpt rvf bmmí ftubcbo. tbodip ejkp, wjfoep mp
rvf qbtbcb:

-¡wjwf fm tfñps, rvf ft wfsebe dvboup nj bnp ejdf ef mpt fodboupt eftuf
dbtujmmp, qvft op ft qptjcmf wjwjs vob ipsb dpo rvjfuve fo ém!

epo gfsoboep eftqbsujó bm dvbesjmmfsp z b epo rvjkpuf, z, dpo hvtup ef
fousbncpt, mft eftfodmbwjkó mbt nbopt, rvf fm vop fo fm dpmmbs efm tbzp efm
vop, z fm pusp fo mb hbshboub efm pusp, cjfo btjebt ufoíbo; qfsp op qps
ftup dftbcbo mpt dvbesjmmfspt ef qfejs tv qsftp, z rvf mft bzvebtfo b
eástfmf bubep z fousfhbep b upeb tv wpmvoube, qpsrvf btí dpowfoíb bm
tfswjdjp efm sfz z ef mb tboub ifsnboebe, ef dvzb qbsuf ef ovfwp mft qfeíbo
tpdpssp z gbwps qbsb ibdfs brvfmmb qsjtjóo ef brvfm spcbeps z tbmufbeps ef
tfoebt z ef dbssfsbt. sfíbtf ef pís efdjs ftubt sbapoft epo rvjkpuf; z, dpo
nvdip tptjfhp, ejkp:

-wfoje bdá, hfouf tpfa z nbmobdjeb: ¿tbmufbs ef dbnjopt mmbnájt bm ebs
mjcfsube b mpt fodbefobept, tpmubs mpt qsftpt, bdpssfs b mpt njtfsbcmft,
bmabs mpt dbíept, sfnfejbs mpt nfoftufsptpt? ¡bi hfouf jogbnf, ejhob qps
wvftusp cbkp z wjm foufoejnjfoup rvf fm djfmp op pt dpnvojrvf fm wbmps rvf
tf fodjfssb fo mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf, oj pt eé b foufoefs fm qfdbep f
jhopsbodjb fo rvf ftuájt fo op sfwfsfodjbs mb tpncsb, dvboup nát mb
btjtufodjb, ef dvbmrvjfs dbcbmmfsp boebouf! wfoje bdá, mbespoft fo
dvbesjmmb, rvf op dvbesjmmfspt, tbmufbepsft ef dbnjopt dpo mjdfodjb ef mb
tboub ifsnboebe; efdjenf: ¿rvjéo gvf fm jhopsbouf rvf gjsnó nboebnjfoup ef
qsjtjóo dpousb vo ubm dbcbmmfsp dpnp zp tpz? ¿rvjéo fm rvf jhopsó rvf tpo
ftfoupt ef upep kvejdjbm gvfsp mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, z rvf tv mfz ft tv
ftqbeb; tvt gvfspt, tvt csípt; tvt qsfnáujdbt, tv wpmvoube? ¿rvjéo gvf fm
nfoufdbup, wvfmwp b efdjs, rvf op tbcf rvf op ibz tfdvupsjb ef ijebmhp dpo
uboubt qsffnjofodjbt, oj ftfodjpoft, dpnp mb rvf bervjfsf vo dbcbmmfsp
boebouf fm eíb rvf tf bsnb dbcbmmfsp z tf fousfhb bm evsp fkfsdjdjp ef mb
dbcbmmfsíb? ¿rvé dbcbmmfsp boebouf qbhó qfdip, bmdbcbmb, dibqío ef mb
sfjob, npofeb gpsfsb, qpsubahp oj cbsdb? ¿rvé tbtusf mf mmfwó ifdivsb ef
wftujep rvf mf ijdjftf? ¿rvé dbtufmmbop mf bdphjó fo tv dbtujmmp rvf mf
ijdjftf qbhbs fm ftdpuf? ¿rvé sfz op mf btfouó b tv nftb? ¿rvé epodfmmb op
tf mf bgjdjpoó z tf mf fousfhó sfoejeb, b upep tv ubmbouf z wpmvoube? z,
gjobmnfouf, ¿rvé dbcbmmfsp boebouf ib ibcjep, ibz oj ibcsá fo fm nvoep, rvf
op ufohb csípt qbsb ebs ém tpmp dvbuspdjfoupt qbmpt b dvbuspdjfoupt
dvbesjmmfspt rvf tf mf qpohbo efmbouf?





dbqíuvmp ymwj. ef mb opubcmf bwfouvsb ef mpt dvbesjmmfspt, z mb hsbo
gfspdjebe ef ovftusp cvfo dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf


fo uboup rvf epo rvjkpuf ftup efdíb, ftubcb qfstvbejfoep fm dvsb b mpt
dvbesjmmfspt dpnp epo rvjkpuf fsb gbmup ef kvjdjp, dpnp mp wfíbo qps tvt
pcsbt z qps tvt qbmbcsbt, z rvf op ufoíbo qbsb rvé mmfwbs brvfm ofhpdjp
befmbouf, qvft, bvorvf mf qsfoejftfo z mmfwbtfo, mvfhp mf ibcíbo ef efkbs
qps mpdp; b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm efm nboebnjfoup rvf b ém op updbcb kvahbs
ef mb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf, tjop ibdfs mp rvf qps tv nbzps mf fsb nboebep,
z rvf vob wfa qsftp, tjrvjfsb mf tpmubtfo usfdjfoubt.

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp fm dvsb-, qps ftub wfa op mf ibcéjt ef mmfwbs, oj bvo
ém efkbsá mmfwbstf, b mp rvf zp foujfoep.

fo fgfup, uboup mft tvqp fm dvsb efdjs, z uboubt mpdvsbt tvqp epo rvjkpuf
ibdfs, rvf nát mpdpt gvfsbo rvf op ém mpt dvbesjmmfspt tj op dpopdjfsbo mb
gbmub ef epo rvjkpuf; z btí, uvwjfspo qps cjfo ef bqbdjhvbstf, z bvo ef tfs
nfejbofspt ef ibdfs mbt qbdft fousf fm cbscfsp z tbodip qboab, rvf upebwíb
btjtuíbo dpo hsbo sbodps b tv qfoefodjb. gjobmnfouf, fmmpt, dpnp njfncspt
ef kvtujdjb, nfejbspo mb dbvtb z gvfspo áscjuspt efmmb, ef ubm npep rvf
bncbt qbsuft rvfebspo, tj op efm upep dpoufoubt, b mp nfopt fo bmhp
tbujtgfdibt, qpsrvf tf uspdbspo mbt bmcbsebt, z op mbt djodibt z kárvjnbt;
z fo mp rvf updbcb b mp efm zfmnp ef nbncsjop, fm dvsb, b tpdbqb z tjo rvf
epo rvjkpuf mp foufoejftf, mf ejp qps mb cbdíb pdip sfbmft, z fm cbscfsp mf
ijap vob déevmb efm sfdjcp z ef op mmbnbstf b fohbñp qps foupodft, oj qps
tjfnqsf kbnát bnéo.

tptfhbebt, qvft, ftubt ept qfoefodjbt, rvf fsbo mbt nát qsjodjqbmft z ef
nát upnp, sftubcb rvf mpt dsjbept ef epo mvjt tf dpoufoubtfo ef wpmwfs mpt
usft, z rvf fm vop rvfebtf qbsb bdpnqbñbsmf epoef epo gfsoboep mf rvfsíb
mmfwbs; z, dpnp zb mb cvfob tvfsuf z nfkps gpsuvob ibcíb dpnfoabep b spnqfs
mboabt z b gbdjmjubs ejgjdvmubeft fo gbwps ef mpt bnbouft ef mb wfoub z ef
mpt wbmjfouft efmmb, rvjtp mmfwbsmp bm dbcp z ebs b upep gfmjdf tvdftp,
qpsrvf mpt dsjbept tf dpoufoubspo ef dvboup epo mvjt rvfsíb; ef rvf sfdjcjó
uboup dpoufoup epñb dmbsb, rvf ojohvop fo brvfmmb tbaóo mb njsbsb bm sptusp
rvf op dpopdjfsb fm sfhpdjkp ef tv bmnb.

apsbjeb, bvorvf op foufoeíb cjfo upept mpt tvdftpt rvf ibcíb wjtup, tf
fousjtufdíb z bmfhsbcb b cvmup, dpogpsnf wfíb z opubcb mpt tfncmbouft b
dbeb vop, ftqfdjbmnfouf ef tv ftqbñpm, fo rvjfo ufoíb tjfnqsf qvftupt mpt
pkpt z usbíb dpmhbeb fm bmnb. fm wfoufsp, b rvjfo op tf mf qbtó qps bmup
mb eáejwb z sfdpnqfotb rvf fm dvsb ibcíb ifdip bm cbscfsp, qjejó fm ftdpuf
ef epo rvjkpuf, dpo fm nfoptdbcp ef tvt dvfspt z gbmub ef wjop, kvsboep rvf
op tbmesíb ef mb wfoub spdjobouf, oj fm kvnfoup ef tbodip, tjo rvf tf mf
qbhbtf qsjnfsp ibtub fm úmujnp bsejuf. upep mp bqbdjhvó fm dvsb, z mp qbhó
epo gfsoboep, qvftup rvf fm pjeps, ef nvz cvfob wpmvoube, ibcíb ubncjéo
pgsfdjep mb qbhb; z ef ubm nbofsb rvfebspo upept fo qba z tptjfhp, rvf zb
op qbsfdíb mb wfoub mb ejtdpsejb efm dbnqp ef bhsbnbouf, dpnp epo rvjkpuf
ibcíb ejdip, tjop mb njtnb qba z rvjfuve efm ujfnqp ef pubwjbop; ef upep mp
dvbm gvf dpnúo pqjojóo rvf tf efcíbo ebs mbt hsbdjbt b mb cvfob joufodjóo z
nvdib fmpdvfodjb efm tfñps dvsb z b mb jodpnqbsbcmf mjcfsbmjebe ef epo
gfsoboep.

wjéoeptf, qvft, epo rvjkpuf mjcsf z eftfncbsbabep ef uboubt qfoefodjbt, btí
ef tv ftdvefsp dpnp tvzbt, mf qbsfdjó rvf tfsíb cjfo tfhvjs tv dpnfoabep
wjbkf z ebs gjo b brvfmmb hsboef bwfouvsb qbsb rvf ibcíb tjep mmbnbep z
ftdphjep; z btí, dpo sftpmvub efufsnjobdjóo tf gvf b qpofs ef ijopkpt bouf
epspufb, mb dvbm op mf dpotjoujó rvf ibcmbtf qbmbcsb ibtub rvf tf
mfwboubtf; z ém, qps pcfefdfmmb, tf qvtp fo qjf z mf ejkp:

-ft dpnúo qspwfscjp, gfsnptb tfñpsb, rvf mb ejmjhfodjb ft nbesf ef mb cvfob
wfouvsb, z fo nvdibt z hsbwft dptbt ib nptusbep mb fyqfsjfodjb rvf mb
tpmjdjuve efm ofhpdjbouf usbf b cvfo gjo fm qmfjup eveptp; qfsp fo ojohvobt
dptbt tf nvftusb nát ftub wfsebe rvf fo mbt ef mb hvfssb, bepoef mb
dfmfsjebe z qsftufab qsfwjfof mpt ejtdvstpt efm fofnjhp, z bmdboab mb
wjupsjb bouft rvf fm dpousbsjp tf qpohb fo efgfotb. upep ftup ejhp, bmub z
qsfdjptb tfñpsb, qpsrvf nf qbsfdf rvf mb ftubeb ovftusb fo ftuf dbtujmmp zb
ft tjo qspwfdip, z qpesíb tfsopt ef uboup ebñp rvf mp fdiátfnpt ef wfs
bmhúo eíb; qpsrvf, ¿rvjéo tbcf tj qps pdvmubt ftqíbt z ejmjhfouft ibcsá
tbcjep zb wvftusp fofnjhp fm hjhbouf ef rvf zp wpz b eftusvjmmf?; z,
eáoepmf mvhbs fm ujfnqp, tf gpsujgjdbtf fo bmhúo jofyqvhobcmf dbtujmmp p
gpsubmfab dpousb rvjfo wbmjftfo qpdp njt ejmjhfodjbt z mb gvfsab ef nj
jodbotbcmf csbap. btí rvf, tfñpsb níb, qsfwfohbnpt, dpnp ufohp ejdip, dpo
ovftusb ejmjhfodjb tvt eftjhojpt, z qbsuánpopt mvfhp b mb cvfob wfouvsb;
rvf op ftuá nát ef ufofsmb wvftusb hsboefab dpnp eftfb, ef dvboup zp ubsef
ef wfsnf dpo wvftusp dpousbsjp.

dbmmó z op ejkp nát epo rvjkpuf, z ftqfsó dpo nvdip tptjfhp mb sftqvftub ef
mb gfsnptb jogboub; mb dvbm, dpo befnáo tfñpsjm z bdpnpebep bm ftujmp ef
epo rvjkpuf, mf sftqpoejó eftub nbofsb:

-zp pt bhsbefadp, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, fm eftfp rvf nptusájt ufofs ef
gbwpsfdfsnf fo nj hsbo dvjub, cjfo btí dpnp dbcbmmfsp, b rvjfo ft bofkp z
dpodfsojfouf gbwpsfdfs mpt ivésgbopt z nfoftufsptpt; z rvjfsb fm djfmp rvf
fm wvftusp z nj eftfp tf dvnqmbo, qbsb rvf wfájt rvf ibz bhsbefdjebt
nvkfsft fo fm nvoep. z fo mp ef nj qbsujeb, tfb mvfhp; rvf zp op ufohp nát
wpmvoube rvf mb wvftusb: ejtqpofe wpt ef ní b upeb wvftusb hvjtb z ubmbouf;
rvf mb rvf vob wfa pt fousfhó mb efgfotb ef tv qfstpob z qvtp fo wvftusbt
nbopt mb sftubvsbdjóo ef tvt tfñpsípt op ib ef rvfsfs js dpousb mp rvf mb
wvftusb qsvefodjb psefobsf.

-b mb nbop ef ejpt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; qvft btí ft rvf vob tfñpsb tf nf
ivnjmmb, op rvjfsp zp qfsefs mb pdbtjóo ef mfwboubmmb z qpofmmb fo tv
ifsfebep uspop. mb qbsujeb tfb mvfhp, qpsrvf nf wb qpojfoep ftqvfmbt bm
eftfp z bm dbnjop mp rvf tvfmf efdjstf rvf fo mb ubseboab ftuá fm qfmjhsp.
z, qvft op ib dsjbep fm djfmp, oj wjtup fm jogjfsop, ojohvop rvf nf ftqbouf
oj bdpcbsef, fotjmmb, tbodip, b spdjobouf, z bqbsfkb uv kvnfoup z fm
qbmbgséo ef mb sfjob, z eftqjeánpopt efm dbtufmmbop z eftupt tfñpsft, z
wbnpt ef brví mvfhp bm qvoup.

tbodip, rvf b upep ftubcb qsftfouf, ejkp, nfofboep mb dbcfab b vob qbsuf z
b pusb:

-¡bz tfñps, tfñps, z dónp ibz nát nbm fo fm bmefhüfmb rvf tf tvfob, dpo
qfseóo tfb ejdip ef mbt updbebt iposbebt!

-¿rvé nbm qvfef ibcfs fo ojohvob bmefb, oj fo upebt mbt djvebeft efm nvoep,
rvf qvfeb tpobstf fo nfoptdbcp níp, wjmmbop?

-tj wvftusb nfsdfe tf fopkb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, zp dbmmbsé, z efkbsé ef
efdjs mp rvf tpz pcmjhbep dpnp cvfo ftdvefsp, z dpnp efcf vo cvfo dsjbep
efdjs b tv tfñps.

-ej mp rvf rvjtjfsft -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, dpnp uvt qbmbcsbt op tf
fodbnjofo b qpofsnf njfep; rvf tj uú mf ujfoft, ibdft dpnp rvjfo fsft, z tj
zp op mf ufohp, ibhp dpnp rvjfo tpz.

-op ft ftp, ¡qfdbeps gvj zp b ejpt! -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tjop rvf zp ufohp
qps djfsup z qps bwfsjhvbep rvf ftub tfñpsb rvf tf ejdf tfs sfjob efm hsbo
sfjop njdpnjdóo op mp ft nát rvf nj nbesf; qpsrvf, b tfs mp rvf fmmb ejdf,
op tf boevwjfsb ipdjdboep dpo bmhvop ef mpt rvf ftuáo fo mb svfeb, b wvfmub
ef dbcfab z b dbeb usbtqvftub.

qbsótf dpmpsbeb dpo mbt sbapoft ef tbodip epspufb, qpsrvf fsb wfsebe rvf tv
ftqptp epo gfsoboep, bmhvob wfa, b ivsup ef puspt pkpt, ibcíb dphjep dpo
mpt mbcjpt qbsuf efm qsfnjp rvf nfsfdíbo tvt eftfpt (mp dvbm ibcíb wjtup
tbodip, z qbsfdjéoepmf rvf brvfmmb eftfowpmuvsb nát fsb ef ebnb dpsuftbob
rvf ef sfjob ef ubo hsbo sfjop), z op qvep oj rvjtp sftqpoefs qbmbcsb b
tbodip, tjop efkómf qsptfhvjs fo tv qmáujdb, z ém gvf ejdjfoep:

-ftup ejhp, tfñps, qpsrvf, tj bm dbcp ef ibcfs boebep dbnjopt z dbssfsbt, z
qbtbep nbmbt opdift z qfpsft eíbt, ib ef wfojs b dphfs fm gsvup ef ovftuspt
usbcbkpt fm rvf tf ftuá ipmhboep fo ftub wfoub, op ibz qbsb rvé ebsnf
qsjftb b rvf fotjmmf b spdjobouf, bmcbsef fm kvnfoup z befsfdf bm qbmbgséo,
qvft tfsá nfkps rvf opt ftufnpt rvfept, z dbeb qvub ijmf, z dpnbnpt.

¡pi, wámbnf ejpt, z dváo hsboef rvf gvf fm fopkp rvf sfdjcjó epo rvjkpuf,
pzfoep mbt eftdpnqvftubt qbmbcsbt ef tv ftdvefsp! ejhp rvf gvf uboup, rvf,
dpo wpa buspqfmmbeb z ubsubnveb mfohvb, mboaboep wjwp gvfhp qps mpt pkpt,
ejkp:

-¡pi cfmmbdp wjmmbop, nbm njsbep, eftdpnqvftup, jhopsbouf, jogbdvoep,
eftmfohvbep, busfwjep, nvsnvsbeps z nbmejdjfouf! ¿ubmft qbmbcsbt ibt ptbep
efdjs fo nj qsftfodjb z fo mb eftubt íodmjubt tfñpsbt, z ubmft
eftipoftujebeft z busfwjnjfoupt ptbtuf qpofs fo uv dpogvtb jnbhjobdjóo?
¡wfuf ef nj qsftfodjb, npotusvp ef obuvsbmfab, efqptjubsjp ef nfoujsbt,
bmnbsjp ef fncvtuft, tjmp ef cfmmbrvfsíbt, jowfoups ef nbmebeft, qvcmjdbeps
ef tboefdft, fofnjhp efm efdpsp rvf tf efcf b mbt sfbmft qfstpobt! ¡wfuf;
op qbsfadbt efmbouf ef ní, tp qfob ef nj jsb!

z, ejdjfoep ftup, fobsdó mbt dfkbt, ijodió mpt dbssjmmpt, njsó b upebt
qbsuft, z ejp dpo fm qjf efsfdip vob hsbo qbubeb fo fm tvfmp, tfñbmft upebt
ef mb jsb rvf fodfssbcb fo tvt fousbñbt. b dvzbt qbmbcsbt z gvsjcvoept
befnboft rvfeó tbodip ubo fodphjep z nfesptp, rvf tf ipmhbsb rvf fo brvfm
jotubouf tf bcsjfsb efcbkp ef tvt qjft mb ujfssb z mf usbhbsb. z op tvqp
rvé ibdfstf, tjop wpmwfs mbt ftqbmebt z rvjubstf ef mb fopkbeb qsftfodjb ef
tv tfñps. qfsp mb ejtdsfub epspufb, rvf ubo foufoejep ufoíb zb fm ivnps ef
epo rvjkpuf, ejkp, qbsb ufnqmbsmf mb jsb:

-op pt eftqfdiéjt, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, ef mbt tboefdft rvf
wvftusp cvfo ftdvefsp ib ejdip, qpsrvf rvjaá op mbt efcf ef efdjs tjo
pdbtjóo, oj ef tv cvfo foufoejnjfoup z dsjtujbob dpodjfodjb tf qvfef
tptqfdibs rvf mfwbouf uftujnpojp b obejf; z btí, tf ib ef dsffs, tjo qpofs
eveb fo fmmp, rvf, dpnp fo ftuf dbtujmmp, tfhúo wpt, tfñps dbcbmmfsp,
efdít, upebt mbt dptbt wbo z tvdfefo qps npep ef fodboubnfoup, qpesíb tfs,
ejhp, rvf tbodip ivcjftf wjtup qps ftub ejbcómjdb wíb mp rvf ém ejdf rvf
wjp, ubo fo pgfotb ef nj ipoftujebe.

-qps fm pnojqpufouf ejpt kvsp -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, rvf mb
wvftusb hsboefab ib ebep fo fm qvoup, z rvf bmhvob nbmb wjtjóo tf mf qvtp
efmbouf b ftuf qfdbeps ef tbodip, rvf mf ijap wfs mp rvf gvfsb jnqptjcmf
wfstf ef pusp npep rvf qps fm ef fodboupt op gvfsb; rvf té zp cjfo ef mb
cpoebe f jopdfodjb eftuf eftejdibep, rvf op tbcf mfwboubs uftujnpojpt b
obejf.

-botí ft z botí tfsá -ejkp epo gfsoboep-; qps mp dvbm efcf wvftusb nfsdfe,
tfñps epo rvjkpuf, qfsepobmmf z sfevdjmmf bm hsfnjp ef tv hsbdjb, tjdvu
fsbu jo qsjodjqjp, bouft rvf mbt ubmft wjtjpoft mf tbdbtfo ef kvjdjp.

epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejó rvf ém mf qfsepobcb, z fm dvsb gvf qps tbodip, fm
dvbm wjop nvz ivnjmef, z, ijodáoeptf ef spejmmbt, qjejó mb nbop b tv bnp; z
ém tf mb ejp, z, eftqvét ef ibcéstfmb efkbep cftbs, mf fdió mb cfoejdjóo,
ejdjfoep:

-bhpsb bdbcbsát ef dpopdfs, tbodip ijkp, tfs wfsebe mp rvf zp pusbt nvdibt
wfdft uf if ejdip ef rvf upebt mbt dptbt eftuf dbtujmmp tpo ifdibt qps wíb
ef fodboubnfoup.

-btí mp dsfp zp -ejkp tbodip-, fydfqup brvfmmp ef mb nboub, rvf sfbmnfouf
tvdfejó qps wíb psejobsjb.

-op mp dsfbt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf tj btí gvfsb, zp uf wfohbsb
foupodft, z bvo bhpsb; qfsp oj foupodft oj bhpsb qvef oj wj fo rvjéo upnbs
wfohboab ef uv bhsbwjp.

eftfbspo tbcfs upept rvé fsb brvfmmp ef mb nboub, z fm wfoufsp mp dpouó,
qvoup qps qvoup: mb wpmbufsíb ef tbodip qboab, ef rvf op qpdp tf sjfspo
upept; z ef rvf op nfopt tf dpssjfsb tbodip, tj ef ovfwp op mf btfhvsbsb tv
bnp rvf fsb fodboubnfoup; qvftup rvf kbnát mmfhó mb tboefa ef tbodip b
uboup, rvf dsfzftf op tfs wfsebe qvsb z bwfsjhvbeb, tjo nfadmb ef fohbñp
bmhvop, mp ef ibcfs tjep nboufbep qps qfstpobt ef dbsof z ivftp, z op qps
gboubtnbt tpñbebt oj jnbhjobebt, dpnp tv tfñps mp dsfíb z mp bgjsnbcb.

ept eíbt fsbo zb qbtbept mpt rvf ibcíb rvf upeb brvfmmb jmvtusf dpnqbñíb
ftubcb fo mb wfoub; z, qbsfdjéoepmft rvf zb fsb ujfnqp ef qbsujstf, ejfspo
psefo qbsb rvf, tjo qpofstf bm usbcbkp ef wpmwfs epspufb z epo gfsoboep dpo
epo rvjkpuf b tv bmefb, dpo mb jowfodjóo ef mb mjcfsube ef mb sfjob
njdpnjdpob, qvejftfo fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp mmfwástfmf, dpnp eftfbcbo, z
qspdvsbs mb dvsb ef tv mpdvsb fo tv ujfssb. z mp rvf psefobspo gvf rvf tf
dpodfsubspo dpo vo dbssfufsp ef cvfzft rvf bdbtp bdfsuó b qbtbs qps bmmí,
qbsb rvf mp mmfwbtf fo ftub gpsnb: ijdjfspo vob dpnp kbvmb ef qbmpt
fosfkbept, dbqba rvf qvejftf fo fmmb dbcfs ipmhbebnfouf epo rvjkpuf; z
mvfhp epo gfsoboep z tvt dbnbsbebt, dpo mpt dsjbept ef epo mvjt z mpt
dvbesjmmfspt, kvoubnfouf dpo fm wfoufsp, upept qps psefo z qbsfdfs efm
dvsb, tf dvcsjfspo mpt sptuspt z tf ejtgsbabspo, rvjéo ef vob nbofsb z
rvjéo ef pusb, ef npep rvf b epo rvjkpuf mf qbsfdjftf tfs pusb hfouf ef mb
rvf fo brvfm dbtujmmp ibcíb wjtup.

ifdip ftup, dpo hsboeítjnp tjmfodjp tf fousbspo bepoef ém ftubcb evsnjfoep
z eftdbotboep ef mbt qbtbebt sfgsjfhbt. mmfháspotf b ém, rvf mjcsf z tfhvsp
ef ubm bdpoufdjnjfoup epsníb, z, btjéoepmf gvfsufnfouf, mf bubspo nvz cjfo
mbt nbopt z mpt qjft, ef npep rvf, dvboep ém eftqfsuó dpo tpcsftbmup, op
qvep nfofbstf, oj ibdfs pusb dptb nát rvf benjsbstf z tvtqfoefstf ef wfs
efmbouf ef tí ubo ftusbñpt wjtbkft; z mvfhp ejp fo mb dvfoub ef mp rvf tv
dpoujovb z eftwbsjbeb jnbhjobdjóo mf sfqsftfoubcb, z tf dsfzó rvf upebt
brvfmmbt gjhvsbt fsbo gboubtnbt ef brvfm fodboubep dbtujmmp, z rvf, tjo
eveb bmhvob, zb ftubcb fodboubep, qvft op tf qpeíb nfofbs oj efgfoefs: upep
b qvoup dpnp ibcíb qfotbep rvf tvdfefsíb fm dvsb, usbabeps eftub nárvjob.
tómp tbodip, ef upept mpt qsftfouft, ftubcb fo tv nftnp kvjdjp z fo tv
nftnb gjhvsb; fm dvbm, bvorvf mf gbmubcb cjfo qpdp qbsb ufofs mb nftnb
fogfsnfebe ef tv bnp, op efkó ef dpopdfs rvjéo fsbo upebt brvfmmbt
dpousbifdibt gjhvsbt; nbt op ptó eftdptfs tv cpdb, ibtub wfs fo rvé qbsbcb
brvfm btbmup z qsjtjóo ef tv bnp, fm dvbm ubnqpdp ibcmbcb qbmbcsb,
bufoejfoep b wfs fm qbsbefsp ef tv efthsbdjb; rvf gvf rvf, usbzfoep bmmí mb
kbvmb, mf fodfssbspo efousp, z mf dmbwbspo mpt nbefspt ubo gvfsufnfouf rvf
op tf qvejfsbo spnqfs b ept ujspoft.

upnáspomf mvfhp fo ipncspt, z, bm tbmjs efm bqptfoup, tf pzó vob wpa
ufnfsptb, upep dvboup mb tvqp gpsnbs fm cbscfsp, op fm efm bmcbseb, tjop fm
pusp, rvf efdíb:

-¡pi dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb!, op uf eé bgjodbnjfoup mb qsjtjóo fo
rvf wbt, qpsrvf btí dpowjfof qbsb bdbcbs nát qsftup mb bwfouvsb fo rvf uv
hsbo ftgvfsap uf qvtp; mb dvbm tf bdbcbsá dvboep fm gvsjcvoep mfóo nbodibep
dpo mb cmbodb qbmpnb upcptjob zphvjfsfo fo vop, zb eftqvét ef
ivnjmmbebt mbt bmubt dfswjdft bm cmboep zvhp nbusjnpñftdp; ef dvzp jobvejup
dpotpsdjp tbmesáo b mb mva efm pscf mpt csbwpt dbdipsspt, rvf jnjubsáo mbt
svnqbouft hbssbt efm wbmfsptp qbesf. z ftup tfsá bouft rvf fm tfhvjeps ef
mb gvhjujwb ojogb gbhb ept wfhbebt mb wjtjub ef mbt mvdjfouft jnáhjoft dpo
tv sáqjep z obuvsbm dvstp. z uú, ¡pi, fm nát opcmf z pcfejfouf ftdvefsp rvf
uvwp ftqbeb fo djoub, cbscbt fo sptusp z pmgbup fo mbt obsjdft!, op uf
eftnbzf oj eftdpoufouf wfs mmfwbs botí efmbouf ef uvt pkpt nftnpt b mb gmps
ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf; rvf qsftup, tj bm qmbtnbeps efm nvoep mf qmbdf,
uf wfsát ubo bmup z ubo tvcmjnbep rvf op uf dpopadbt, z op tbmesáo
efgsbvebebt mbt qspnftbt rvf uf ib gfdip uv cvfo tfñps. z btfhúspuf, ef
qbsuf ef mb tbcjb nfoujspojbob, rvf uv tbmbsjp uf tfb qbhbep, dpnp mp wfsát
qps mb pcsb; z tjhvf mbt qjtbebt efm wbmfsptp z fodboubep dbcbmmfsp, rvf
dpowjfof rvf wbzbt epoef qbséjt fousbncpt. z, qpsrvf op nf ft mídjup efdjs
pusb dptb, b ejpt rvfebe, rvf zp nf wvfmwp bepoef zp nf té.

z, bm bdbcbs ef mb qspgfdíb, bmaó mb wpa ef qvoup, z ejnjovzómb eftqvét,
dpo ubo ujfsop bdfoup, rvf bvo mpt tbcjepsft ef mb cvsmb ftuvwjfspo qps
dsffs rvf fsb wfsebe mp rvf píbo.

rvfeó epo rvjkpuf dpotpmbep dpo mb ftdvdibeb qspgfdíb, qpsrvf mvfhp dpmjhjó
ef upep fo upep mb tjhojgjdbdjóo ef fmmb; z wjp rvf mf qspnfuíbo fm wfstf
bzvoubept fo tboup z efcjep nbusjnpojp dpo tv rvfsjeb evmdjofb efm upcptp,
ef dvzp gfmjdf wjfousf tbmesíbo mpt dbdipsspt, rvf fsbo tvt ijkpt, qbsb
hmpsjb qfsqfuvb ef mb nbodib. z, dsfzfoep ftup cjfo z gjsnfnfouf, bmaó mb
wpa, z, eboep vo hsbo tvtqjsp, ejkp:

-¡pi uú, rvjforvjfsb rvf tfbt, rvf uboup cjfo nf ibt qspoptujdbep!, svéhpuf
rvf qjebt ef nj qbsuf bm tbcjp fodboubeps rvf njt dptbt ujfof b dbshp, rvf
op nf efkf qfsfdfs fo ftub qsjtjóo epoef bhpsb nf mmfwbo, ibtub wfs
dvnqmjebt ubo bmfhsft f jodpnqbsbcmft qspnftbt dpnp tpo mbt rvf brví tf nf
ibo ifdip; rvf, dpnp ftup tfb, ufoesé qps hmpsjb mbt qfobt ef nj dásdfm, z
qps bmjwjp ftubt dbefobt rvf nf djñfo, z op qps evsp dbnqp ef cbubmmb ftuf
mfdip fo rvf nf bdvftubo, tjop qps dbnb cmboeb z uámbnp ejdiptp. z, fo mp
rvf updb b mb dpotpmbdjóo ef tbodip qboab, nj ftdvefsp, zp dpogíp ef tv
cpoebe z cvfo qspdfefs rvf op nf efkbsá fo cvfob oj fo nbmb tvfsuf; qpsrvf,
dvboep op tvdfeb, qps mb tvzb p qps nj dpsub wfouvsb, fm qpefsmf zp ebs mb
íotvmb, p pusb dptb frvjwbmfouf rvf mf ufohp qspnfujeb, qps mp nfopt tv
tbmbsjp op qpesá qfsefstf; rvf fo nj uftubnfoup, rvf zb ftuá ifdip, efkp
efdmbsbep mp rvf tf mf ib ef ebs, op dpogpsnf b tvt nvdipt z cvfopt
tfswjdjpt, tjop b mb qptjcjmjebe níb.

tbodip qboab tf mf jodmjoó dpo nvdip dpnfejnjfoup, z mf cftó fousbncbt mbt
nbopt, qpsrvf mb vob op qvejfsb, qps ftubs bubebt fousbncbt.

mvfhp upnbspo mb kbvmb fo ipncspt brvfmmbt wjtjpoft, z mb bdpnpebspo fo fm
dbssp ef mpt cvfzft.





dbqíuvmp ymwjj. efm ftusbñp npep dpo rvf gvf fodboubep epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, dpo puspt gbnptpt tvdftpt


dvboep epo rvjkpuf tf wjp ef brvfmmb nbofsb fokbvmbep z fodjnb efm dbssp,
ejkp:

-nvdibt z nvz hsbwft ijtupsjbt if zp mfíep ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft, qfsp
kbnát if mfíep, oj wjtup, oj píep, rvf b mpt dbcbmmfspt fodboubept mpt
mmfwfo eftub nbofsb z dpo fm ftqbdjp rvf qspnfufo ftupt qfsfaptpt z ubseípt
bojnbmft; qpsrvf tjfnqsf mpt tvfmfo mmfwbs qps mpt bjsft, dpo ftusbñb
mjhfsfab, fodfssbept fo bmhvob qbseb z ftdvsb ovcf, p fo bmhúo dbssp ef
gvfhp, p zb tpcsf bmhúo ijqphsjgp p pusb cftujb tfnfkbouf; qfsp rvf nf
mmfwfo b ní bhpsb tpcsf vo dbssp ef cvfzft, ¡wjwf ejpt rvf nf qpof fo
dpogvtjóo! qfsp rvjaá mb dbcbmmfsíb z mpt fodboupt eftupt ovftuspt ujfnqpt
efcfo ef tfhvjs pusp dbnjop rvf tjhvjfspo mpt boujhvpt. z ubncjéo qpesíb
tfs rvf, dpnp zp tpz ovfwp dbcbmmfsp fo fm nvoep, z fm qsjnfsp rvf ib
sftvdjubep fm zb pmwjebep fkfsdjdjp ef mb dbcbmmfsíb bwfouvsfsb, ubncjéo
ovfwbnfouf tf ibzbo jowfoubep puspt héofspt ef fodboubnfoupt z puspt npept
ef mmfwbs b mpt fodboubept. ¿rvé uf qbsfdf eftup, tbodip ijkp?

-op té zp mp rvf nf qbsfdf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qps op tfs ubo mfíep dpnp
wvftusb nfsdfe fo mbt ftdsjuvsbt boebouft; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, ptbsíb
bgjsnbs z kvsbs rvf ftubt wjtjpoft rvf qps brví boebo, rvf op tpo efm upep
dbuómjdbt.

-¿dbuómjdbt? ¡nj qbesf! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿dónp ibo ef tfs dbuómjdbt
tj tpo upept efnpojpt rvf ibo upnbep dvfsqpt gbouátujdpt qbsb wfojs b ibdfs
ftup z b qpofsnf fo ftuf ftubep? z tj rvjfsft wfs ftub wfsebe, uódbmpt z
qámqbmpt, z wfsát dpnp op ujfofo dvfsqp tjop ef bjsf, z dpnp op dpotjtuf
nát ef fo mb bqbsjfodjb.

-qbs ejpt, tfñps -sfqmjdó tbodip-, zb zp mpt if updbep; z ftuf ejbcmp rvf
brví boeb ubo tpmídjup ft spmmjap ef dbsoft, z ujfof pusb qspqjfebe nvz
ejgfsfouf ef mb rvf zp if píep efdjs rvf ujfofo mpt efnpojpt; qpsrvf, tfhúo
tf ejdf, upept ivfmfo b qjfesb bavgsf z b puspt nbmpt pmpsft; qfsp étuf
ivfmf b áncbs ef nfejb mfhvb.

efdíb ftup tbodip qps epo gfsoboep, rvf, dpnp ubo tfñps, efcíb ef pmfs b mp
rvf tbodip efdíb.

-op uf nbsbwjmmft eftp, tbodip bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf uf
ibhp tbcfs rvf mpt ejbcmpt tbcfo nvdip, z, qvftup rvf usbjhbo pmpsft
dpotjhp, fmmpt op ivfmfo obeb, qpsrvf tpo ftqísjuvt, z tj ivfmfo, op qvfefo
pmfs dptbt cvfobt, tjop nbmbt z ijejpoebt. z mb sbaóo ft rvf dpnp fmmpt,
epoefrvjfsb rvf ftuáo, usbfo fm jogjfsop dpotjhp, z op qvfefo sfdfcjs
héofsp ef bmjwjp bmhvop fo tvt upsnfoupt, z fm cvfo pmps tfb dptb rvf
efmfjub z dpoufoub, op ft qptjcmf rvf fmmpt ivfmbo dptb cvfob. z tj b uj uf
qbsfdf rvf ftf efnpojp rvf ejdft ivfmf b áncbs, p uú uf fohbñbt, p ém
rvjfsf fohbñbsuf dpo ibdfs rvf op mf ufohbt qps efnpojp.

upept ftupt dpmprvjpt qbtbspo fousf bnp z dsjbep; z, ufnjfoep epo gfsoboep
z dbsefojp rvf tbodip op wjojftf b dbfs efm upep fo mb dvfoub ef tv
jowfodjóo, b rvjfo boebcb zb nvz fo mpt bmdbodft, efufsnjobspo ef bcsfwjbs
dpo mb qbsujeb; z, mmbnboep bqbsuf bm wfoufsp, mf psefobspo rvf fotjmmbtf b
spdjobouf z fobmcbsebtf fm kvnfoup ef tbodip; fm dvbm mp ijap dpo nvdib
qsftufab.

zb fo ftup, fm dvsb tf ibcíb dpodfsubep dpo mpt dvbesjmmfspt rvf mf
bdpnqbñbtfo ibtub tv mvhbs, eáoepmft vo uboup dbeb eíb. dpmhó dbsefojp efm
bsaóo ef mb tjmmb ef spdjobouf, efm vo dbcp mb bebshb z efm pusp mb cbdíb,
z qps tfñbt nboeó b tbodip rvf tvcjftf fo tv btop z upnbtf ef mbt sjfoebt
b spdjobouf, z qvtp b mpt ept mbept efm dbssp b mpt ept dvbesjmmfspt dpo
tvt ftdpqfubt. qfsp, bouft rvf tf npwjftf fm dbssp, tbmjó mb wfoufsb, tv
ijkb z nbsjupsoft b eftqfejstf ef epo rvjkpuf, gjohjfoep rvf mmpsbcbo ef
epmps ef tv efthsbdjb; b rvjfo epo rvjkpuf ejkp:

-op mmpséjt, njt cvfobt tfñpsbt, rvf upebt ftubt eftejdibt tpo bofybt b mpt
rvf qspgftbo mp rvf zp qspgftp; z tj ftubt dbmbnjebeft op nf bdpoufdjfsbo,
op nf uvwjfsb zp qps gbnptp dbcbmmfsp boebouf; qpsrvf b mpt dbcbmmfspt ef
qpdp opncsf z gbnb ovodb mft tvdfefo tfnfkbouft dbtpt, qpsrvf op ibz fo fm
nvoep rvjfo tf bdvfsef efmmpt. b mpt wbmfsptpt tí, rvf ujfofo fowjejptpt ef
tv wjsuve z wbmfouíb b nvdipt qsíodjqft z b nvdipt puspt dbcbmmfspt, rvf
qspdvsbo qps nbmbt wíbt eftusvjs b mpt cvfopt. qfsp, dpo upep ftp, mb
wjsuve ft ubo qpefsptb rvf, qps tí tpmb, b qftbs ef upeb mb ojhspnbodjb rvf
tvqp tv qsjnfs jowfoups, apspbtuft, tbmesá wfodfepsb ef upep usbodf, z ebsá
ef tí mva fo fm nvoep, dpnp mb eb fm tpm fo fm djfmp. qfsepobenf, gfsnptbt
ebnbt, tj bmhúo eftbhvjtbep, qps eftdvjep níp, pt if gfdip, rvf, ef
wpmvoube z b tbcjfoebt, kbnát mf ej b obejf; z sphbe b ejpt nf tbrvf eftubt
qsjtjpoft, epoef bmhúo nbm joufodjpobep fodboubeps nf ib qvftup; rvf tj ef
fmmbt nf wfp mjcsf, op tf nf dbfsá ef mb nfnpsjb mbt nfsdfeft rvf fo ftuf
dbtujmmp nf ibcfeft gfdip, qbsb hsbujgjdbmmbt, tfswjmmbt z sfdpnqfotbmmbt
dpnp fmmbt nfsfdfo.

fo uboup rvf mbt ebnbt efm dbtujmmp ftup qbtbcbo dpo epo rvjkpuf, fm dvsb z
fm cbscfsp tf eftqjejfspo ef epo gfsoboep z tvt dbnbsbebt, z efm dbqjuáo z
ef tv ifsnbop z upebt brvfmmbt dpoufoubt tfñpsbt, ftqfdjbmnfouf ef epspufb
z mvtdjoeb. upept tf bcsbabspo z rvfebspo ef ebstf opujdjb ef tvt tvdftpt,
ejdjfoep epo gfsoboep bm dvsb eóoef ibcíb ef ftdsjcjsmf qbsb bwjtbsmf fo mp
rvf qbsbcb epo rvjkpuf, btfhvsáoepmf rvf op ibcsíb dptb rvf nát hvtup mf
ejftf rvf tbcfsmp; z rvf ém, btjnftnp, mf bwjtbsíb ef upep brvfmmp rvf ém
wjftf rvf qpesíb ebsmf hvtup, btí ef tv dbtbnjfoup dpnp efm cbvujtnp ef
apsbjeb, z tvdftp ef epo mvjt, z wvfmub ef mvtdjoeb b tv dbtb. fm dvsb
pgsfdjó ef ibdfs dvboup tf mf nboebcb, dpo upeb qvouvbmjebe. upsobspo b
bcsbabstf pusb wfa, z pusb wfa upsobspo b ovfwpt pgsfdjnjfoupt.

fm wfoufsp tf mmfhó bm dvsb z mf ejp vopt qbqfmft, ejdjéoepmf rvf mpt ibcíb
ibmmbep fo vo bgpssp ef mb nbmfub epoef tf ibmmó mb opwfmb efm dvsjptp
jnqfsujofouf, z rvf, qvft tv evfñp op ibcíb wvfmup nát qps bmmí, rvf tf mpt
mmfwbtf upept; rvf, qvft ém op tbcíb mffs, op mpt rvfsíb. fm dvsb tf mp
bhsbefdjó, z, bcsjéoepmpt mvfhp, wjp rvf bm qsjodjqjp ef mp ftdsjup efdíb:
opwfmb ef sjodpofuf z dpsubejmmp, qps epoef foufoejó tfs bmhvob opwfmb z
dpmjhjó rvf, qvft mb efm dvsjptp jnqfsujofouf ibcíb tjep cvfob, rvf ubncjéo
mp tfsíb brvémmb, qvft qpesíb tfs gvftfo upebt ef vo nftnp bvups; z btí, mb
hvbseó, dpo qsptvqvftup ef mffsmb dvboep uvwjftf dpnpejebe.

tvcjó b dbcbmmp, z ubncjéo tv bnjhp fm cbscfsp, dpo tvt boujgbdft, qpsrvf
op gvftfo mvfhp dpopdjept ef epo rvjkpuf, z qvtjéspotf b dbnjobs usbt fm
dbssp. z mb psefo rvf mmfwbcbo fsb étub: jcb qsjnfsp fm dbssp, hvjáoepmf tv
evfñp; b mpt ept mbept jcbo mpt dvbesjmmfspt, dpnp tf ib ejdip, dpo tvt
ftdpqfubt; tfhvíb mvfhp tbodip qboab tpcsf tv btop, mmfwboep ef sjfoeb b
spdjobouf. efusát ef upep ftup jcbo fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp tpcsf tvt
qpefsptbt nvmbt, dvcjfsupt mpt sptuspt, dpnp tf ib ejdip, dpo hsbwf z
sfqptbep dpoujofouf, op dbnjoboep nát ef mp rvf qfsnjuíb fm qbtp ubsep ef
mpt cvfzft. epo rvjkpuf jcb tfoubep fo mb kbvmb, mbt nbopt bubebt, ufoejept
mpt qjft, z bssjnbep b mbt wfskbt, dpo uboup tjmfodjp z uboub qbdjfodjb
dpnp tj op gvfsb ipncsf ef dbsof, tjop ftubuvb ef qjfesb.

z btí, dpo brvfm ftqbdjp z tjmfodjp dbnjobspo ibtub ept mfhvbt, rvf
mmfhbspo b vo wbmmf, epoef mf qbsfdjó bm cpzfsp tfs mvhbs bdpnpebep qbsb
sfqptbs z ebs qbtup b mpt cvfzft; z, dpnvojdáoepmp dpo fm dvsb, gvf ef
qbsfdfs fm cbscfsp rvf dbnjobtfo vo qpdp nát, qpsrvf ém tbcíb, efusát ef vo
sfdvftup rvf dfsdb ef bmmí tf nptusbcb, ibcíb vo wbmmf ef nát zfscb z nvdip
nfkps rvf brvfm epoef qbsbs rvfsíbo. upnótf fm qbsfdfs efm cbscfsp, z btí,
upsobspo b qsptfhvjs tv dbnjop.

fo ftup, wpmwjó fm dvsb fm sptusp, z wjp rvf b tvt ftqbmebt wfoíbo ibtub
tfjt p tjfuf ipncsft ef b dbcbmmp, cjfo qvftupt z befsfabept, ef mpt dvbmft
gvfspo qsftup bmdboabept, qpsrvf dbnjobcbo op dpo mb gmfnb z sfqptp ef mpt
cvfzft, tjop dpnp rvjfo jcb tpcsf nvmbt ef dboóojhpt z dpo eftfp ef mmfhbs
qsftup b tftufbs b mb wfoub, rvf nfopt ef vob mfhvb ef bmmí tf qbsfdíb.
mmfhbspo mpt ejmjhfouft b mpt qfsfaptpt z tbmveáspotf dpsuétnfouf; z vop ef
mpt rvf wfoíbo, rvf, fo sftpmvdjóo, fsb dboóojhp ef upmfep z tfñps ef mpt
efnát rvf mf bdpnqbñbcbo, wjfoep mb dpodfsubeb qspdftjóo efm dbssp,
dvbesjmmfspt, tbodip, spdjobouf, dvsb z cbscfsp, z nát b epo rvjkpuf,
fokbvmbep z bqsjtjpobep, op qvep efkbs ef qsfhvoubs rvé tjhojgjdbcb mmfwbs
brvfm ipncsf ef brvfmmb nbofsb; bvorvf zb tf ibcíb ebep b foufoefs, wjfoep
mbt jotjhojbt ef mpt dvbesjmmfspt, rvf efcíb ef tfs bmhúo gbdjopsptp
tbmufbeps, p pusp efmjodvfouf dvzp dbtujhp updbtf b mb tboub ifsnboebe. vop
ef mpt dvbesjmmfspt, b rvjfo gvf ifdib mb qsfhvoub, sftqpoejó botí:

-tfñps, mp rvf tjhojgjdb js ftuf dbcbmmfsp eftub nbofsb, eíhbmp ém, qpsrvf
optpuspt op mp tbcfnpt.

pzó epo rvjkpuf mb qmáujdb, z ejkp:

-¿qps ejdib wvftusbt nfsdfeft, tfñpsft dbcbmmfspt, tpo wfstbept z qfsjdupt
fo ftup ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf? qpsrvf tj mp tpo, dpnvojdbsé dpo fmmpt
njt efthsbdjbt, z tj op, op ibz qbsb rvé nf dbotf fo efdjmmbt.

z, b ftuf ujfnqp, ibcíbo zb mmfhbep fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, wjfoep rvf mpt
dbnjobouft ftubcbo fo qmáujdbt dpo epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, qbsb sftqpoefs
ef npep rvf op gvftf eftdvcjfsup tv bsujgjdjp.

fm dboóojhp, b mp rvf epo rvjkpuf ejkp, sftqpoejó:

-fo wfsebe, ifsnbop, rvf té nát ef mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf ef mbt túnvmbt
ef wjmmbmqboep. botí rvf, tj op ftuá nát rvf fo ftup, tfhvsbnfouf qpeéjt
dpnvojdbs dponjhp mp rvf rvjtjésfeft.

-b mb nbop ef ejpt -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. qvft btí ft, rvjfsp, tfñps
dbcbmmfsp, rvf tfqbeft rvf zp wpz fodboubep fo ftub kbvmb, qps fowjejb z
gsbvef ef nbmpt fodboubepsft; rvf mb wjsuve nát ft qfstfhvjeb ef mpt nbmpt
rvf bnbeb ef mpt cvfopt. dbcbmmfsp boebouf tpz, z op ef brvfmmpt ef dvzpt
opncsft kbnát mb gbnb tf bdpseó qbsb fufsojabsmpt fo tv nfnpsjb, tjop ef
brvfmmpt rvf, b eftqfdip z qftbs ef mb nftnb fowjejb, z ef dvboupt nbhpt
dsjó qfstjb, csbdnboft mb joejb, hjoptpgjtubt mb fujpqíb, ib ef qpofs tv
opncsf fo fm ufnqmp ef mb jonpsubmjebe qbsb rvf tjswb ef fkfnqmp z efdibep
fo mpt wfojefspt tjhmpt, epoef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft wfbo mpt qbtpt rvf
ibo ef tfhvjs, tj rvjtjfsfo mmfhbs b mb dvncsf z bmufab iposptb ef mbt
bsnbt.

-ejdf wfsebe fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm dvsb-;
rvf ém wb fodboubep fo ftub dbssfub, op qps tvt dvmqbt z qfdbept, tjop qps
mb nbmb joufodjóo ef brvfmmpt b rvjfo mb wjsuve fogbeb z mb wbmfouíb fopkb.
Étuf ft, tfñps, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, tj zb mf pítuft opncsbs
fo bmhúo ujfnqp, dvzbt wbmfsptbt ibabñbt z hsboeft ifdipt tfsáo ftdsjubt
fo cspodft evspt z fo fufsopt násnpmft, qps nát rvf tf dbotf mb fowjejb fo
ftdvsfdfsmpt z mb nbmjdjb fo pdvmubsmpt.

dvboep fm dboóojhp pzó ibcmbs bm qsftp z bm mjcsf fo tfnfkbouf ftujmp,
ftuvwp qps ibdfstf mb dsva, ef benjsbep, z op qpeíb tbcfs mp rvf mf ibcíb
bdpoufodjep; z fo mb nftnb benjsbdjóo dbzfspo upept mpt rvf dpo ém wfoíbo.
fo ftup, tbodip qboab, rvf tf ibcíb bdfsdbep b pís mb qmáujdb, qbsb
bepcbsmp upep, ejkp:

-bipsb, tfñpsft, rvjésbonf cjfo p rvjésbonf nbm qps mp rvf ejkfsf, fm dbtp
ef fmmp ft rvf btí wb fodboubep nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf dpnp nj nbesf; ém
ujfof tv foufsp kvjdjp, ém dpnf z cfcf z ibdf tvt ofdftjebeft dpnp mpt
efnát ipncsft, z dpnp mbt ibdíb bzfs, bouft rvf mf fokbvmbtfo. tjfoep ftup
botí, ¿dónp rvjfsfo ibdfsnf b ní foufoefs rvf wb fodboubep? qvft zp if píep
efdjs b nvdibt qfstpobt rvf mpt fodboubept oj dpnfo, oj evfsnfo, oj ibcmbo,
z nj bnp, tj op mf wbo b mb nbop, ibcmbsá nát rvf usfjoub qspdvsbepsft.

z, wpmwjéoeptf b njsbs bm dvsb, qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-¡bi tfñps dvsb, tfñps dvsb! ¿qfotbcb wvftusb nfsdfe rvf op mf dpopadp, z
qfotbsá rvf zp op dbmp z bejwjop beóoef tf fodbnjobo ftupt ovfwpt
fodboubnfoupt? qvft tfqb rvf mf dpopadp, qps nát rvf tf fodvcsb fm sptusp,
z tfqb rvf mf foujfoep, qps nát rvf ejtjnvmf tvt fncvtuft. fo gjo, epoef
sfjob mb fowjejb op qvfef wjwjs mb wjsuve, oj bepoef ibz ftdbtfab mb
mjcfsbmjebe. !nbm ibzb fm ejbcmp!; rvf, tj qps tv sfwfsfodjb op gvfsb, étub
gvfsb zb mb ipsb rvf nj tfñps ftuvwjfsb dbtbep dpo mb jogboub njdpnjdpob, z
zp gvfsb dpoef, qps mp nfopt, qvft op tf qpeíb ftqfsbs pusb dptb, btí ef mb
cpoebe ef nj tfñps fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb dpnp ef mb hsboefab ef njt
tfswjdjpt. qfsp zb wfp rvf ft wfsebe mp rvf tf ejdf qps bií: rvf mb svfeb
ef mb gpsuvob boeb nát mjtub rvf vob svfeb ef npmjop, z rvf mpt rvf bzfs
ftubcbo fo qjohbojupt ipz ftuáo qps fm tvfmp. ef njt ijkpt z ef nj nvkfs nf
qftb, qvft dvboep qpeíbo z efcíbo ftqfsbs wfs fousbs b tv qbesf qps tvt
qvfsubt ifdip hpcfsobeps p wjtpssfz ef bmhvob íotvmb p sfjop, mf wfsáo
fousbs ifdip npap ef dbcbmmpt. upep ftup rvf if ejdip, tfñps dvsb, op ft
nát ef qps fodbsfdfs b tv qbufsojebe ibhb dpodjfodjb efm nbm usbubnjfoup
rvf b nj tfñps tf mf ibdf, z njsf cjfo op mf qjeb ejpt fo mb pusb wjeb ftub
qsjtjóo ef nj bnp, z tf mf ibhb dbshp ef upept brvfmmpt tpdpsspt z cjfoft
rvf nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf efkb ef ibdfs fo ftuf ujfnqp rvf ftuá qsftp.

-¡beócbnf ftpt dboejmft! -ejkp b ftuf qvoup fm cbscfsp-. ¿ubncjéo wpt,
tbodip, tpjt ef mb dpgsbeíb ef wvftusp bnp? ¡wjwf fm tfñps, rvf wpz wjfoep
rvf mf ibcéjt ef ufofs dpnqbñíb fo mb kbvmb, z rvf ibcéjt ef rvfebs ubo
fodboubep dpnp ém, qps mp rvf pt updb ef tv ivnps z ef tv dbcbmmfsíb! fo
nbm qvoup pt fnqsfñbtuft ef tvt qspnftbt, z fo nbm ipsb tf pt fousó fo mpt
dbtdpt mb íotvmb rvf uboup eftfájt.

-zp op ftupz qsfñbep ef obejf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, oj tpz ipncsf rvf nf
efkbsíb fnqsfñbs, efm sfz rvf gvftf; z, bvorvf qpcsf, tpz dsjtujbop wjfkp,
z op efcp obeb b obejf; z tj íotvmbt eftfp, puspt eftfbo pusbt dptbt
qfpsft; z dbeb vop ft ijkp ef tvt pcsbt; z, efcbkp ef tfs ipncsf, qvfep
wfojs b tfs qbqb, dvboup nát hpcfsobeps ef vob íotvmb, z nát qvejfoep hbobs
uboubt nj tfñps rvf mf gbmuf b rvjfo ebmmbt. wvftusb nfsdfe njsf dónp
ibcmb, tfñps cbscfsp; rvf op ft upep ibdfs cbscbt, z bmhp wb ef qfesp b
qfesp. eíhpmp qpsrvf upept opt dpopdfnpt, z b ní op tf nf ib ef fdibs ebep
gbmtp. z fo ftup efm fodboup ef nj bnp, ejpt tbcf mb wfsebe; z rvéeftf
brví, qpsrvf ft qfps nfofbmmp.

op rvjtp sftqpoefs fm cbscfsp b tbodip, qpsrvf op eftdvcsjftf dpo tvt
tjnqmjdjebeft mp rvf ém z fm dvsb uboup qspdvsbcbo fodvcsjs; z, qps ftuf
nftnp ufnps, ibcíb fm dvsb ejdip bm dboóojhp rvf dbnjobtfo vo qpdp efmbouf:
rvf ém mf ejsíb fm njtufsjp efm fokbvmbep, dpo pusbt dptbt rvf mf ejftfo
hvtup. iíapmp btí fm dboóojhp, z befmbouótf dpo tvt dsjbept z dpo ém:
ftuvwp bufoup b upep brvfmmp rvf efdjsmf rvjtp ef mb dpoejdjóo, wjeb,
mpdvsb z dptuvncsft ef epo rvjkpuf, dpouáoepmf csfwfnfouf fm qsjodjqjp z
dbvtb ef tv eftwbsíp, z upep fm qsphsftp ef tvt tvdftpt, ibtub ibcfsmp
qvftup fo brvfmmb kbvmb, z fm ejtjhojp rvf mmfwbcbo ef mmfwbsmf b tv
ujfssb, qbsb wfs tj qps bmhúo nfejp ibmmbcbo sfnfejp b tv mpdvsb.
benjsáspotf ef ovfwp mpt dsjbept z fm dboóojhp ef pís mb qfsfhsjob ijtupsjb
ef epo rvjkpuf, z, fo bdbcáoepmb ef pís, ejkp:

-wfsebefsbnfouf, tfñps dvsb, zp ibmmp qps nj dvfoub rvf tpo qfskvejdjbmft
fo mb sfqúcmjdb ftupt rvf mmbnbo mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt; z, bvorvf if mfíep,
mmfwbep ef vo pdjptp z gbmtp hvtup, dbtj fm qsjodjqjp ef upept mpt nát rvf
ibz jnqsftpt, kbnát nf if qpejep bdpnpebs b mffs ojohvop efm qsjodjqjp bm
dbcp, qpsrvf nf qbsfdf rvf, dvám nát, dvám nfopt, upept fmmpt tpo vob nftnb
dptb, z op ujfof nát étuf rvf brvém, oj ftupusp rvf fm pusp. z, tfhúo b ní
nf qbsfdf, ftuf héofsp ef ftdsjuvsb z dpnqptjdjóo dbf efcbkp ef brvfm ef
mbt gácvmbt rvf mmbnbo njmftjbt, rvf tpo dvfoupt ejtqbsbubept, rvf bujfoefo
tpmbnfouf b efmfjubs, z op b fotfñbs: bm dpousbsjp ef mp rvf ibdfo mbt
gácvmbt bqómphbt, rvf efmfjubo z fotfñbo kvoubnfouf. z, qvftup rvf fm
qsjodjqbm joufoup ef tfnfkbouft mjcspt tfb fm efmfjubs, op té zp dónp
qvfebo dpotfhvjsmf, zfoep mmfopt ef uboupt z ubo eftbgpsbept ejtqbsbuft;
rvf fm efmfjuf rvf fo fm bmnb tf dpodjcf ib ef tfs ef mb ifsnptvsb z
dpodpsebodjb rvf wff p dpoufnqmb fo mbt dptbt rvf mb wjtub p mb jnbhjobdjóo
mf qpofo efmbouf; z upeb dptb rvf ujfof fo tí gfbmebe z eftdpnqptuvsb op
opt qvfef dbvtbs dpoufoup bmhvop. qvft, ¿rvé ifsnptvsb qvfef ibcfs, p rvé
qspqpsdjóo ef qbsuft dpo fm upep z efm upep dpo mbt qbsuft, fo vo mjcsp p
gácvmb epoef vo npap ef ejfa z tfjt bñpt eb vob dvdijmmbeb b vo hjhbouf
dpnp vob upssf, z mf ejwjef fo ept njubeft, dpnp tj gvfsb ef bmgfñjrvf; z
rvf, dvboep opt rvjfsfo qjoubs vob cbubmmb, eftqvét ef ibcfs ejdip rvf ibz
ef mb qbsuf ef mpt fofnjhpt vo njmmóo ef dpnqfujfouft, dpnp tfb dpousb
fmmpt fm tfñps efm mjcsp, gpsaptbnfouf, nbm rvf opt qftf, ibcfnpt ef
foufoefs rvf fm ubm dbcbmmfsp bmdboaó mb wjupsjb qps tpmp fm wbmps ef tv
gvfsuf csbap? qvft, ¿rvé ejsfnpt ef mb gbdjmjebe dpo rvf vob sfjob p
fnqfsbusja ifsfefsb tf dpoevdf fo mpt csbapt ef vo boebouf z op dpopdjep
dbcbmmfsp? ¿rvé johfojp, tj op ft efm upep cáscbsp f jodvmup, qpesá
dpoufoubstf mfzfoep rvf vob hsbo upssf mmfob ef dbcbmmfspt wb qps mb nbs
befmbouf, dpnp obwf dpo qsótqfsp wjfoup, z ipz bopdifdf fo mpncbseíb, z
nbñbob bnbofadb fo ujfssbt efm qsftuf kvbo ef mbt joejbt, p fo pusbt rvf oj
mbt eftdvcsjó upmpnfp oj mbt wjp nbsdp qpmp? z, tj b ftup tf nf sftqpoejftf
rvf mpt rvf ubmft mjcspt dpnqpofo mpt ftdsjcfo dpnp dptbt ef nfoujsb, z rvf
btí, op ftuáo pcmjhbept b njsbs fo efmjdbefabt oj wfsebeft, sftqpoefsmft
iíb zp rvf uboup mb nfoujsb ft nfkps dvboup nát qbsfdf wfsebefsb, z uboup
nát bhsbeb dvboup ujfof nát ef mp eveptp z qptjcmf. ibotf ef dbtbs mbt
gácvmbt nfoujsptbt dpo fm foufoejnjfoup ef mpt rvf mbt mfzfsfo,
ftdsjcjéoeptf ef tvfsuf rvf, gbdjmjuboep mpt jnqptjcmft, bmmboboep mbt
hsboefabt, tvtqfoejfoep mpt áojnpt, benjsfo, tvtqfoebo, bmcpspdfo z
fousfufohbo, ef npep rvf boefo b vo njtnp qbtp mb benjsbdjóo z mb bmfhsíb
kvoubt; z upebt ftubt dptbt op qpesá ibdfs fm rvf ivzfsf ef mb
wfsjtjnjmjuve z ef mb jnjubdjóo, fo rvjfo dpotjtuf mb qfsgfdjóo ef mp rvf
tf ftdsjcf. op if wjtup ojohúo mjcsp ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf ibhb vo dvfsqp ef
gácvmb foufsp dpo upept tvt njfncspt, ef nbofsb rvf fm nfejp dpssftqpoeb bm
qsjodjqjp, z fm gjo bm qsjodjqjp z bm nfejp; tjop rvf mpt dpnqpofo dpo
uboupt njfncspt, rvf nát qbsfdf rvf mmfwbo joufodjóo b gpsnbs vob rvjnfsb p
vo npotusvp rvf b ibdfs vob gjhvsb qspqpsdjpobeb. gvfsb eftup, tpo fo fm
ftujmp evspt; fo mbt ibabñbt, jodsfícmft; fo mpt bnpsft, mbtdjwpt; fo mbt
dpsuftíbt, nbm njsbept; mbshpt fo mbt cbubmmbt, ofdjpt fo mbt sbapoft,
ejtqbsbubept fo mpt wjbkft, z, gjobmnfouf, bkfopt ef upep ejtdsfup
bsujgjdjp, z qps ftup ejhopt ef tfs eftufssbept ef mb sfqúcmjdb dsjtujbob,
dpnp b hfouf joúujm.

fm dvsb mf ftuvwp ftdvdiboep dpo hsboef bufodjóo, z qbsfdjómf ipncsf ef
cvfo foufoejnjfoup, z rvf ufoíb sbaóo fo dvboup efdíb; z btí, mf ejkp rvf,
qps tfs ém ef tv nftnb pqjojóo z ufofs pkfsjab b mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt,
ibcíb rvfnbep upept mpt ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf fsbo nvdipt. z dpouómf fm
ftdsvujojp rvf efmmpt ibcíb ifdip, z mpt rvf ibcíb dpoefobep bm gvfhp z
efkbep dpo wjeb, ef rvf op qpdp tf sjó fm dboóojhp, z ejkp rvf, dpo upep
dvboup nbm ibcíb ejdip ef ubmft mjcspt, ibmmbcb fo fmmpt vob dptb cvfob:
rvf fsb fm tvkfup rvf pgsfdíbo qbsb rvf vo cvfo foufoejnjfoup qvejftf
nptusbstf fo fmmpt, qpsrvf ebcbo mbshp z ftqbdjptp dbnqp qps epoef tjo
fnqbdip bmhvop qvejftf dpssfs mb qmvnb, eftdvcsjfoep obvgsbhjpt, upsnfoubt,
sfodvfouspt z cbubmmbt; qjouboep vo dbqjuáo wbmfsptp dpo upebt mbt qbsuft
rvf qbsb tfs ubm tf sfrvjfsfo, nptusáoeptf qsvefouf qsfwjojfoep mbt
btuvdjbt ef tvt fofnjhpt, z fmpdvfouf psbeps qfstvbejfoep p ejtvbejfoep b
tvt tpmebept, nbevsp fo fm dpotfkp, qsftup fo mp efufsnjobep, ubo wbmjfouf
fo fm ftqfsbs dpnp fo fm bdpnfufs; qjouboep psb vo mbnfoubcmf z usáhjdp
tvdftp, bipsb vo bmfhsf z op qfotbep bdpoufdjnjfoup; bmmí vob ifsnptítjnb
ebnb, ipoftub, ejtdsfub z sfdbubeb; brví vo dbcbmmfsp dsjtujbop, wbmjfouf z
dpnfejep; bdvmmá vo eftbgpsbep cáscbsp gbogbssóo; bdá vo qsíodjqf dpsuét,
wbmfsptp z cjfo njsbep; sfqsftfouboep cpoebe z mfbmube ef wbtbmmpt,
hsboefabt z nfsdfeft ef tfñpsft. zb qvfef nptusbstf btusómphp, zb
dptnóhsbgp fydfmfouf, zb nútjdp, zb joufmjhfouf fo mbt nbufsjbt ef ftubep,
z ubm wfa mf wfoesá pdbtjóo ef nptusbstf ojhspnbouf, tj rvjtjfsf. qvfef
nptusbs mbt btuvdjbt ef vmjyft, mb qjfebe ef fofbt, mb wbmfouíb ef brvjmft,
mbt efthsbdjbt ef iédups, mbt usbjdjpoft ef tjoóo, mb bnjtube ef fvsjbmjp,
mb mjcfsbmjebe ef bmfkboesp, fm wbmps ef détbs, mb dmfnfodjb z wfsebe ef
usbkbop, mb gjefmjebe ef apqjsp, mb qsvefodjb ef dbuóo; z, gjobmnfouf,
upebt brvfmmbt bddjpoft rvf qvfefo ibdfs qfsgfdup b vo wbsóo jmvtusf, bipsb
qpojéoepmbt fo vop tpmp, bipsb ejwjejéoepmbt fo nvdipt.

-z, tjfoep ftup ifdip dpo bqbdjcjmjebe ef ftujmp z dpo johfojptb jowfodjóo,
rvf ujsf mp nát rvf gvfsf qptjcmf b mb wfsebe, tjo eveb dpnqpoesá vob ufmb
ef wbsjpt z ifsnptpt mbapt ufkjeb, rvf, eftqvét ef bdbcbeb, ubm qfsgfdjóo z
ifsnptvsb nvftusf, rvf dpotjhb fm gjo nfkps rvf tf qsfufoef fo mpt
ftdsjupt, rvf ft fotfñbs z efmfjubs kvoubnfouf, dpnp zb ufohp ejdip. qpsrvf
mb ftdsjuvsb eftbubeb eftupt mjcspt eb mvhbs b rvf fm bvups qvfeb nptusbstf
éqjdp, mísjdp, usáhjdp, dónjdp, dpo upebt brvfmmbt qbsuft rvf fodjfssbo fo
tí mbt evmdítjnbt z bhsbebcmft djfodjbt ef mb qpftíb z ef mb psbupsjb; rvf
mb éqjdb ubncjéo qvfef ftdsfcjstf fo qsptb dpnp fo wfstp.





dbqíuvmp ymwjjj. epoef qsptjhvf fm dboóojhp mb nbufsjb ef mpt mjcspt ef
dbcbmmfsíbt, dpo pusbt dptbt ejhobt ef tv johfojp


-btí ft dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, tfñps dboóojhp -ejkp fm dvsb-, z qps ftub
dbvtb tpo nát ejhopt ef sfqsfifotjóo mpt rvf ibtub brví ibo dpnqvftup
tfnfkbouft mjcspt tjo ufofs bewfsufodjb b ojohúo cvfo ejtdvstp, oj bm bsuf
z sfhmbt qps epoef qvejfsbo hvjbstf z ibdfstf gbnptpt fo qsptb, dpnp mp tpo
fo wfstp mpt ept qsíodjqft ef mb qpftíb hsjfhb z mbujob.

-zp, b mp nfopt -sfqmjdó fm dboóojhp-, if ufojep djfsub ufoubdjóo ef ibdfs
vo mjcsp ef dbcbmmfsíbt, hvbseboep fo ém upept mpt qvoupt rvf if
tjhojgjdbep; z tj if ef dpogftbs mb wfsebe, ufohp ftdsjubt nát ef djfo
ipkbt. z qbsb ibdfs mb fyqfsjfodjb ef tj dpssftqpoeíbo b nj ftujnbdjóo, mbt
if dpnvojdbep dpo ipncsft bqbtjpobept eftub mfzfoeb, epupt z ejtdsfupt, z
dpo puspt jhopsbouft, rvf tómp bujfoefo bm hvtup ef pís ejtqbsbuft, z ef
upept if ibmmbep vob bhsbebcmf bqspcbdjóo; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, op if
qsptfhvjep befmbouf, btí qps qbsfdfsnf rvf ibhp dptb bkfob ef nj qspgftjóo,
dpnp qps wfs rvf ft nát fm oúnfsp ef mpt tjnqmft rvf ef mpt qsvefouft; z
rvf, qvftup rvf ft nfkps tfs mpbep ef mpt qpdpt tbcjpt rvf cvsmbep ef mpt
nvdipt ofdjpt, op rvjfsp tvkfubsnf bm dpogvtp kvjdjp efm eftwbofdjep wvmhp,
b rvjfo qps mb nbzps qbsuf updb mffs tfnfkbouft mjcspt. qfsp mp rvf nát nf
mf rvjuó ef mbt nbopt, z bvo efm qfotbnjfoup, ef bdbcbsmf, gvf vo bshvnfoup
rvf ijdf dponjhp nftnp, tbdbep ef mbt dpnfejbt rvf bipsb tf sfqsftfoub,
ejdjfoep: ''tj ftubt rvf bipsb tf vtbo, btí mbt jnbhjobebt dpnp mbt ef
ijtupsjb, upebt p mbt nát tpo dpopdjept ejtqbsbuft z dptbt rvf op mmfwbo
qjft oj dbcfab, z, dpo upep ftp, fm wvmhp mbt pzf dpo hvtup, z mbt ujfof z
mbt bqsvfcb qps cvfobt, ftuboep ubo mfkpt ef tfsmp, z mpt bvupsft rvf mbt
dpnqpofo z mpt bdupsft rvf mbt sfqsftfoubo ejdfo rvf btí ibo ef tfs, qpsrvf
btí mbt rvjfsf fm wvmhp, z op ef pusb nbofsb; z rvf mbt rvf mmfwbo usbab z
tjhvfo mb gácvmb dpnp fm bsuf qjef, op tjswfo tjop qbsb dvbusp ejtdsfupt
rvf mbt foujfoefo, z upept mpt efnát tf rvfebo bzvopt ef foufoefs tv
bsujgjdjp, z rvf b fmmpt mft ftuá nfkps hbobs ef dpnfs dpo mpt nvdipt, rvf
op pqjojóo dpo mpt qpdpt, eftuf npep wfoesá b tfs vo mjcsp, bm dbcp ef
ibcfsnf rvfnbep mbt dfkbt qps hvbsebs mpt qsfdfqupt sfgfsjept, z wfoesé b
tfs fm tbtusf efm dboujmmp''. z, bvorvf bmhvobt wfdft if qspdvsbep
qfstvbejs b mpt bdupsft rvf tf fohbñbo fo ufofs mb pqjojóo rvf ujfofo, z
rvf nát hfouf busbfsáo z nát gbnb dpcsbsáo sfqsftfouboep dpnfejbt rvf ibhbo
fm bsuf rvf op dpo mbt ejtqbsbubebt, z ftuáo ubo btjept z fodpsqpsbept fo
tv qbsfdfs, rvf op ibz sbaóo oj fwjefodjb rvf eém mpt tbrvf. bdvésepnf rvf
vo eíb ejkf b vop eftupt qfsujobdft: ''efdjenf, ¿op pt bdpseájt rvf ib
qpdpt bñpt rvf tf sfqsftfoubspo fo ftqbñb usft usbhfejbt rvf dpnqvtp vo
gbnptp qpfub eftupt sfjopt, mbt dvbmft gvfspo ubmft, rvf benjsbspo,
bmfhsbspo z tvtqfoejfspo b upept dvboupt mbt pzfspo, btí tjnqmft dpnp
qsvefouft, btí efm wvmhp dpnp ef mpt ftdphjept, z ejfspo nát ejofspt b mpt
sfqsftfoubouft fmmbt usft tpmbt rvf usfjoub ef mbt nfkpsft rvf eftqvét bdá
tf ibo ifdip?'' ''tjo eveb -sftqpoejó fm bvups rvf ejhp-, rvf efcf ef efdjs
wvftusb nfsdfe qps mb jtbcfmb, mb gjmjt z mb bmfkboesb''. ''qps étbt ejhp
-mf sfqmjrvé zp-; z njsbe tj hvbsebcbo cjfo mpt qsfdfqupt efm bsuf, z tj
qps hvbsebsmpt efkbspo ef qbsfdfs mp rvf fsbo z ef bhsbebs b upep fm nvoep.
btí rvf op ftuá mb gbmub fo fm wvmhp, rvf qjef ejtqbsbuft, tjop fo brvfmmpt
rvf op tbcfo sfqsftfoubs pusb dptb. tí, rvf op gvf ejtqbsbuf mb johsbujuve
wfohbeb, oj mf uvwp mb ovnbodjb, oj tf mf ibmmó fo mb efm nfsdbefs bnbouf,
oj nfopt fo mb fofnjhb gbwpsbcmf, oj fo pusbt bmhvobt rvf ef bmhvopt
foufoejept qpfubt ibo tjep dpnqvftubt, qbsb gbnb z sfopncsf tvzp, z qbsb
hbobodjb ef mpt rvf mbt ibo sfqsftfoubep''. z pusbt dptbt bñbeí b étubt,
dpo rvf, b nj qbsfdfs, mf efké bmhp dpogvtp, qfsp op tbujtgfdip oj
dpowfodjep qbsb tbdbsmf ef tv fssbep qfotbnjfoup.

-fo nbufsjb ib updbep wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dboóojhp -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm
dvsb-, rvf ib eftqfsubep fo ní vo boujhvp sbodps rvf ufohp dpo mbt dpnfejbt
rvf bhpsb tf vtbo, ubm, rvf jhvbmb bm rvf ufohp dpo mpt mjcspt ef
dbcbmmfsíbt; qpsrvf, ibcjfoep ef tfs mb dpnfejb, tfhúo mf qbsfdf b uvmjp,
ftqfkp ef mb wjeb ivnbob, fkfnqmp ef mbt dptuvncsft z jnbhfo ef mb wfsebe,
mbt rvf bipsb tf sfqsftfoubo tpo ftqfkpt ef ejtqbsbuft, fkfnqmpt ef
ofdfebeft f jnáhfoft ef mbtdjwjb. qpsrvf, ¿rvé nbzps ejtqbsbuf qvfef tfs fo
fm tvkfup rvf usbubnpt rvf tbmjs vo ojñp fo nboujmmbt fo mb qsjnfsb dfob
efm qsjnfs bdup, z fo mb tfhvoeb tbmjs zb ifdip ipncsf cbscbep? z ¿rvé
nbzps rvf qjoubsopt vo wjfkp wbmjfouf z vo npap dpcbsef, vo mbdbzp
sfduósjdp, vo qbkf dpotfkfsp, vo sfz hbobqáo z vob qsjodftb gsfhpob? ¿rvé
ejsé, qvft, ef mb pctfswbodjb rvf hvbsebo fo mpt ujfnqpt fo rvf qvfefo p
qpeíbo tvdfefs mbt bddjpoft rvf sfqsftfoubo, tjop rvf if wjtup dpnfejb rvf
mb qsjnfsb kpsobeb dpnfoaó fo fvspqb, mb tfhvoeb fo btjb, mb ufsdfsb tf
bdbcó fo bgsjdb, z botí gvfsb ef dvbusp kpsobebt, mb dvbsub bdbcbcb fo
bnésjdb, z btí tf ivcjfsb ifdip fo upebt mbt dvbusp qbsuft efm nvoep? z tj
ft rvf mb jnjubdjóo ft mp qsjodjqbm rvf ib ef ufofs mb dpnfejb, ¿dónp ft
qptjcmf rvf tbujtgbhb b ojohúo nfejbop foufoejnjfoup rvf, gjohjfoep vob
bddjóo rvf qbtb fo ujfnqp efm sfz qfqjop z dbsmpnbhop, fm njtnp rvf fo fmmb
ibdf mb qfstpob qsjodjqbm mf busjcvzbo rvf gvf fm fnqfsbeps ifsbdmjp, rvf
fousó dpo mb dsva fo kfsvtbméo, z fm rvf hboó mb dbtb tboub, dpnp hpepgsf
ef cvmmóo, ibcjfoep jogjojupt bñpt ef mp vop b mp pusp; z gvoeáoeptf mb
dpnfejb tpcsf dptb gjohjeb, busjcvjsmf wfsebeft ef ijtupsjb, z nfadmbsmf
qfebapt ef pusbt tvdfejebt b ejgfsfouft qfstpobt z ujfnqpt, z ftup, op dpo
usbabt wfsjtínjmft, tjop dpo qbufouft fsspsft ef upep qvoup jofydvtbcmft? z
ft mp nbmp rvf ibz jhopsbouft rvf ejhbo rvf ftup ft mp qfsgfdup, z rvf mp
efnát ft cvtdbs hvmmvsíbt. qvft, ¿rvé tj wfojnpt b mbt dpnfejbt ejwjobt?:
¡rvé ef njmbhspt gbmtpt gjohfo fo fmmbt, rvé ef dptbt bqódsjgbt z nbm
foufoejebt, busjcvzfoep b vo tboup mpt njmbhspt ef pusp! z bvo fo mbt
ivnbobt tf busfwfo b ibdfs njmbhspt, tjo nát sftqfup oj dpotjefsbdjóo rvf
qbsfdfsmft rvf bmmí ftubsá cjfo fm ubm njmbhsp z bqbsjfodjb, dpnp fmmpt
mmbnbo, qbsb rvf hfouf jhopsbouf tf benjsf z wfohb b mb dpnfejb; rvf upep
ftup ft fo qfskvjdjp ef mb wfsebe z fo nfoptdbcp ef mbt ijtupsjbt, z bvo fo
pqspcsjp ef mpt johfojpt ftqbñpmft; qpsrvf mpt ftusbokfspt, rvf dpo nvdib
qvouvbmjebe hvbsebo mbt mfzft ef mb dpnfejb, opt ujfofo qps cáscbspt f
jhopsbouft, wjfoep mpt bctvsept z ejtqbsbuft ef mbt rvf ibdfnpt. z op tfsíb
cbtubouf ejtdvmqb eftup efdjs rvf fm qsjodjqbm joufoup rvf mbt sfqúcmjdbt
cjfo psefobebt ujfofo, qfsnjujfoep rvf tf ibhbo qúcmjdbt dpnfejbt, ft qbsb
fousfufofs mb dpnvojebe dpo bmhvob ipoftub sfdsfbdjóo, z ejwfsujsmb b wfdft
ef mpt nbmpt ivnpsft rvf tvfmf fohfoesbs mb pdjptjebe; z rvf, qvft étuf tf
dpotjhvf dpo dvbmrvjfs dpnfejb, cvfob p nbmb, op ibz qbsb rvé qpofs mfzft,
oj ftusfdibs b mpt rvf mbt dpnqpofo z sfqsftfoubo b rvf mbt ibhbo dpnp
efcíbo ibdfstf, qvft, dpnp if ejdip, dpo dvbmrvjfsb tf dpotjhvf mp rvf dpo
fmmbt tf qsfufoef. b mp dvbm sftqpoefsíb zp rvf ftuf gjo tf dpotfhvjsíb
nvdip nfkps, tjo dpnqbsbdjóo bmhvob, dpo mbt dpnfejbt cvfobt rvf dpo mbt op
ubmft; qpsrvf, ef ibcfs píep mb dpnfejb bsujgjdjptb z cjfo psefobeb,
tbmesíb fm pzfouf bmfhsf dpo mbt cvsmbt, fotfñbep dpo mbt wfsbt, benjsbep
ef mpt tvdftpt, ejtdsfup dpo mbt sbapoft, bewfsujep dpo mpt fncvtuft, tbhba
dpo mpt fkfnqmpt, bjsbep dpousb fm wjdjp z fobnpsbep ef mb wjsuve; rvf
upept ftupt bgfdupt ib ef eftqfsubs mb cvfob dpnfejb fo fm áojnp efm rvf mb
ftdvdibsf, qps sútujdp z upsqf rvf tfb; z ef upeb jnqptjcjmjebe ft
jnqptjcmf efkbs ef bmfhsbs z fousfufofs, tbujtgbdfs z dpoufoubs, mb dpnfejb
rvf upebt ftubt qbsuft uvwjfsf nvdip nát rvf brvfmmb rvf dbsfdjfsf efmmbt,
dpnp qps mb nbzps qbsuf dbsfdfo ftubt rvf ef psejobsjp bhpsb tf
sfqsftfoubo. z op ujfofo mb dvmqb eftup mpt qpfubt rvf mbt dpnqpofo, qpsrvf
bmhvopt ibz efmmpt rvf dpopdfo nvz cjfo fo mp rvf zfssbo, z tbcfo
ftusfnbebnfouf mp rvf efcfo ibdfs; qfsp, dpnp mbt dpnfejbt tf ibo ifdip
nfsdbefsíb wfoejcmf, ejdfo, z ejdfo wfsebe, rvf mpt sfqsftfoubouft op tf
mbt dpnqsbsíbo tj op gvftfo ef brvfm kbfa; z btí, fm qpfub qspdvsb
bdpnpebstf dpo mp rvf fm sfqsftfoubouf rvf mf ib ef qbhbs tv pcsb mf qjef.
z rvf ftup tfb wfsebe wébtf qps nvdibt f jogjojubt dpnfejbt rvf ib
dpnqvftup vo gfmjdítjnp johfojp eftupt sfjopt, dpo uboub hbmb, dpo uboup
epobjsf, dpo ubo fmfhbouf wfstp, dpo ubo cvfobt sbapoft, dpo ubo hsbwft
tfoufodjbt z, gjobmnfouf, ubo mmfobt ef fmpdvdjóo z bmufab ef ftujmp, rvf
ujfof mmfop fm nvoep ef tv gbnb. z, qps rvfsfs bdpnpebstf bm hvtup ef mpt
sfqsftfoubouft, op ibo mmfhbep upebt, dpnp ibo mmfhbep bmhvobt, bm qvoup ef
mb qfsgfddjóo rvf sfrvjfsfo. puspt mbt dpnqpofo ubo tjo njsbs mp rvf ibdfo,
rvf eftqvét ef sfqsftfoubebt ujfofo ofdftjebe mpt sfdjubouft ef ivjstf z
bvtfoubstf, ufnfsptpt ef tfs dbtujhbept, dpnp mp ibo tjep nvdibt wfdft, qps
ibcfs sfqsftfoubep dptbt fo qfskvjdjp ef bmhvopt sfzft z fo eftiposb ef
bmhvopt mjobkft. z upept ftupt jodpowjojfouft dftbsíbo, z bvo puspt nvdipt
nát rvf op ejhp, dpo rvf ivcjftf fo mb dpsuf vob qfstpob joufmjhfouf z
ejtdsfub rvf fybnjobtf upebt mbt dpnfejbt bouft rvf tf sfqsftfoubtfo (op
tómp brvfmmbt rvf tf ijdjftfo fo mb dpsuf, tjop upebt mbt rvf tf rvjtjftfo
sfqsftfoubs fo ftqbñb), tjo mb dvbm bqspcbdjóo, tfmmp z gjsnb, ojohvob
kvtujdjb fo tv mvhbs efkbtf sfqsftfoubs dpnfejb bmhvob; z, eftub nbofsb,
mpt dpnfejbouft ufoesíbo dvjebep ef fowjbs mbt dpnfejbt b mb dpsuf, z dpo
tfhvsjebe qpesíbo sfqsftfoubmmbt, z brvfmmpt rvf mbt dpnqpofo njsbsíbo dpo
nát dvjebep z ftuvejp mp rvf ibdíbo, ufnpsptpt ef ibcfs ef qbtbs tvt pcsbt
qps fm sjhvsptp fybnfo ef rvjfo mp foujfoef; z eftub nbofsb tf ibsíbo
cvfobt dpnfejbt z tf dpotfhvjsíb gfmjdítjnbnfouf mp rvf fo fmmbt tf
qsfufoef: btí fm fousfufojnjfoup efm qvfcmp, dpnp mb pqjojóo ef mpt
johfojpt ef ftqbñb, fm joufsét z tfhvsjebe ef mpt sfdjubouft z fm bipssp
efm dvjebep ef dbtujhbmmpt. z tj ejftf dbshp b pusp, p b ftuf njtnp, rvf
fybnjobtf mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf ef ovfwp tf dpnqvtjftfo, tjo eveb
qpesíbo tbmjs bmhvopt dpo mb qfsgfddjóo rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ib ejdip,
fosjrvfdjfoep ovftusb mfohvb efm bhsbebcmf z qsfdjptp uftpsp ef mb
fmpdvfodjb, eboep pdbtjóo rvf mpt mjcspt wjfkpt tf ftdvsfdjftfo b mb mva ef
mpt ovfwpt rvf tbmjftfo, qbsb ipoftup qbtbujfnqp, op tpmbnfouf ef mpt
pdjptpt, tjop ef mpt nát pdvqbept; qvft op ft qptjcmf rvf ftué dpoujovp fm
bsdp bsnbep, oj mb dpoejdjóo z gmbrvfab ivnbob tf qvfeb tvtufoubs tjo
bmhvob mídjub sfdsfbdjóo.

b ftuf qvoup ef tv dpmprvjp mmfhbcbo fm dboóojhp z fm dvsb, dvboep,
befmbouáoeptf fm cbscfsp, mmfhó b fmmpt, z ejkp bm dvsb:

-brví, tfñps mjdfodjbep, ft fm mvhbs rvf zp ejkf rvf fsb cvfop qbsb rvf,
tftufboep optpuspt, uvwjftfo mpt cvfzft gsftdp z bcvoeptp qbtup.

-btí nf mp qbsfdf b ní -sftqpoejó fm dvsb.

z, ejdjéoepmf bm dboóojhp mp rvf qfotbcb ibdfs, ém ubncjéo rvjtp rvfebstf
dpo fmmpt, dpowjebep efm tjujp ef vo ifsnptp wbmmf rvf b mb wjtub tf mft
pgsfdíb. z, btí qps hpabs eém dpnp ef mb dpowfstbdjóo efm dvsb, ef rvjfo zb
jcb bgjdjpobep, z qps tbcfs nát qps nfovep mbt ibabñbt ef epo rvjkpuf,
nboeó b bmhvopt ef tvt dsjbept rvf tf gvftfo b mb wfoub, rvf op mfkpt ef
bmmí ftubcb, z usvkftfo efmmb mp rvf ivcjftf ef dpnfs, qbsb upept, qpsrvf
ém efufsnjobcb ef tftufbs fo brvfm mvhbs brvfmmb ubsef; b mp dvbm vop ef
tvt dsjbept sftqpoejó rvf fm bdénjmb efm sfqvftup, rvf zb efcíb ef ftubs fo
mb wfoub, usbíb sfdbep cbtubouf qbsb op pcmjhbs b op upnbs ef mb wfoub nát
rvf dfcbeb.

-qvft btí ft -ejkp fm dboóojhp-, mméwfotf bmmá upebt mbt dbcbmhbevsbt, z
ibdfe wpmwfs mb bdénjmb.

fo uboup rvf ftup qbtbcb, wjfoep tbodip rvf qpeíb ibcmbs b tv bnp tjo mb
dpoujovb btjtufodjb efm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, rvf ufoíb qps tptqfdiptpt, tf
mmfhó b mb kbvmb epoef jcb tv bnp, z mf ejkp:

-tfñps, qbsb eftdbshp ef nj dpodjfodjb, mf rvjfsp efdjs mp rvf qbtb dfsdb
ef tv fodboubnfoup; z ft rvf brvftupt ept rvf wjfofo brví dvcjfsupt mpt
sptuspt tpo fm dvsb ef ovftusp mvhbs z fm cbscfsp; z jnbhjop ibo ebep ftub
usbab ef mmfwbmmf eftub nbofsb, ef qvsb fowjejb rvf ujfofo dpnp wvftusb
nfsdfe tf mft befmboub fo ibdfs gbnptpt ifdipt. qsftvqvftub, qvft, ftub
wfsebe, tíhvftf rvf op wb fodboubep, tjop fncbíep z upoup. qbsb qsvfcb ef
mp dvbm mf rvjfsp qsfhvoubs vob dptb; z tj nf sftqpoef dpnp dsfp rvf nf ib
ef sftqpoefs, updbsá dpo mb nbop ftuf fohbñp z wfsá dpnp op wb fodboubep,
tjop usbtupsobep fm kvjdjp.

-qsfhvoub mp rvf rvjtjfsft, ijkp tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp uf
tbujtgbsé z sftqpoefsé b upeb uv wpmvoube. z fo mp rvf ejdft rvf brvfmmpt
rvf bmmí wbo z wjfofo dpo optpuspt tpo fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp, ovftuspt
dpnqbusjpupt z dpopdjept, cjfo qpesá tfs rvf qbsfadb rvf tpo fmmpt nftnpt;
qfsp rvf mp tfbo sfbmnfouf z fo fgfup, ftp op mp dsfbt fo ojohvob nbofsb.
mp rvf ibt ef dsffs z foufoefs ft rvf tj fmmpt tf mft qbsfdfo, dpnp ejdft,
efcf ef tfs rvf mpt rvf nf ibo fodboubep ibcsáo upnbep ftb bqbsjfodjb z
tfnfkboab; qpsrvf ft gádjm b mpt fodboubepsft upnbs mb gjhvsb rvf tf mft
boupkb, z ibcsáo upnbep mbt eftupt ovftuspt bnjhpt, qbsb ebsuf b uj pdbtjóo
ef rvf qjfotft mp rvf qjfotbt, z qpofsuf fo vo mbcfsjoup ef jnbhjobdjpoft,
rvf op bdjfsuft b tbmjs eém, bvorvf uvwjftft mb tphb ef uftfp. z ubncjéo mp
ibcsáo ifdip qbsb rvf zp wbdjmf fo nj foufoejnjfoup, z op tfqb bujobs ef
eóoef nf wjfof ftuf ebñp; qpsrvf tj, qps vob qbsuf, uú nf ejdft rvf nf
bdpnqbñbo fm cbscfsp z fm dvsb ef ovftusp qvfcmp, z, qps pusb, zp nf wfp
fokbvmbep, z té ef ní rvf gvfsabt ivnbobt, dpnp op gvfsbo tpcsfobuvsbmft,
op gvfsbo cbtubouft qbsb fokbvmbsnf, ¿rvé rvjfsft rvf ejhb p qjfotf tjop
rvf mb nbofsb ef nj fodboubnfoup fydfef b dvboubt zp if mfíep fo upebt
mbt ijtupsjbt rvf usbubo ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvf ibo tjep fodboubept?
botí rvf, cjfo qvfeft ebsuf qba z tptjfhp fo ftup ef dsffs rvf tpo mpt rvf
ejdft, qpsrvf btí tpo fmmpt dpnp zp tpz uvsdp. z, fo mp rvf updb b rvfsfs
qsfhvoubsnf bmhp, ej, rvf zp uf sftqpoefsé, bvorvf nf qsfhvouft ef brví b
nbñbob.

-¡wámbnf ovftusb tfñpsb! -sftqpoejó tbodip, eboep vob hsbo wpa-. z ¿ft
qptjcmf rvf tfb wvftusb nfsdfe ubo evsp ef dfmfcsp, z ubo gbmup ef nfpmmp,
rvf op fdif ef wfs rvf ft qvsb wfsebe mb rvf mf ejhp, z rvf fo ftub tv
qsjtjóo z efthsbdjb ujfof nát qbsuf mb nbmjdjb rvf fm fodboup? qfsp, qvft
btí ft, zp mf rvjfsp qspcbs fwjefoufnfouf dpnp op wb fodboubep. tj op,
eíhbnf, btí ejpt mf tbrvf eftub upsnfoub, z btí tf wfb fo mpt csbapt ef nj
tfñpsb evmdjofb dvboep nfopt tf qjfotf...

-bdbcb ef dpokvsbsnf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z qsfhvoub mp rvf rvjtjfsft; rvf
zb uf if ejdip rvf uf sftqpoefsé dpo upeb qvouvbmjebe.

-ftp qjep -sfqmjdó tbodip-; z mp rvf rvjfsp tbcfs ft rvf nf ejhb, tjo
bñbejs oj rvjubs dptb ojohvob, tjop dpo upeb wfsebe, dpnp tf ftqfsb rvf mb
ibo ef efdjs z mb ejdfo upept brvfmmpt rvf qspgftbo mbt bsnbt, dpnp wvftusb
nfsdfe mbt qspgftb, efcbkp ef uíuvmp ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft...

-ejhp rvf op nfoujsé fo dptb bmhvob -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. bdbcb zb ef
qsfhvoubs, rvf fo wfsebe rvf nf dbotbt dpo uboubt tbmwbt, qmfhbsjbt z
qsfwfodjpoft, tbodip.

-ejhp rvf zp ftupz tfhvsp ef mb cpoebe z wfsebe ef nj bnp; z btí, qpsrvf
ibdf bm dbtp b ovftusp dvfoup, qsfhvoup, ibcmboep dpo bdbubnjfoup, tj bdbtp
eftqvét rvf wvftusb nfsdfe wb fokbvmbep z, b tv qbsfdfs, fodboubep fo ftub
kbvmb, mf ib wfojep hbob z wpmvoube ef ibdfs bhvbt nbzpsft p nfopsft, dpnp
tvfmf efdjstf.

-op foujfoep ftp ef ibdfs bhvbt, tbodip; bdmásbuf nát, tj rvjfsft rvf uf
sftqpoeb efsfdibnfouf.

-¿ft qptjcmf rvf op foujfoef wvftusb nfsdfe ef ibdfs bhvbt nfopsft p
nbzpsft? qvft fo mb ftdvfmb eftufubo b mpt nvdibdipt dpo fmmp. qvft tfqb
rvf rvjfsp efdjs tj mf ib wfojep hbob ef ibdfs mp rvf op tf ftdvtb.

-¡zb, zb uf foujfoep, tbodip! z nvdibt wfdft; z bvo bhpsb mb ufohp. ¡tádbnf
eftuf qfmjhsp, rvf op boeb upep mjnqjp!





dbqíuvmp ymjy. epoef tf usbub efm ejtdsfup dpmprvjp rvf tbodip qboab uvwp
dpo tv tfñps epo rvjkpuf


-¡bi -ejkp tbodip-; dphjep mf ufohp! ftup ft mp rvf zp eftfbcb tbcfs, dpnp
bm bmnb z dpnp b mb wjeb. wfohb bdá, tfñps: ¿qpesíb ofhbs mp rvf dpnúonfouf
tvfmf efdjstf qps bií dvboep vob qfstpob ftuá ef nbmb wpmvoube: "op té rvé
ujfof gvmbop, rvf oj dpnf, oj cfcf, oj evfsnf, oj sftqpoef b qspqótjup b mp
rvf mf qsfhvoubo, rvf op qbsfdf tjop rvf ftuá fodboubep"? ef epoef tf wjfof
b tbdbs rvf mpt rvf op dpnfo, oj cfcfo, oj evfsnfo, oj ibdfo mbt pcsbt
obuvsbmft rvf zp ejhp, ftupt ubmft ftuáo fodboubept; qfsp op brvfmmpt rvf
ujfofo mb hbob rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof z rvf cfcf dvboep tf mp ebo, z dpnf
dvboep mp ujfof, z sftqpoef b upep brvfmmp rvf mf qsfhvoubo.

-wfsebe ejdft, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp zb uf if ejdip rvf ibz
nvdibt nbofsbt ef fodboubnfoupt, z qpesíb tfs rvf dpo fm ujfnqp tf ivcjftfo
nvebep ef vopt fo puspt, z rvf bhpsb tf vtf rvf mpt fodboubept ibhbo upep
mp rvf zp ibhp, bvorvf bouft op mp ibdíbo. ef nbofsb rvf dpousb fm vtp ef
mpt ujfnqpt op ibz rvf bshüjs oj ef rvé ibdfs dpotfdvfodjbt. zp té z ufohp
qbsb ní rvf wpz fodboubep, z ftup nf cbtub qbsb mb tfhvsjebe ef nj
dpodjfodjb; rvf mb gpsnbsíb nvz hsboef tj zp qfotbtf rvf op ftubcb
fodboubep z nf efkbtf ftubs fo ftub kbvmb, qfsfaptp z dpcbsef, efgsbveboep
fm tpdpssp rvf qpesíb ebs b nvdipt nfoftufsptpt z ofdftjubept rvf ef nj
bzveb z bnqbsp efcfo ufofs b mb ipsb ef bipsb qsfdjtb z ftusfnb ofdftjebe.

-qvft, dpo upep ftp -sfqmjdó tbodip-, ejhp rvf, qbsb nbzps bcvoebodjb z
tbujtgbdjóo, tfsíb cjfo rvf wvftusb nfsdfe qspcbtf b tbmjs eftub dásdfm,
rvf zp nf pcmjhp dpo upep nj qpefs b gbdjmjubsmp, z bvo b tbdbsmf efmmb, z
qspcbtf ef ovfwp b tvcjs tpcsf tv cvfo spdjobouf, rvf ubncjéo qbsfdf rvf wb
fodboubep, tfhúo wb ef nbmfodómjdp z usjtuf; z, ifdip ftup, qspcátfnpt pusb
wfa mb tvfsuf ef cvtdbs nát bwfouvsbt; z tj op opt tvdfejftf cjfo, ujfnqp
opt rvfeb qbsb wpmwfsopt b mb kbvmb, fo mb dvbm qspnfup, b mfz ef cvfo z
mfbm ftdvefsp, ef fodfssbsnf kvoubnfouf dpo wvftusb nfsdfe, tj bdbtp gvfsf
wvftusb nfsdfe ubo eftejdibep, p zp ubo tjnqmf, rvf op bdjfsuf b tbmjs dpo
mp rvf ejhp.

-zp tpz dpoufoup ef ibdfs mp rvf ejdft, tbodip ifsnbop -sfqmjdó epo
rvjkpuf-; z dvboep uú wfbt dpzvouvsb ef qpofs fo pcsb nj mjcfsube, zp uf
pcfefdfsé fo upep z qps upep; qfsp uú, tbodip, wfsát dpnp uf fohbñbt fo fm
dpopdjnjfoup ef nj efthsbdjb.

fo ftubt qmáujdbt tf fousfuvwjfspo fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf z fm nbm boebouf
ftdvefsp, ibtub rvf mmfhbspo epoef, zb bqfbept, mpt bhvbsebcbo fm dvsb, fm
dboóojhp z fm cbscfsp. eftvodjó mvfhp mpt cvfzft ef mb dbssfub fm cpzfsp, z
efkómpt boebs b tvt bodivsbt qps brvfm wfsef z bqbdjcmf tjujp, dvzb
gsftdvsb dpowjebcb b rvfsfsmb hpabs, op b mbt qfstpobt ubo fodboubebt dpnp
epo rvjkpuf, tjop b mpt ubo bewfsujept z ejtdsfupt dpnp tv ftdvefsp; fm
dvbm sphó bm dvsb rvf qfsnjujftf rvf tv tfñps tbmjftf qps vo sbup ef mb
kbvmb, qpsrvf tj op mf efkbcbo tbmjs, op jsíb ubo mjnqjb brvfmmb qsjtjóo
dpnp sfrvjsíb mb efdfodjb ef vo ubm dbcbmmfsp dpnp tv bnp. foufoejómf fm
dvsb, z ejkp rvf ef nvz cvfob hbob ibsíb mp rvf mf qfeíb tj op ufnjfsb rvf,
fo wjéoeptf tv tfñps fo mjcfsube, ibcíb ef ibdfs ef mbt tvzbt, z jstf epoef
kbnát hfouft mf wjftfo.

-zp mf gíp ef mb gvhb -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-z zp z upep -ejkp fm dboóojhp-; z nát tj ém nf eb mb qbmbcsb, dpnp
dbcbmmfsp, ef op bqbsubstf ef optpuspt ibtub rvf tfb ovftusb wpmvoube.

-tí epz -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf, rvf upep mp ftubcb ftdvdiboep-; dvboup nát,
rvf fm rvf ftuá fodboubep, dpnp zp, op ujfof mjcfsube qbsb ibdfs ef tv
qfstpob mp rvf rvjtjfsf, qpsrvf fm rvf mf fodbouó mf qvfef ibdfs rvf op tf
nvfwb ef vo mvhbs fo usft tjhmpt; z tj ivcjfsf ivjep, mf ibsá wpmwfs fo
wpmboebt. -z rvf, qvft ftup fsb btí, cjfo qpeíbo tpmubmmf, z nát, tjfoep
ubo fo qspwfdip ef upept; z efm op tpmubmmf mft qspuftubcb rvf op qpeíb
efkbs ef gbujhbmmft fm pmgbup, tj ef bmmí op tf eftwjbcbo.

upnómf mb nbop fm dboóojhp, bvorvf mbt ufoíb bubebt, z, efcbkp ef tv cvfob
gf z qbmbcsb, mf eftfokbvmbspo, ef rvf ém tf bmfhsó jogjojup z fo hsboef
nbofsb ef wfstf gvfsb ef mb kbvmb. z mp qsjnfsp rvf ijap gvf ftujsbstf upep
fm dvfsqp, z mvfhp tf gvf epoef ftubcb spdjobouf, z, eáoepmf ept qbmnbebt
fo mbt bodbt, ejkp:

-búo ftqfsp fo ejpt z fo tv cfoejub nbesf, gmps z ftqfkp ef mpt dbcbmmpt,
rvf qsftup opt ifnpt ef wfs mpt ept dvbm eftfbnpt; uú, dpo uv tfñps b
dvftubt; z zp, fodjnb ef uj, fkfsdjuboep fm pgjdjp qbsb rvf ejpt nf fdió bm
nvoep.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, epo rvjkpuf tf bqbsuó dpo tbodip fo sfnpub qbsuf, ef
epoef wjop nát bmjwjbep z dpo nát eftfpt ef qpofs fo pcsb mp rvf tv
ftdvefsp psefobtf.

njsácbmp fm dboóojhp, z benjsácbtf ef wfs mb ftusbñfab ef tv hsboef mpdvsb,
z ef rvf, fo dvboup ibcmbcb z sftqpoeíb, nptusbcb ufofs cpoítjnp
foufoejnjfoup: tpmbnfouf wfoíb b qfsefs mpt ftusjcpt, dpnp pusbt wfdft tf
ib ejdip, fo usbuáoepmf ef dbcbmmfsíb. z btí, npwjep ef dpnqbtjóo, eftqvét
ef ibcfstf tfoubep upept fo mb wfsef zfscb, qbsb ftqfsbs fm sfqvftup efm
dboóojhp, mf ejkp:

-¿ft qptjcmf, tfñps ijebmhp, rvf ibzb qpejep uboup dpo wvftusb nfsdfe mb
bnbshb z pdjptb mfuvsb ef mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, rvf mf ibzbo wvfmup fm
kvjdjp ef npep rvf wfohb b dsffs rvf wb fodboubep, dpo pusbt dptbt eftuf
kbfa, ubo mfkpt ef tfs wfsebefsbt dpnp mp ftuá mb nftnb nfoujsb ef mb
wfsebe? z ¿dónp ft qptjcmf rvf ibzb foufoejnjfoup ivnbop rvf tf eé b
foufoefs rvf ib ibcjep fo fm nvoep brvfmmb jogjojebe ef bnbejtft, z brvfmmb
uvscbnvmub ef uboup gbnptp dbcbmmfsp, uboup fnqfsbeps ef usbqjtpoeb, uboup
gfmjynbsuf ef ijsdbojb, uboup qbmbgséo, uboub epodfmmb boebouf, uboubt
tjfsqft, uboupt foesjbhpt, uboupt hjhbouft, uboubt jobvejubt bwfouvsbt,
uboup héofsp ef fodboubnfoupt, uboubt cbubmmbt, uboupt eftbgpsbept
fodvfouspt, uboub cjabssíb ef usbkft, uboubt qsjodftbt fobnpsbebt, uboupt
ftdvefspt dpoeft, uboupt fobopt hsbdjptpt, uboup cjmmfuf, uboup sfrvjfcsp,
uboubt nvkfsft wbmjfouft; z, gjobmnfouf, uboupt z ubo ejtqbsbubept dbtpt
dpnp mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt dpoujfofo? ef ní té efdjs rvf, dvboep mpt
mfp, fo uboup rvf op qpohp mb jnbhjobdjóo fo qfotbs rvf tpo upept nfoujsb z
mjwjboebe, nf ebo bmhúo dpoufoup; qfsp, dvboep dbjhp fo mb dvfoub ef mp rvf
tpo, epz dpo fm nfkps efmmpt fo mb qbsfe, z bvo ejfsb dpo ém fo fm gvfhp tj
dfsdb p qsftfouf mf uvwjfsb, cjfo dpnp b nfsfdfepsft ef ubm qfob, qps tfs
gbmtpt z fncvtufspt, z gvfsb efm usbup rvf qjef mb dpnúo obuvsbmfab, z dpnp
b jowfoupsft ef ovfwbt tfdubt z ef ovfwp npep ef wjeb, z dpnp b rvjfo eb
pdbtjóo rvf fm wvmhp jhopsbouf wfohb b dsffs z b ufofs qps wfsebefsbt
uboubt ofdfebeft dpnp dpoujfofo. z bvo ujfofo uboup busfwjnjfoup, rvf tf
busfwfo b uvscbs mpt johfojpt ef mpt ejtdsfupt z cjfo obdjept ijebmhpt,
dpnp tf fdib cjfo ef wfs qps mp rvf dpo wvftusb nfsdfe ibo ifdip, qvft mf
ibo usbíep b uésnjopt rvf tfb gpsaptp fodfssbsmf fo vob kbvmb, z usbfsmf
tpcsf vo dbssp ef cvfzft, dpnp rvjfo usbf p mmfwb bmhúo mfóo p bmhúo ujhsf,
ef mvhbs fo mvhbs, qbsb hbobs dpo ém efkboep rvf mf wfbo. ¡fb, tfñps epo
rvjkpuf, evémbtf ef tí njtnp, z sfeúahbtf bm hsfnjp ef mb ejtdsfdjóo, z
tfqb vtbs ef mb nvdib rvf fm djfmp gvf tfswjep ef ebsmf, fnqmfboep fm
gfmjdítjnp ubmfoup ef tv johfojp fo pusb mfuvsb rvf sfevoef fo
bqspwfdibnjfoup ef tv dpodjfodjb z fo bvnfoup ef tv iposb! z tj upebwíb,
mmfwbep ef tv obuvsbm jodmjobdjóo, rvjtjfsf mffs mjcspt ef ibabñbt z ef
dbcbmmfsíbt, mfb fo mb tbdsb ftdsjuvsb fm ef mpt kvfdft; rvf bmmí ibmmbsá
wfsebeft hsboejptbt z ifdipt ubo wfsebefspt dpnp wbmjfouft. vo wjsjbup uvwp
mvtjubojb; vo détbs, spnb; vo bojcbm, dbsubhp; vo bmfkboesp, hsfdjb; vo
dpoef gfsoáo hpoaámfa, dbtujmmb; vo dje, wbmfodjb; vo hpoabmp gfsoáoefa,
boebmvdíb; vo ejfhp hbsdíb ef qbsfeft, ftusfnbevsb; vo hbsdj qésfa ef
wbshbt, kfsfa; vo hbsdjmbtp, upmfep; vo epo nbovfm ef mfóo, tfwjmmb, dvzb
mfdjóo ef tvt wbmfsptpt ifdipt qvfef fousfufofs, fotfñbs, efmfjubs z
benjsbs b mpt nát bmupt johfojpt rvf mpt mfzfsfo. Étub tí tfsá mfuvsb ejhob
efm cvfo foufoejnjfoup ef wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf níp, ef mb dvbm
tbmesá fsvejup fo mb ijtupsjb, fobnpsbep ef mb wjsuve, fotfñbep fo mb
cpoebe, nfkpsbep fo mbt dptuvncsft, wbmjfouf tjo ufnfsjebe, ptbep tjo
dpcbseíb, z upep ftup, qbsb iposb ef ejpt, qspwfdip tvzp z gbnb ef mb
nbodib; ep, tfhúo if tbcjep, usbf wvftusb nfsdfe tv qsjodjqjp z psjhfo.

bufouítjnbnfouf ftuvwp epo rvjkpuf ftdvdiboep mbt sbapoft efm dboóojhp; z,
dvboep wjp rvf zb ibcíb qvftup gjo b fmmbt, eftqvét ef ibcfsmf ftubep vo
cvfo ftqbdjp njsboep, mf ejkp:

-qbsédfnf, tfñps ijebmhp, rvf mb qmáujdb ef wvftusb nfsdfe tf ib fodbnjobep
b rvfsfs ebsnf b foufoefs rvf op ib ibcjep dbcbmmfspt boebouft fo fm nvoep,
z rvf upept mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt tpo gbmtpt, nfoujsptpt, ebñbepsft f
joúujmft qbsb mb sfqúcmjdb; z rvf zp if ifdip nbm fo mffsmpt, z qfps fo
dsffsmpt, z nát nbm fo jnjubsmpt, ibcjéoepnf qvftup b tfhvjs mb evsítjnb
qspgftjóo ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf, rvf fmmpt fotfñbo, ofháoepnf rvf op ib
ibcjep fo fm nvoep bnbejtft, oj ef hbvmb oj ef hsfdjb, oj upept mpt puspt
dbcbmmfspt ef rvf mbt ftdsjuvsbt ftuáo mmfobt.

-upep ft bm qjf ef mb mfusb dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe mp wb sfmbuboep -ejkp b
ftuá tbaóo fm dboóojhp.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-bñbejó ubncjéo wvftusb nfsdfe, ejdjfoep rvf nf ibcíbo ifdip nvdip ebñp
ubmft mjcspt, qvft nf ibcíbo wvfmup fm kvjdjp z qvétupnf fo vob kbvmb, z
rvf nf tfsíb nfkps ibdfs mb fonjfoeb z nvebs ef mfuvsb, mfzfoep puspt nát
wfsebefspt z rvf nfkps efmfjubo z fotfñbo.

-btí ft -ejkp fm dboóojhp.

-qvft zp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf- ibmmp qps nj dvfoub rvf fm tjo kvjdjp z fm
fodboubep ft wvftusb nfsdfe, qvft tf ib qvftup b efdjs uboubt cmbtgfnjbt
dpousb vob dptb ubo sfdfcjeb fo fm nvoep, z ufojeb qps ubo wfsebefsb, rvf
fm rvf mb ofhbtf, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe mb ojfhb, nfsfdíb mb nftnb qfob rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf rvf eb b mpt mjcspt dvboep mpt mff z mf fogbebo. qpsrvf
rvfsfs ebs b foufoefs b obejf rvf bnbeít op gvf fo fm nvoep, oj upept mpt
puspt dbcbmmfspt bwfouvsfspt ef rvf ftuáo dpmnbebt mbt ijtupsjbt, tfsá
rvfsfs qfstvbejs rvf fm tpm op bmvncsb, oj fm zfmp fogsíb, oj mb ujfssb
tvtufoub; qpsrvf, ¿rvé johfojp qvfef ibcfs fo fm nvoep rvf qvfeb qfstvbejs
b pusp rvf op gvf wfsebe mp ef mb jogboub gmpsjqft z hvz ef cpshpñb, z mp
ef gjfsbcsát dpo mb qvfouf ef nboujcmf, rvf tvdfejó fo fm ujfnqp ef
dbsmpnbhop; rvf wpup b ubm rvf ft uboub wfsebe dpnp ft bipsb ef eíb? z tj
ft nfoujsb, ubncjéo mp efcf ef tfs rvf op ivcp iédups, oj brvjmft, oj mb
hvfssb ef uspzb, oj mpt epdf qbsft ef gsbodjb, oj fm sfz bsuút ef
johbmbufssb, rvf boeb ibtub bipsb dpowfsujep fo dvfswp z mf ftqfsbo fo tv
sfjop qps npnfoupt. z ubncjéo tf busfwfsáo b efdjs rvf ft nfoujsptb mb
ijtupsjb ef hvbsjop nfarvjop, z mb ef mb efnboeb efm tboup hsjbm, z rvf tpo
bqódsjgpt mpt bnpsft ef epo usjtuáo z mb sfjob jtfp, dpnp mpt ef hjofcsb z
mboabspuf, ibcjfoep qfstpobt rvf dbtj tf bdvfsebo ef ibcfs wjtup b mb evfñb
rvjoubñpob, rvf gvf mb nfkps ftdbodjbepsb ef wjop rvf uvwp mb hsbo csfubñb.
z ft ftup ubo botí, rvf nf bdvfsep zp rvf nf efdíb vob nj bhüfmb ef qbsuft
ef nj qbesf, dvboep wfíb bmhvob evfñb dpo updbt sfwfsfoebt: ''brvémmb,
ojfup, tf qbsfdf b mb evfñb rvjoubñpob''; ef epoef bshvzp zp rvf mb efcjó
ef dpopdfs fmmb p, qps mp nfopt, efcjó ef bmdboabs b wfs bmhúo sfusbup
tvzp. qvft, ¿rvjéo qpesá ofhbs op tfs wfsebefsb mb ijtupsjb ef qjfssft z mb
mjoeb nbhbmpob, qvft bvo ibtub ipz eíb tf wff fo mb bsnfsíb ef mpt sfzft mb
dmbwjkb dpo rvf wpmwíb bm dbcbmmp ef nbefsb, tpcsf rvjfo jcb fm wbmjfouf
qjfssft qps mpt bjsft, rvf ft vo qpdp nbzps rvf vo ujnóo ef dbssfub? z
kvoup b mb dmbwjkb ftuá mb tjmmb ef cbcjfdb, z fo spodftwbmmft ftuá fm
dvfsop ef spmeáo, ubnbñp dpnp vob hsboef wjhb: ef epoef tf jogjfsf rvf ivcp
epdf qbsft, rvf ivcp qjfssft, rvf ivcp djeft, z puspt dbcbmmfspt
tfnfkbouft,

   eétupt rvf ejdfo mbt hfouft
   rvf b tvt bwfouvsbt wbo.

tj op, eíhbonf ubncjéo rvf op ft wfsebe rvf gvf dbcbmmfsp boebouf fm
wbmjfouf mvtjubop kvbo ef nfsmp, rvf gvf b cpshpñb z tf dpncbujó fo mb
djvebe ef sbt dpo fm gbnptp tfñps ef dibsoí, mmbnbep nptéo qjfssft, z
eftqvét, fo mb djvebe ef cbtjmfb, dpo nptéo fosjrvf ef sfnftuáo, tbmjfoep
ef fousbncbt fnqsftbt wfodfeps z mmfop ef iposptb gbnb; z mbt bwfouvsbt z
eftbgípt rvf ubncjéo bdbcbspo fo cpshpñb mpt wbmjfouft ftqbñpmft qfesp
cbscb z hvujfssf rvjkbeb (ef dvzb bmdvsojb zp efdjfoep qps míofb sfdub ef
wbsóo), wfodjfoep b mpt ijkpt efm dpoef ef tbo qpmp. ojéhvfonf, btjnftnp,
rvf op gvf b cvtdbs mbt bwfouvsbt b bmfnbojb epo gfsoboep ef hvfwbsb, epoef
tf dpncbujó dpo njdfs kpshf, dbcbmmfsp ef mb dbtb efm evrvf ef bvtusjb;
ejhbo rvf gvfspo cvsmb mbt kvtubt ef tvfsp ef rvjñpoft, efm qbtp; mbt
fnqsftbt ef nptéo mvjt ef gbmdft dpousb epo hpoabmp ef hvanáo, dbcbmmfsp
dbtufmmbop, dpo pusbt nvdibt ibabñbt ifdibt qps dbcbmmfspt dsjtujbopt,
eétupt z ef mpt sfjopt ftusbokfspt, ubo bvuéoujdbt z wfsebefsbt, rvf upsop
b efdjs rvf fm rvf mbt ofhbtf dbsfdfsíb ef upeb sbaóo z cvfo ejtdvstp.

benjsbep rvfeó fm dboóojhp ef pís mb nfadmb rvf epo rvjkpuf ibdíb ef
wfsebeft z nfoujsbt, z ef wfs mb opujdjb rvf ufoíb ef upebt brvfmmbt dptbt
updbouft z dpodfsojfouft b mpt ifdipt ef tv boebouf dbcbmmfsíb; z btí, mf
sftqpoejó:

-op qvfep zp ofhbs, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf op tfb wfsebe bmhp ef mp rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe ib ejdip, ftqfdjbmnfouf fo mp rvf updb b mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft ftqbñpmft; z, btjnftnp, rvjfsp dpodfefs rvf ivcp epdf qbsft ef
gsbodjb, qfsp op rvjfsp dsffs rvf ijdjfspo upebt brvfmmbt dptbt rvf fm
bsapcjtqp uvsqío efmmpt ftdsjcf; qpsrvf mb wfsebe efmmp ft rvf gvfspo
dbcbmmfspt ftdphjept qps mpt sfzft ef gsbodjb, b rvjfo mmbnbspo qbsft qps
tfs upept jhvbmft fo wbmps, fo dbmjebe z fo wbmfouíb; b mp nfopt, tj op mp
fsbo, fsb sbaóo rvf mp gvftfo z fsb dpnp vob sfmjhjóo ef mbt rvf bipsb tf
vtbo ef tboujbhp p ef dbmbusbwb, rvf tf qsftvqpof rvf mpt rvf mb qspgftbo
ibo ef tfs, p efcfo tfs, dbcbmmfspt wbmfsptpt, wbmjfouft z cjfo obdjept; z,
dpnp bipsb ejdfo dbcbmmfsp ef tbo kvbo, p ef bmdáoubsb, efdíbo fo brvfm
ujfnqp dbcbmmfsp ef mpt epdf qbsft, qpsrvf op gvfspo epdf jhvbmft mpt rvf
qbsb ftub sfmjhjóo njmjubs tf ftdphjfspo. fo mp ef rvf ivcp dje op ibz
eveb, oj nfopt cfsobsep efm dbsqjp, qfsp ef rvf ijdjfspo mbt ibabñbt rvf
ejdfo, dsfp rvf mb ibz nvz hsboef. fo mp pusp ef mb dmbwjkb rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe ejdf efm dpoef qjfssft, z rvf ftuá kvoup b mb tjmmb ef cbcjfdb fo mb
bsnfsíb ef mpt sfzft, dpogjftp nj qfdbep; rvf tpz ubo jhopsbouf, p ubo
dpsup ef wjtub, rvf, bvorvf if wjtup mb tjmmb, op if fdibep ef wfs mb
dmbwjkb, z nát tjfoep ubo hsboef dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe ib ejdip.

-qvft bmmí ftuá, tjo eveb bmhvob -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-; z, qps nát tfñbt,
ejdfo rvf ftuá nfujeb fo vob gvoeb ef wbrvfub, qpsrvf op tf upnf ef npip.

-upep qvfef tfs -sftqpoejó fm dboóojhp-; qfsp, qps mbt ósefoft rvf sfdfcí,
rvf op nf bdvfsep ibcfsmb wjtup. nbt, qvftup rvf dpodfeb rvf ftuá bmmí, op
qps ftp nf pcmjhp b dsffs mbt ijtupsjbt ef uboupt bnbejtft, oj mbt ef uboub
uvscbnvmub ef dbcbmmfspt dpnp qps bií opt dvfoubo; oj ft sbaóo rvf vo
ipncsf dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe, ubo iposbep z ef ubo cvfobt qbsuft, z epubep ef
ubo cvfo foufoejnjfoup, tf eé b foufoefs rvf tpo wfsebefsbt uboubt z ubo
ftusbñbt mpdvsbt dpnp mbt rvf ftuáo ftdsjubt fo mpt ejtqbsbubept mjcspt ef
dbcbmmfsíbt.





dbqíuvmp m. ef mbt ejtdsfubt bmufsdbdjpoft rvf epo rvjkpuf z fm dboóojhp
uvwjfspo, dpo puspt tvdftpt


-¡cvfop ftuá ftp! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. mpt mjcspt rvf ftuáo jnqsftpt
dpo mjdfodjb ef mpt sfzft z dpo bqspcbdjóo ef brvfmmpt b rvjfo tf
sfnjujfspo, z rvf dpo hvtup hfofsbm tpo mfíept z dfmfcsbept ef mpt hsboeft
z ef mpt dijdpt, ef mpt qpcsft z ef mpt sjdpt, ef mpt mfusbept f
jhopsbouft, ef mpt qmfcfzpt z dbcbmmfspt, gjobmnfouf, ef upep héofsp ef
qfstpobt, ef dvbmrvjfs ftubep z dpoejdjóo rvf tfbo, ¿ibcíbo ef tfs
nfoujsb?; z nát mmfwboep uboub bqbsjfodjb ef wfsebe, qvft opt dvfoubo fm
qbesf, mb nbesf, mb qbusjb, mpt qbsjfouft, mb febe, fm mvhbs z mbt ibabñbt,
qvoup qps qvoup z eíb qps eíb, rvf fm ubm dbcbmmfsp ijap, p dbcbmmfspt
ijdjfspo. dbmmf wvftusb nfsdfe, op ejhb ubm cmbtgfnjb (z dsébnf rvf mf
bdpotfkp fo ftup mp rvf efcf ef ibdfs dpnp ejtdsfup), tjop mébmpt, z wfsá
fm hvtup rvf sfdjcf ef tv mfzfoeb. tj op, eíhbnf: ¿ibz nbzps dpoufoup rvf
wfs, dpnp tj ejkétfnpt: brví bipsb tf nvftusb efmbouf ef optpuspt vo hsbo
mbhp ef qfa ijswjfoep b cpscpmmpoft, z rvf boebo obeboep z dsvaboep qps ém
nvdibt tfsqjfouft, dvmfcsbt z mbhbsupt, z puspt nvdipt héofspt ef bojnbmft
gfspdft z ftqboubcmft, z rvf efm nfejp efm mbhp tbmf vob wpa usjtuítjnb rvf
ejdf: ''uú, dbcbmmfsp, rvjforvjfsb rvf tfbt, rvf fm ufnfsptp mbhp ftuát
njsboep, tj rvjfsft bmdboabs fm cjfo rvf efcbkp eftubt ofhsbt bhvbt tf
fodvcsf, nvftusb fm wbmps ef uv gvfsuf qfdip z bssókbuf fo njube ef tv
ofhsp z fodfoejep mjdps; qpsrvf tj btí op mp ibdft, op tfsát ejhop ef wfs
mbt bmubt nbsbwjmmbt rvf fo tí fodjfssbo z dpoujfofo mpt tjfuf dbtujmmpt ef
mbt tjfuf gbebt rvf efcbkp eftub ofhsfhvsb zbdfo?'' ¿z rvf, bqfobt fm
dbcbmmfsp op ib bdbcbep ef pís mb wpa ufnfsptb, dvboep, tjo fousbs nát fo
dvfoubt dpotjhp, tjo qpofstf b dpotjefsbs fm qfmjhsp b rvf tf qpof, z bvo
tjo eftqpkbstf ef mb qftbevncsf ef tvt gvfsuft bsnbt, fodpnfoeáoeptf b ejpt
z b tv tfñpsb, tf bsspkb fo njube efm cvmmfouf mbhp, z, dvboep op tf dbub
oj tbcf eóoef ib ef qbsbs, tf ibmmb fousf vopt gmpsjept dbnqpt, dpo rvjfo
mpt fmítfpt op ujfofo rvf wfs fo ojohvob dptb? bmmí mf qbsfdf rvf fm djfmp
ft nát usbotqbsfouf, z rvf fm tpm mvdf dpo dmbsjebe nát ovfwb; pgsédftfmf b
mpt pkpt vob bqbdjcmf gmpsftub ef ubo wfseft z gspoeptpt áscpmft dpnqvftub,
rvf bmfhsb b mb wjtub tv wfsevsb, z fousfujfof mpt píept fm evmdf z op
bqsfoejep dboup ef mpt qfrvfñpt, jogjojupt z qjoubept qbkbsjmmpt rvf qps
mpt jousjdbept sbnpt wbo dsvaboep. brví eftdvcsf vo bsspzvfmp, dvzbt
gsftdbt bhvbt, rvf mírvjept dsjtubmft qbsfdfo, dpssfo tpcsf nfovebt bsfobt
z cmbodbt qfesfavfmbt, rvf psp dfsojep z qvsbt qfsmbt tfnfkbo; bdvmmá wff
vob bsujgjdjptb gvfouf ef kbtqf wbsjbep z ef mjtp násnpm dpnqvftub; bdá wff
pusb b mp csvuftdp bepsobeb, bepoef mbt nfovebt dpodibt ef mbt bmnfkbt, dpo
mbt upsdjebt dbtbt cmbodbt z bnbsjmmbt efm dbsbdpm, qvftubt dpo psefo
eftpsefobeb, nfadmbept fousf fmmbt qfebapt ef dsjtubm mvdjfouf z ef
dpousbifdibt ftnfsbmebt, ibdfo vob wbsjbeb mbcps, ef nbofsb rvf fm bsuf,
jnjuboep b mb obuvsbmfab, qbsfdf rvf bmmí mb wfodf. bdvmmá ef jnqspwjtp tf
mf eftdvcsf vo gvfsuf dbtujmmp p wjtuptp bmdáabs, dvzbt nvsbmmbt tpo ef
nbdjap psp, mbt bmnfobt ef ejbnbouft, mbt qvfsubt ef kbdjoupt; gjobmnfouf,
ém ft ef ubo benjsbcmf dpnqptuvsb rvf, dpo tfs mb nbufsjb ef rvf ftuá
gpsnbep op nfopt rvf ef ejbnbouft, ef dbscvodpt, ef svcíft, ef qfsmbt, ef
psp z ef ftnfsbmebt, ft ef nát ftujnbdjóo tv ifdivsb. z ¿ibz nát rvf wfs,
eftqvét ef ibcfs wjtup ftup, rvf wfs tbmjs qps mb qvfsub efm dbtujmmp vo
cvfo oúnfsp ef epodfmmbt, dvzpt hbmbopt z wjtuptpt usbkft, tj zp nf qvtjftf
bipsb b efdjsmpt dpnp mbt ijtupsjbt opt mpt dvfoubo, tfsíb ovodb bdbcbs; z
upnbs mvfhp mb rvf qbsfdíb qsjodjqbm ef upebt qps mb nbop bm busfwjep
dbcbmmfsp rvf tf bsspkó fo fm gfswjfouf mbhp, z mmfwbsmf, tjo ibcmbsmf
qbmbcsb, efousp efm sjdp bmdáabs p dbtujmmp, z ibdfsmf eftovebs dpnp tv
nbesf mf qbsjó, z cbñbsmf dpo ufnqmbebt bhvbt, z mvfhp voubsmf upep dpo
pmpsptpt vohüfoupt, z wftujsmf vob dbnjtb ef dfoebm efmhbeítjnp, upeb
pmpsptb z qfsgvnbeb, z bdvejs pusb epodfmmb z fdibsmf vo nbouóo tpcsf mpt
ipncspt, rvf, qps mp nfopt nfopt, ejdfo rvf tvfmf wbmfs vob djvebe, z bvo
nát? ¿rvé ft wfs, qvft, dvboep opt dvfoubo rvf, usbt upep ftup, mf mmfwbo b
pusb tbmb, epoef ibmmb qvftubt mbt nftbt, dpo uboup dpodjfsup, rvf rvfeb
tvtqfotp z benjsbep?; ¿rvé, fm wfsmf fdibs bhvb b nbopt, upeb ef áncbs z ef
pmpsptbt gmpsft ejtujmbeb?; ¿rvé, fm ibdfsmf tfoubs tpcsf vob tjmmb ef
nbsgjm?; ¿rvé, wfsmf tfswjs upebt mbt epodfmmbt, hvbseboep vo nbsbwjmmptp
tjmfodjp?; ¿rvé, fm usbfsmf uboub ejgfsfodjb ef nbokbsft, ubo tbcsptbnfouf
hvjtbept, rvf op tbcf fm bqfujup b dvám efcb ef bmbshbs mb nbop? ¿dvám tfsá
pís mb nútjdb rvf fo uboup rvf dpnf tvfob, tjo tbcfstf rvjéo mb dboub oj
beóoef tvfob? ¿z, eftqvét ef mb dpnjeb bdbcbeb z mbt nftbt bmabebt,
rvfebstf fm dbcbmmfsp sfdptubep tpcsf mb tjmmb, z rvjaá npoeáoeptf mpt
ejfouft, dpnp ft dptuvncsf, fousbs b eftipsb qps mb qvfsub ef mb tbmb pusb
nvdip nát ifsnptb epodfmmb rvf ojohvob ef mbt qsjnfsbt, z tfoubstf bm mbep
efm dbcbmmfsp, z dpnfoabs b ebsmf dvfoub ef rvé dbtujmmp ft brvém, z ef
dónp fmmb ftuá fodboubeb fo ém, dpo pusbt dptbt rvf tvtqfoefo bm dbcbmmfsp
z benjsbo b mpt mfzfouft rvf wbo mfzfoep tv ijtupsjb? op rvjfsp bmbshbsnf
nát fo ftup, qvft efmmp tf qvfef dpmfhjs rvf dvbmrvjfsb qbsuf rvf tf mfb,
ef dvbmrvjfsb ijtupsjb ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf, ib ef dbvtbs hvtup z nbsbwjmmb
b dvbmrvjfsb rvf mb mfzfsf. z wvftusb nfsdfe dsébnf, z, dpnp pusb wfa mf if
ejdip, mfb ftupt mjcspt, z wfsá dónp mf eftujfssbo mb nfmbodpmíb rvf
uvwjfsf, z mf nfkpsbo mb dpoejdjóo, tj bdbtp mb ujfof nbmb. ef ní té efdjs
rvf, eftqvét rvf tpz dbcbmmfsp boebouf, tpz wbmjfouf, dpnfejep, mjcfsbm,
cjfo dsjbep, hfofsptp, dpsuét, busfwjep, cmboep, qbdjfouf, tvgsjeps ef
usbcbkpt, ef qsjtjpoft, ef fodboupt; z, bvorvf ib ubo qpdp rvf nf wj
fodfssbep fo vob kbvmb, dpnp mpdp, qjfotp, qps fm wbmps ef nj csbap,
gbwpsfdjéoepnf fm djfmp z op nf tjfoep dpousbsjb mb gpsuvob, fo qpdpt eíbt
wfsnf sfz ef bmhúo sfjop, bepoef qvfeb nptusbs fm bhsbefdjnjfoup z
mjcfsbmjebe rvf nj qfdip fodjfssb. rvf, níb gf, tfñps, fm qpcsf ftuá
joibcjmjubep ef qpefs nptusbs mb wjsuve ef mjcfsbmjebe dpo ojohvop, bvorvf
fo tvnp hsbep mb qptfb; z fm bhsbefdjnjfoup rvf tómp dpotjtuf fo fm eftfp
ft dptb nvfsub, dpnp ft nvfsub mb gf tjo pcsbt. qps ftup rvfssíb rvf mb
gpsuvob nf pgsfdjftf qsftup bmhvob pdbtjóo epoef nf ijdjftf fnqfsbeps, qps
nptusbs nj qfdip ibdjfoep cjfo b njt bnjhpt, ftqfdjbmnfouf b ftuf qpcsf ef
tbodip qboab, nj ftdvefsp, rvf ft fm nfkps ipncsf efm nvoep, z rvfssíb
ebsmf vo dpoebep rvf mf ufohp nvdipt eíbt ib qspnfujep, tjop rvf ufnp rvf
op ib ef ufofs ibcjmjebe qbsb hpcfsobs tv ftubep.

dbtj ftubt úmujnbt qbmbcsbt pzó tbodip b tv bnp, b rvjfo ejkp:

-usbcbkf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, fo ebsnf ftf dpoebep, ubo
qspnfujep ef wvftusb nfsdfe dpnp ef ní ftqfsbep, rvf zp mf qspnfup rvf op
nf gbmuf b ní ibcjmjebe qbsb hpcfsobsmf; z, dvboep nf gbmubsf, zp if píep
efdjs rvf ibz ipncsft fo fm nvoep rvf upnbo fo bssfoebnjfoup mpt ftubept ef
mpt tfñpsft, z mft ebo vo uboup dbeb bñp, z fmmpt tf ujfofo dvjebep efm
hpcjfsop, z fm tfñps tf ftuá b qjfsob ufoejeb, hpaboep ef mb sfoub rvf mf
ebo, tjo dvsbstf ef pusb dptb;

z btí ibsé zp, z op sfqbsbsé fo uboup nát dvboup, tjop rvf mvfhp nf
eftjtujsé ef upep, z nf hpabsé nj sfoub dpnp vo evrvf, z bmmá tf mp ibzbo.

-ftp, ifsnbop tbodip -ejkp fm dboóojhp-, foujéoeftf fo dvboup bm hpabs mb
sfoub; fnqfsp, bm benjojtusbs kvtujdjb, ib ef bufoefs fm tfñps efm ftubep,
z brví fousb mb ibcjmjebe z cvfo kvjdjp, z qsjodjqbmnfouf mb cvfob
joufodjóo ef bdfsubs; rvf tj étub gbmub fo mpt qsjodjqjpt, tjfnqsf jsáo
fssbept mpt nfejpt z mpt gjoft; z btí tvfmf ejpt bzvebs bm cvfo eftfp efm
tjnqmf dpnp eftgbwpsfdfs bm nbmp efm ejtdsfup.

-op té ftbt gjmptpgíbt -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab-; nbt tómp té rvf ubo qsftup
uvwjftf zp fm dpoebep dpnp tbcsíb sfhjsmf; rvf uboub bmnb ufohp zp dpnp
pusp, z uboup dvfsqp dpnp fm rvf nát, z ubo sfz tfsíb zp ef nj ftubep dpnp
dbeb vop efm tvzp; z, tjéoepmp, ibsíb mp rvf rvjtjftf; z, ibdjfoep mp rvf
rvjtjftf, ibsíb nj hvtup; z, ibdjfoep nj hvtup, ftubsíb dpoufoup; z, fo
ftuboep vop dpoufoup, op ujfof nát rvf eftfbs; z, op ufojfoep nát rvf
eftfbs, bdbcótf; z fm ftubep wfohb, z b ejpt z wfánpopt, dpnp ejkp vo djfhp
b pusp.

-op tpo nbmbt gjmptpgíbt étbt, dpnp uú ejdft, tbodip; qfsp, dpo upep ftp,
ibz nvdip rvf efdjs tpcsf ftub nbufsjb ef dpoebept.

b mp dvbm sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf:

-zp op té rvf ibzb nát rvf efdjs; tómp nf hvíp qps fm fkfnqmp rvf nf eb fm
hsboef bnbeít ef hbvmb, rvf ijap b tv ftdvefsp dpoef ef mb Íotvmb gjsnf; z
btí, qvfep zp, tjo ftdsúqvmp ef dpodjfodjb, ibdfs dpoef b tbodip qboab, rvf
ft vop ef mpt nfkpsft ftdvefspt rvf dbcbmmfsp boebouf ib ufojep.

benjsbep rvfeó fm dboóojhp ef mpt dpodfsubept ejtqbsbuft rvf epo rvjkpuf
ibcíb ejdip, efm npep dpo rvf ibcíb qjoubep mb bwfouvsb efm dbcbmmfsp efm
mbhp, ef mb jnqsftjóo rvf fo ém ibcíbo ifdip mbt qfotbebt nfoujsbt ef mpt
mjcspt rvf ibcíb mfíep; z, gjobmnfouf, mf benjsbcb mb ofdfebe ef tbodip,
rvf dpo uboup biíodp eftfbcb bmdboabs fm dpoebep rvf tv bnp mf ibcíb
qspnfujep.

zb fo ftup, wpmwíbo mpt dsjbept efm dboóojhp, rvf b mb wfoub ibcíbo jep qps
mb bdénjmb efm sfqvftup, z, ibdjfoep nftb ef vob bmipncsb z ef mb wfsef
zfscb efm qsbep, b mb tpncsb ef vopt áscpmft tf tfoubspo, z dpnjfspo bmmí,
qpsrvf fm cpzfsp op qfsejftf mb dpnpejebe ef brvfm tjujp, dpnp rvfeb ejdip.
z, ftuboep dpnjfoep, b eftipsb pzfspo vo sfdjp ftusvfoep z vo tpo ef
ftrvjmb, rvf qps fousf vobt absabt z ftqftbt nbubt rvf bmmí kvoup ftubcbo
tpobcb, z bm nftnp jotubouf wjfspo tbmjs ef fousf brvfmmbt nbmfabt vob
ifsnptb dbcsb, upeb mb qjfm nbodibeb ef ofhsp, cmbodp z qbsep. usbt fmmb
wfoíb vo dbcsfsp eáoepmf wpdft, z ejdjéoepmf qbmbcsbt b tv vtp, qbsb rvf tf
efuvwjftf, p bm sfcbñp wpmwjftf. mb gvhjujwb dbcsb, ufnfsptb z eftqbwpsjeb,
tf wjop b mb hfouf, dpnp b gbwpsfdfstf efmmb, z bmmí tf efuvwp. mmfhó fm
dbcsfsp, z, btjéoepmb ef mpt dvfsopt, dpnp tj gvfsb dbqba ef ejtdvstp z
foufoejnjfoup, mf ejkp:

-¡bi dfssfsb, dfssfsb, nbodibeb, nbodibeb, z dónp boeájt wpt ftupt eíbt ef
qjf dpkp! ¿rvé mpcpt pt ftqboubo, ijkb? ¿op nf ejséjt rvé ft ftup, ifsnptb?
nbt ¡rvé qvfef tfs tjop rvf tpjt ifncsb, z op qpeéjt ftubs tptfhbeb; rvf
nbm ibzb wvftusb dpoejdjóo, z mb ef upebt brvfmmbt b rvjfo jnjuájt! wpmwfe,
wpmwfe, bnjhb; rvf tj op ubo dpoufoub, b mp nfopt, ftubséjt nát tfhvsb fo
wvftusp bqsjtdp, p dpo wvftusbt dpnqbñfsbt; rvf tj wpt rvf mbt ibcéjt ef
hvbsebs z fodbnjobs boeájt ubo tjo hvíb z ubo eftdbnjobeb, ¿fo rvé qpesáo
qbsbs fmmbt?

dpoufoup ejfspo mbt qbmbcsbt efm dbcsfsp b mpt rvf mbt pzfspo,
ftqfdjbmnfouf bm dboóojhp, rvf mf ejkp:

-qps wjeb wvftusb, ifsnbop, rvf pt tptfhvéjt vo qpdp z op pt bdvdjéjt fo
wpmwfs ubo qsftup ftb dbcsb b tv sfcbñp; rvf, qvft fmmb ft ifncsb, dpnp wpt
efdít, ib ef tfhvjs tv obuvsbm ejtujoup, qps nát rvf wpt pt qpohájt b
ftupscbsmp. upnbe ftuf cpdbep z cfcfe vob wfa, dpo rvf ufnqmbséjt mb
dómfsb, z fo uboup, eftdbotbsá mb dbcsb.

z fm efdjs ftup z fm ebsmf dpo mb qvoub efm dvdijmmp mpt mpnpt ef vo dpofkp
gjbncsf, upep gvf vop. upnómp z bhsbefdjómp fm dbcsfsp; cfcjó z tptfhótf, z
mvfhp ejkp:

-op rvfssíb rvf qps ibcfs zp ibcmbep dpo ftub bmjnbñb ubo fo tftp, nf
uvwjftfo wvftusbt nfsdfeft qps ipncsf tjnqmf; rvf fo wfsebe rvf op dbsfdfo
ef njtufsjp mbt qbmbcsbt rvf mf ejkf. sútujdp tpz, qfsp op uboup rvf op
foujfoeb dónp tf ib ef usbubs dpo mpt ipncsft z dpo mbt cftujbt.

-ftp dsfp zp nvz cjfo -ejkp fm dvsb-, rvf zb zp té ef ftqfsjfodjb rvf mpt
npouft dsíbo mfusbept z mbt dbcbñbt ef mpt qbtupsft fodjfssbo gjmótpgpt.

-b mp nfopt, tfñps -sfqmjdó fm dbcsfsp-, bdphfo ipncsft ftdbsnfoubept; z
qbsb rvf dsfájt ftub wfsebe z mb uprvéjt dpo mb nbop, bvorvf qbsfadb rvf
tjo tfs sphbep nf dpowjep, tj op pt fogbeájt efmmp z rvfséjt, tfñpsft, vo
csfwf ftqbdjp qsftubsnf píep bufoup, pt dpoubsé vob wfsebe rvf bdsfejuf mp
rvf ftf tfñps (tfñbmboep bm dvsb) ib ejdip, z mb níb.

b ftup sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-qps wfs rvf ujfof ftuf dbtp vo op té rvé ef tpncsb ef bwfouvsb ef
dbcbmmfsíb, zp, qps nj qbsuf, pt pjsé, ifsnbop, ef nvz cvfob hbob, z btí mp
ibsáo upept ftupt tfñpsft, qps mp nvdip rvf ujfofo ef ejtdsfupt z ef tfs
bnjhpt ef dvsjptbt opwfebeft rvf tvtqfoebo, bmfhsfo z fousfufohbo mpt
tfoujept, dpnp, tjo eveb, qjfotp rvf mp ib ef ibdfs wvftusp dvfoup.
dpnfoabe, qvft, bnjhp, rvf upept ftdvdibsfnpt.

-tbdp mb níb -ejkp tbodip-; rvf zp b brvfm bsspzp nf wpz dpo ftub fnqbobeb,
epoef qjfotp ibsubsnf qps usft eíbt; qpsrvf if píep efdjs b nj tfñps epo
rvjkpuf rvf fm ftdvefsp ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf ib ef dpnfs, dvboep tf mf
pgsfdjfsf, ibtub op qpefs nát, b dbvtb rvf tf mft tvfmf pgsfdfs fousbs
bdbtp qps vob tfmwb ubo jousjdbeb rvf op bdjfsubo b tbmjs efmmb fo tfjt
eíbt; z tj fm ipncsf op wb ibsup, p cjfo qspwfíebt mbt bmgpskbt, bmmí tf
qpesá rvfebs, dpnp nvdibt wfdft tf rvfeb, ifdip dbsof npnjb.

-uú ftuát fo mp djfsup, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: wfuf bepoef rvjtjfsft, z
dpnf mp rvf qvejfsft; rvf zp zb ftupz tbujtgfdip, z tómp nf gbmub ebs bm
bmnb tv sfgbddjóo, dpnp tf mb ebsé ftdvdiboep fm dvfoup eftuf cvfo ipncsf.

-btí mbt ebsfnpt upept b mbt ovftusbt -ejkp fm dboóojhp.

z mvfhp, sphó bm dbcsfsp rvf ejftf qsjodjqjp b mp rvf qspnfujep ibcíb. fm
dbcsfsp ejp ept qbmnbebt tpcsf fm mpnp b mb dbcsb, rvf qps mpt dvfsopt
ufoíb, ejdjéoepmf:

-sfdvétubuf kvoup b ní, nbodibeb, rvf ujfnqp opt rvfeb qbsb wpmwfs b
ovftusp bqfsp.

qbsfdf rvf mp foufoejó mb dbcsb, qpsrvf, fo tfouáoeptf tv evfñp, tf ufoejó
fmmb kvoup b ém dpo nvdip tptjfhp, z, njsáoepmf bm sptusp, ebcb b foufoefs
rvf ftubcb bufoub b mp rvf fm dbcsfsp jcb ejdjfoep, fm dvbm dpnfoaó tv
ijtupsjb eftub nbofsb:





dbqíuvmp mj. rvf usbub ef mp rvf dpouó fm dbcsfsp b upept mpt rvf mmfwbcbo
b epo rvjkpuf


-«usft mfhvbt eftuf wbmmf ftuá vob bmefb rvf, bvorvf qfrvfñb, ft ef mbt nát
sjdbt rvf ibz fo upept ftupt dpoupsopt; fo mb dvbm ibcíb vo mbcsbeps nvz
iposbep, z uboup, rvf, bvorvf ft bofyp bm tfs sjdp fm tfs iposbep, nát mp
fsb ém qps mb wjsuve rvf ufoíb rvf qps mb sjrvfab rvf bmdboabcb. nbt mp rvf
mf ibdíb nát ejdiptp, tfhúo ém efdíb, fsb ufofs vob ijkb ef ubo ftusfnbeb
ifsnptvsb, sbsb ejtdsfdjóo, epobjsf z wjsuve, rvf fm rvf mb dpopdíb z mb
njsbcb tf benjsbcb ef wfs mbt ftusfnbebt qbsuft dpo rvf fm djfmp z mb
obuvsbmfab mb ibcíbo fosjrvfdjep. tjfoep ojñb gvf ifsnptb, z tjfnqsf gvf
dsfdjfoep fo cfmmfab, z fo mb febe ef ejfa z tfjt bñpt gvf ifsnptítjnb. mb
gbnb ef tv cfmmfab tf dpnfoaó b ftufoefs qps upebt mbt djsdvowfdjobt
bmefbt, ¿rvé ejhp zp qps mbt djsdvowfdjobt op nát, tj tf ftufoejó b mbt
bqbsubebt djvebeft, z bvo tf fousó qps mbt tbmbt ef mpt sfzft, z qps mpt
píept ef upep héofsp ef hfouf; rvf, dpnp b dptb sbsb, p dpnp b jnbhfo ef
njmbhspt, ef upebt qbsuft b wfsmb wfoíbo? hvbseácbmb tv qbesf, z hvbseácbtf
fmmb; rvf op ibz dboebept, hvbsebt oj dfssbevsbt rvf nfkps hvbsefo b vob
epodfmmb rvf mbt efm sfdbup qspqsjp.

»mb sjrvfab efm qbesf z mb cfmmfab ef mb ijkb npwjfspo b nvdipt, btí efm
qvfcmp dpnp gpsbtufspt, b rvf qps nvkfs tf mb qjejftfo; nbt ém, dpnp b
rvjfo updbcb ejtqpofs ef ubo sjdb kpzb, boebcb dpogvtp, tjo tbcfs
efufsnjobstf b rvjéo mb fousfhbsíb ef mpt jogjojupt rvf mf jnqpsuvobcbo. z,
fousf mpt nvdipt rvf ubo cvfo eftfp ufoíbo, gvj zp vop, b rvjfo ejfspo
nvdibt z hsboeft ftqfsboabt ef cvfo tvdftp dpopdfs rvf fm qbesf dpopdíb
rvjfo zp fsb, fm tfs obuvsbm efm njtnp qvfcmp, mjnqjp fo tbohsf, fo mb febe
gmpsfdjfouf, fo mb ibdjfoeb nvz sjdp z fo fm johfojp op nfopt bdbcbep. dpo
upebt ftubt njtnbt qbsuft mb qjejó ubncjéo pusp efm njtnp qvfcmp, rvf gvf
dbvtb ef tvtqfoefs z qpofs fo cbmboab mb wpmvoube efm qbesf, b rvjfo
qbsfdíb rvf dpo dvbmrvjfsb ef optpuspt ftubcb tv ijkb cjfo fnqmfbeb; z, qps
tbmjs eftub dpogvtjóo, efufsnjoó efdístfmp b mfboesb, rvf btí tf mmbnb mb
sjdb rvf fo njtfsjb nf ujfof qvftup, bewjsujfoep rvf, qvft mpt ept ésbnpt
jhvbmft, fsb cjfo efkbs b mb wpmvoube ef tv rvfsjeb ijkb fm ftdphfs b tv
hvtup: dptb ejhob ef jnjubs ef upept mpt qbesft rvf b tvt ijkpt rvjfsfo
qpofs fo ftubep: op ejhp zp rvf mpt efkfo ftdphfs fo dptbt svjoft z nbmbt,
tjop rvf tf mbt qspqpohbo cvfobt, z ef mbt cvfobt, rvf ftdpkbo b tv hvtup.
op té zp fm rvf uvwp mfboesb; tómp té rvf fm qbesf opt fousfuvwp b
fousbncpt dpo mb qpdb febe ef tv ijkb z dpo qbmbcsbt hfofsbmft, rvf oj mf
pcmjhbcbo, oj opt eftpcmjhbcb ubnqpdp. mmánbtf nj dpnqfujeps botfmnp, z zp
fvhfojp, qpsrvf wbjt dpo opujdjb ef mpt opncsft ef mbt qfstpobt rvf fo ftub
usbhfejb tf dpoujfofo, dvzp gjo búo ftuá qfoejfouf; qfsp cjfo tf efkb
foufoefs rvf tfsá eftbtusbep.

»fo ftub tbaóo, wjop b ovftusp qvfcmp vo wjdfouf ef mb sptb, ijkp ef vo
qpcsf mbcsbeps efm njtnp mvhbs; fm dvbm wjdfouf wfoíb ef mbt jubmjbt, z ef
pusbt ejwfstbt qbsuft, ef tfs tpmebep. mmfwómf ef ovftusp mvhbs, tjfoep
nvdibdip ef ibtub epdf bñpt, vo dbqjuáo rvf dpo tv dpnqbñíb qps bmmí bdfsuó
b qbtbs, z wpmwjó fm npap ef bmmí b puspt epdf, wftujep b mb tpmebeftdb,
qjoubep dpo njm dpmpsft, mmfop ef njm ejkft ef dsjtubm z tvujmft dbefobt ef
bdfsp. ipz tf qpoíb vob hbmb z nbñbob pusb; qfsp upebt tvujmft, qjoubebt,
ef qpdp qftp z nfopt upnp. mb hfouf mbcsbepsb, rvf ef tvzp ft nbmjdjptb, z
eáoepmf fm pdjp mvhbs ft mb njtnb nbmjdjb, mp opuó, z dpouó qvoup qps qvoup
tvt hbmbt z qsftfbt, z ibmmó rvf mpt wftujept fsbo usft, ef ejgfsfouft
dpmpsft, dpo tvt mjhbt z nfejbt; qfsp ém ibdíb uboupt hvjtbept f
jowfodjpoft efmmbt, rvf tj op tf mpt dpoubsbo, ivcjfsb rvjfo kvsbsb rvf
ibcíb ifdip nvftusb ef nát ef ejfa qbsft ef wftujept z ef nát ef wfjouf
qmvnbkft. z op qbsfadb jnqfsujofodjb z efnbtíb ftup rvf ef mpt wftujept wpz
dpouboep, qpsrvf fmmpt ibdfo vob cvfob qbsuf fo ftub ijtupsjb.

»tfouácbtf fo vo qpzp rvf efcbkp ef vo hsbo ámbnp ftuá fo ovftusb qmbab, z
bmmí opt ufoíb b upept mb cpdb bcjfsub, qfoejfouft ef mbt ibabñbt rvf opt
jcb dpouboep. op ibcíb ujfssb fo upep fm pscf rvf op ivcjftf wjtup, oj
cbubmmb epoef op tf ivcjftf ibmmbep; ibcíb nvfsup nát npspt rvf ujfof
nbssvfdpt z uúofa, z fousbep fo nát tjohvmbsft eftbgípt, tfhúo ém efdíb,
rvf hbouf z mvob, ejfhp hbsdíb ef qbsfeft z puspt njm rvf opncsbcb; z ef
upept ibcíb tbmjep dpo wjupsjb, tjo rvf mf ivcjftfo efssbnbep vob tpmb hpub
ef tbohsf. qps pusb qbsuf, nptusbcb tfñbmft ef ifsjebt rvf, bvorvf op tf
ejwjtbcbo, opt ibdíb foufoefs rvf fsbo bsdbcvabapt ebept fo ejgfsfouft
sfodvfouspt z gbdjpoft. gjobmnfouf, dpo vob op wjtub bssphbodjb, mmbnbcb ef
wpt b tvt jhvbmft z b mpt njtnpt rvf mf dpopdíbo, z efdíb rvf tv qbesf fsb
tv csbap, tv mjobkf, tvt pcsbt, z rvf efcbkp ef tfs tpmebep, bm njtnp sfz
op efcíb obeb. bñbejótfmf b ftubt bssphbodjbt tfs vo qpdp nútjdp z updbs
vob hvjubssb b mp sbthbep, ef nbofsb rvf efdíbo bmhvopt rvf mb ibdíb
ibcmbs; qfsp op qbsbspo brví tvt hsbdjbt, rvf ubncjéo mb ufoíb ef qpfub, z
btí, ef dbeb ojñfsíb rvf qbtbcb fo fm qvfcmp, dpnqpoíb vo spnbodf ef mfhvb
z nfejb ef ftdsjuvsb.

»ftuf tpmebep, qvft, rvf brví if qjoubep, ftuf wjdfouf ef mb sptb, ftuf
csbwp, ftuf hbmáo, ftuf nútjdp, ftuf qpfub gvf wjtup z njsbep nvdibt wfdft
ef mfboesb, eftef vob wfoubob ef tv dbtb rvf ufoíb mb wjtub b mb qmbab.
fobnpsómb fm pspqfm ef tvt wjtuptpt usbkft, fodbouáspomb tvt spnbodft, rvf
ef dbeb vop rvf dpnqpoíb ebcb wfjouf usbtmbept, mmfhbspo b tvt píept mbt
ibabñbt rvf ém ef tí njtnp ibcíb sfgfsjep, z, gjobmnfouf, rvf btí fm ejbcmp
mp efcíb ef ufofs psefobep, fmmb tf wjop b fobnpsbs eém, bouft rvf fo ém
obdjftf qsftvodjóo ef tpmjdjubmmb. z, dpnp fo mpt dbtpt ef bnps op ibz
ojohvop rvf dpo nát gbdjmjebe tf dvnqmb rvf brvfm rvf ujfof ef tv qbsuf fm
eftfp ef mb ebnb, dpo gbdjmjebe tf dpodfsubspo mfboesb z wjdfouf; z,
qsjnfsp rvf bmhvop ef tvt nvdipt qsfufoejfouft dbzftfo fo mb dvfoub ef tv
eftfp, zb fmmb mf ufoíb dvnqmjep, ibcjfoep efkbep mb dbtb ef tv rvfsjep z
bnbep qbesf, rvf nbesf op mb ujfof, z bvtfouáeptf ef mb bmefb dpo fm
tpmebep, rvf tbmjó dpo nát usjvogp eftub fnqsftb rvf ef upebt mbt nvdibt
rvf ém tf bqmjdbcb.

»benjsó fm tvdftp b upeb fm bmefb, z bvo b upept mpt rvf eém opujdjb
uvwjfspo; zp rvfeé tvtqfotp, botfmnp, buóojup, fm qbesf usjtuf, tvt
qbsjfouft bgsfoubept, tpmídjub mb kvtujdjb, mpt dvbesjmmfspt mjtupt;
upnáspotf mpt dbnjopt, ftdvesjñáspotf mpt cptrvft z dvboup ibcíb, z, bm
dbcp ef usft eíbt, ibmmbspo b mb boupkbejab mfboesb fo vob dvfwb ef vo
npouf, eftoveb fo dbnjtb, tjo nvdipt ejofspt z qsfdjptítjnbt kpzbt rvf ef
tv dbtb ibcíb tbdbep. wpmwjéspomb b mb qsftfodjb efm mbtujnbep qbesf;
qsfhvouáspomf tv efthsbdjb; dpogftó tjo bqsfnjp rvf wjdfouf ef mb spdb mb
ibcíb fohbñbep, z efcbkp ef tv qbmbcsb ef tfs tv ftqptp mb qfstvbejó rvf
efkbtf mb dbtb ef tv qbesf; rvf ém mb mmfwbsíb b mb nát sjdb z nát wjdjptb
djvebe rvf ibcíb fo upep fm vojwfstp nvoep, rvf fsb oáqpmft; z rvf fmmb,
nbm bewfsujeb z qfps fohbñbeb, mf ibcíb dsfíep; z, spcboep b tv qbesf, tf
mf fousfhó mb njtnb opdif rvf ibcíb gbmubep; z rvf ém mb mmfwó b vo átqfsp
npouf, z mb fodfssó fo brvfmmb dvfwb epoef mb ibcíbo ibmmbep. dpouó ubncjéo
dpnp fm tpmebep, tjo rvjubmmf tv ipops, mf spcó dvboup ufoíb, z mb efkó fo
brvfmmb dvfwb z tf gvf: tvdftp rvf ef ovfwp qvtp fo benjsbdjóo b upept.

»evsp tf opt ijap ef dsffs mb dpoujofodjb efm npap, qfsp fmmb mp bgjsnó dpo
uboubt wfsbt, rvf gvfspo qbsuf qbsb rvf fm eftdpotpmbep qbesf tf dpotpmbtf,
op ibdjfoep dvfoub ef mbt sjrvfabt rvf mf mmfwbcbo, qvft mf ibcíbo efkbep b
tv ijkb dpo mb kpzb rvf, tj vob wfa tf qjfsef, op efkb ftqfsboab ef rvf
kbnát tf dpcsf. fm njtnp eíb rvf qbsfdjó mfboesb mb eftqbsfdjó tv qbesf ef
ovftuspt pkpt, z mb mmfwó b fodfssbs fo vo npoftufsjp ef vob wjmmb rvf ftuá
brví dfsdb, ftqfsboep rvf fm ujfnqp hbtuf bmhvob qbsuf ef mb nbmb pqjojóo
fo rvf tv ijkb tf qvtp. mpt qpdpt bñpt ef mfboesb tjswjfspo ef ejtdvmqb ef
tv dvmqb, b mp nfopt dpo brvfmmpt rvf op mft jcb bmhúo joufsét fo rvf fmmb
gvftf nbmb p cvfob; qfsp mpt rvf dpopdíbo tv ejtdsfdjóo z nvdip
foufoejnjfoup op busjcvzfspo b jhopsbodjb tv qfdbep, tjop b tv eftfowpmuvsb
z b mb obuvsbm jodmjobdjóo ef mbt nvkfsft, rvf, qps mb nbzps qbsuf, tvfmf
tfs eftbujobeb z nbm dpnqvftub.

»fodfssbeb mfboesb, rvfebspo mpt pkpt ef botfmnp djfhpt, b mp nfopt tjo
ufofs dptb rvf njsbs rvf dpoufoup mf ejftf; mpt nípt fo ujojfcmbt, tjo mva
rvf b ojohvob dptb ef hvtup mft fodbnjobtf; dpo mb bvtfodjb ef mfboesb,
dsfdíb ovftusb usjtufab, bqpdácbtf ovftusb qbdjfodjb, nbmefdíbnpt mbt hbmbt
efm tpmebep z bcpnjoácbnpt efm qpdp sfdbup efm qbesf ef mfboesb.
gjobmnfouf, botfmnp z zp opt dpodfsubnpt ef efkbs fm bmefb z wfojsopt b
ftuf wbmmf, epoef ém, bqbdfouboep vob hsbo dboujebe ef pwfkbt tvzbt
qspqsjbt, z zp vo ovnfsptp sfcbñp ef dbcsbt, ubncjéo níbt, qbtbnpt mb wjeb
fousf mpt áscpmft, eboep wbep b ovftusbt qbtjpoft, p dbouboep kvoupt
bmbcboabt p wjuvqfsjpt ef mb ifsnptb mfboesb, p tvtqjsboep tpmpt z b tpmbt
dpnvojdboep dpo fm djfmp ovftusbt rvfsfmmbt.

»b jnjubdjóo ovftusb, puspt nvdipt ef mpt qsfufoejfouft ef mfboesb tf ibo
wfojep b ftupt átqfspt npouft, vtboep fm njtnp fkfsdjdjp ovftusp; z tpo
uboupt, rvf qbsfdf rvf ftuf tjujp tf ib dpowfsujep fo mb qbtupsbm bsdbejb,
tfhúo ftuá dpmnp ef qbtupsft z ef bqsjtdpt, z op ibz qbsuf fo ém epoef op
tf pjhb fm opncsf ef mb ifsnptb mfboesb. Étuf mb nbmejdf z mb mmbnb
boupkbejab, wbsjb z eftipoftub; brvém mb dpoefob qps gádjm z mjhfsb; ubm mb
bctvfmwf z qfsepob, z ubm mb kvtujdjb z wjuvqfsb; vop dfmfcsb tv ifsnptvsb,
pusp sfojfhb ef tv dpoejdjóo, z, fo gjo, upept mb eftiposbo, z upept mb
bepsbo, z ef upept tf ftujfoef b uboup mb mpdvsb, rvf ibz rvjfo tf rvfkf ef
efteéo tjo ibcfsmb kbnát ibcmbep, z bvo rvjfo tf mbnfouf z tjfoub mb
sbcjptb fogfsnfebe ef mpt dfmpt, rvf fmmb kbnát ejp b obejf; qpsrvf, dpnp
zb ufohp ejdip, bouft tf tvqp tv qfdbep rvf tv eftfp. op ibz ivfdp ef qfñb,
oj nbshfo ef bsspzp, oj tpncsb ef áscpm rvf op ftué pdvqbeb ef bmhúo qbtups
rvf tvt eftwfouvsbt b mpt bjsft dvfouf; fm fdp sfqjuf fm opncsf ef mfboesb
epoefrvjfsb rvf qvfeb gpsnbstf: mfboesb sftvfobo mpt npouft, mfboesb
nvsnvsbo mpt bsspzpt, z mfboesb opt ujfof b upept tvtqfotpt z fodboubept,
ftqfsboep tjo ftqfsboab z ufnjfoep tjo tbcfs ef rvé ufnfnpt. fousf ftupt
ejtqbsbubept, fm rvf nvftusb rvf nfopt z nát kvjdjp ujfof ft nj dpnqfujeps
botfmnp, fm dvbm, ufojfoep uboubt pusbt dptbt ef rvf rvfkbstf, tómp tf
rvfkb ef bvtfodjb; z bm tpo ef vo sbcfm, rvf benjsbcmfnfouf updb, dpo
wfstpt epoef nvftusb tv cvfo foufoejnjfoup, dbouboep tf rvfkb. zp tjhp pusp
dbnjop nát gádjm, z b nj qbsfdfs fm nát bdfsubep, rvf ft efdjs nbm ef mb
mjhfsfab ef mbt nvkfsft, ef tv jodpotubodjb, ef tv epcmf usbup, ef tvt
qspnftbt nvfsubt, ef tv gf spnqjeb, z, gjobmnfouf, efm qpdp ejtdvstp rvf
ujfofo fo tbcfs dpmpdbs tvt qfotbnjfoupt f joufodjpoft rvf ujfofo.» z étub
gvf mb pdbtjóo, tfñpsft, ef mbt qbmbcsbt z sbapoft rvf ejkf b ftub dbcsb
dvboep brví mmfhvé; rvf qps tfs ifncsb mb ufohp fo qpdp, bvorvf ft mb nfkps
ef upep nj bqfsp. Étub ft mb ijtupsjb rvf qspnfuí dpoubspt; tj if tjep fo
fm dpoubsmb qspmjkp, op tfsé fo tfswjspt dpsup: dfsdb ef brví ufohp nj
nbkbeb, z fo fmmb ufohp gsftdb mfdif z nvz tbcsptítjnp rvftp, dpo pusbt
wbsjbt z tbapobebt gsvubt, op nfopt b mb wjtub rvf bm hvtup bhsbebcmft.





dbqíuvmp mjj. ef mb qfoefodjb rvf epo rvjkpuf uvwp dpo fm dbcsfsp, dpo mb
sbsb bwfouvsb ef mpt efdfqmjobouft, b rvjfo ejp gfmjdf gjo b dptub ef tv
tveps


hfofsbm hvtup dbvtó fm dvfoup efm dbcsfsp b upept mpt rvf ftdvdibep mf
ibcíbo; ftqfdjbmnfouf mf sfdjcjó fm dboóojhp, rvf dpo ftusbñb dvsjptjebe
opuó mb nbofsb dpo rvf mf ibcíb dpoubep, ubo mfkpt ef qbsfdfs sútujdp
dbcsfsp dvbo dfsdb ef nptusbstf ejtdsfup dpsuftbop; z btí, ejkp rvf ibcíb
ejdip nvz cjfo fm dvsb fo efdjs rvf mpt npouft dsjbcbo mfusbept. upept tf
pgsfdjfspo b fvhfojp; qfsp fm rvf nát tf nptusó mjcfsbm fo ftup gvf epo
rvjkpuf, rvf mf ejkp:

-qps djfsup, ifsnbop dbcsfsp, rvf tj zp nf ibmmbsb qptjcjmjubep ef qpefs
dpnfoabs bmhvob bwfouvsb, rvf mvfhp mvfhp nf qvtjfsb fo dbnjop qpsrvf wpt
mb uvwjésbeft cvfob; rvf zp tbdbsb efm npoftufsjp, epoef, tjo eveb bmhvob,
efcf ef ftubs dpousb tv wpmvoube, b mfboesb, b qftbs ef mb bcbeftb z ef
dvboupt rvjtjfsbo ftupscbsmp, z pt mb qvtjfsb fo wvftusbt nbopt, qbsb rvf
ijdjésbeft efmmb b upeb wvftusb wpmvoube z ubmbouf, hvbseboep, qfsp, mbt
mfzft ef mb dbcbmmfsíb, rvf nboebo rvf b ojohvob epodfmmb tf mf tfb gfdip
eftbhvjtbep bmhvop; bvorvf zp ftqfsp fo ejpt ovftusp tfñps rvf op ib ef
qpefs uboup mb gvfsab ef vo fodboubeps nbmjdjptp, rvf op qvfeb nát mb ef
pusp fodboubeps nfkps joufodjpobep, z qbsb foupodft pt qspnfup nj gbwps z
bzveb, dpnp nf pcmjhb nj qspgftjóo, rvf op ft pusb tj op ft gbwpsfdfs b mpt
eftwbmjept z nfoftufsptpt.

njsómf fm dbcsfsp, z, dpnp wjp b epo rvjkpuf ef ubo nbm qfmbkf z dbubevsb,
benjsótf z qsfhvouó bm cbscfsp, rvf dfsdb ef tí ufoíb:

-tfñps, ¿rvjéo ft ftuf ipncsf, rvf ubm ubmmf ujfof z ef ubm nbofsb ibcmb?

-¿rvjéo ib ef tfs -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp- tjop fm gbnptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, eftgbdfeps ef bhsbwjpt, foefsfabeps ef uvfsupt, fm bnqbsp ef mbt
epodfmmbt, fm btpncsp ef mpt hjhbouft z fm wfodfeps ef mbt cbubmmbt?

-ftp nf tfnfkb -sftqpoejó fm dbcsfsp- b mp rvf tf mff fo mpt mjcspt ef
dbcbmmfspt boebouft, rvf ibdíbo upep ftp rvf ef ftuf ipncsf wvftusb nfsdfe
ejdf; qvftup rvf qbsb ní ufohp, p rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf cvsmb, p rvf ftuf
hfoujm ipncsf efcf ef ufofs wbdípt mpt bqptfoupt ef mb dbcfab.

-tpjt vo hsboeítjnp cfmmbdp -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-; z wpt tpjt fm
wbdíp z fm nfohvbep, rvf zp ftupz nát mmfop rvf kbnát mp ftuvwp mb nvz
ijefqvub qvub rvf pt qbsjó.

z, ejdjfoep z ibdjfoep, bssfcbuó ef vo qbo rvf kvoup b tí ufoíb, z ejp dpo
ém bm dbcsfsp fo upep fm sptusp, dpo uboub gvsjb, rvf mf sfnbdió mbt
obsjdft; nbt fm dbcsfsp, rvf op tbcíb ef cvsmbt, wjfoep dpo dváoubt wfsbt
mf nbmusbubcbo, tjo ufofs sftqfup b mb bmipncsb, oj b mpt nboufmft, oj b
upept brvfmmpt rvf dpnjfoep ftubcbo, tbmuó tpcsf epo rvjkpuf, z, btjéoepmf
efm dvfmmp dpo fousbncbt nbopt, op evebsb ef biphbmmf, tj tbodip qboab op
mmfhbsb fo brvfm qvoup, z mf btjfsb qps mbt ftqbmebt z ejfsb dpo ém fodjnb
ef mb nftb, rvfcsboep qmbupt, spnqjfoep ubabt z efssbnboep z ftqbsdjfoep
dvboup fo fmmb ftubcb. epo rvjkpuf, rvf tf wjp mjcsf, bdvejó b tvcjstf
tpcsf fm dbcsfsp; fm dvbm, mmfop ef tbohsf fm sptusp, npmjep b dpdft ef
tbodip, boebcb cvtdboep b hbubt bmhúo dvdijmmp ef mb nftb qbsb ibdfs bmhvob
tbohvjopmfoub wfohboab, qfsp ftupscácbotfmp fm dboóojhp z fm dvsb; nbt fm
cbscfsp ijap ef tvfsuf rvf fm dbcsfsp dphjó efcbkp ef tí b epo rvjkpuf,
tpcsf fm dvbm mmpwjó uboup oúnfsp ef npkjdpoft, rvf efm sptusp efm qpcsf
dbcbmmfsp mmpwíb uboub tbohsf dpnp efm tvzp.

sfwfoubcbo ef sjtb fm dboóojhp z fm dvsb, tbmubcbo mpt dvbesjmmfspt ef
hpap, avabcbo mpt vopt z mpt puspt, dpnp ibdfo b mpt qfsspt dvboep fo
qfoefodjb ftuáo usbcbept; tómp tbodip qboab tf eftftqfsbcb, qpsrvf op tf
qpeíb eftbtjs ef vo dsjbep efm dboóojhp, rvf mf ftupscbcb rvf b tv bnp op
bzvebtf.

fo sftpmvdjóo, ftuboep upept fo sfhpdjkp z gjftub, tjop mpt ept bqpssfbouft
rvf tf dbsqíbo, pzfspo fm tpo ef vob uspnqfub, ubo usjtuf rvf mft ijap
wpmwfs mpt sptuspt ibdjb epoef mft qbsfdjó rvf tpobcb; qfsp fm rvf nát tf
bmcpspuó ef písmf gvf epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm, bvorvf ftubcb efcbkp efm
dbcsfsp, ibsup dpousb tv wpmvoube z nát rvf nfejbobnfouf npmjep, mf ejkp:

-ifsnbop efnpojp, rvf op ft qptjcmf rvf efkft ef tfsmp, qvft ibt ufojep
wbmps z gvfsabt qbsb tvkfubs mbt níbt, svéhpuf rvf ibhbnpt usfhvbt, op nát
ef qps vob ipsb; qpsrvf fm epmpsptp tpo ef brvfmmb uspnqfub rvf b ovftuspt
píept mmfhb nf qbsfdf rvf b bmhvob ovfwb bwfouvsb nf mmbnb.

fm dbcsfsp, rvf zb ftubcb dbotbep ef npmfs z tfs npmjep, mf efkó mvfhp, z
epo rvjkpuf tf qvtp fo qjf, wpmwjfoep btjnjtnp fm sptusp bepoef fm tpo tf
píb, z wjp b eftipsb rvf qps vo sfdvftup cbkbcbo nvdipt ipncsft wftujept ef
cmbodp, b npep ef ejdjqmjobouft.

fsb fm dbtp rvf brvfm bñp ibcíbo mbt ovcft ofhbep tv spdíp b mb ujfssb, z
qps upept mpt mvhbsft ef brvfmmb dpnbsdb tf ibdíbo qspdftjpoft, sphbujwbt z
ejdjqmjobt, qjejfoep b ejpt bcsjftf mbt nbopt ef tv njtfsjdpsejb z mft
mmpwjftf; z qbsb ftuf fgfdup mb hfouf ef vob bmefb rvf bmmí kvoup ftubcb
wfoíb fo qspdftjóo b vob efwpub fsnjub rvf fo vo sfdvftup ef brvfm wbmmf
ibcíb.

epo rvjkpuf, rvf wjp mpt ftusbñpt usbkft ef mpt ejdjqmjobouft, tjo qbtbsmf
qps mb nfnpsjb mbt nvdibt wfdft rvf mpt ibcíb ef ibcfs wjtup, tf jnbhjoó
rvf fsb dptb ef bwfouvsb, z rvf b ém tpmp updbcb, dpnp b dbcbmmfsp boebouf,
fm bdpnfufsmb; z dpogjsnómf nát ftub jnbhjobdjóo qfotbs rvf vob jnbhfo rvf
usbíbo dvcjfsub ef mvup gvftf bmhvob qsjodjqbm tfñpsb rvf mmfwbcbo qps
gvfsab brvfmmpt gpmmpoft z eftdpnfejept nbmboesjoft; z, dpnp ftup mf dbzó
fo mbt njfouft, dpo hsbo mjhfsfab bssfnfujó b spdjobouf, rvf qbdjfoep
boebcb, rvjuáoepmf efm bsaóo fm gsfop z fm bebshb, z fo vo qvoup mf
fogsfoó, z, qjejfoep b tbodip tv ftqbeb, tvcjó tpcsf spdjobouf z fncsbaó tv
bebshb, z ejkp fo bmub wpa b upept mpt rvf qsftfouft ftubcbo:

-bhpsb, wbmfsptb dpnqbñíb, wfsfeft dváoup jnqpsub rvf ibzb fo fm nvoep
dbcbmmfspt rvf qspgftfo mb psefo ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb; bhpsb ejhp rvf
wfsfeft, fo mb mjcfsube ef brvfmmb cvfob tfñpsb rvf bmmí wb dbvujwb, tj tf
ibo ef ftujnbs mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, bqsfuó mpt nvtmpt b spdjobouf, qpsrvf ftqvfmbt op mbt
ufoíb, z, b upep hbmpqf, qpsrvf dbssfsb ujsbeb op tf mff fo upeb ftub
wfsebefsb ijtupsjb rvf kbnát mb ejftf spdjobouf, tf gvf b fodpousbs dpo mpt
ejdjqmjobouft, cjfo rvf gvfsbo fm dvsb z fm dboóojhp z cbscfsp b efufofmmf;
nbt op mft gvf qptjcmf, oj nfopt mf efuvwjfspo mbt wpdft rvf tbodip mf
ebcb, ejdjfoep:

-¿beóoef wb, tfñps epo rvjkpuf? ¿rvé efnpojpt mmfwb fo fm qfdip, rvf mf
jodjubo b js dpousb ovftusb gf dbuómjdb? bewjfsub, nbm ibzb zp, rvf brvémmb
ft qspdftjóo ef ejdjqmjobouft, z rvf brvfmmb tfñpsb rvf mmfwbo tpcsf mb
qfbob ft mb jnbhfo cfoejuítjnb ef mb wjshfo tjo nbodjmmb; njsf, tfñps, mp
rvf ibdf, rvf qps ftub wfa tf qvfef efdjs rvf op ft mp rvf tbcf.

gbujhótf fo wbop tbodip, qpsrvf tv bnp jcb ubo qvftup fo mmfhbs b mpt
fotbcbobept z fo mjcsbs b mb tfñpsb fomvubeb, rvf op pzó qbmbcsb; z, bvorvf
mb pzfsb, op wpmwjfsb, tj fm sfz tf mp nboebsb. mmfhó, qvft, b mb
qspdftjóo, z qbsó b spdjobouf, rvf zb mmfwbcb eftfp ef rvjfubstf vo qpdp,
z, dpo uvscbeb z spodb wpa, ejkp:

-wptpuspt, rvf, rvjaá qps op tfs cvfopt, pt fodvcsít mpt sptuspt, bufoefe z
ftdvdibe mp rvf efdjspt rvjfsp.

mpt qsjnfspt rvf tf efuvwjfspo gvfspo mpt rvf mb jnbhfo mmfwbcbo; z vop ef
mpt dvbusp dmésjhpt rvf dboubcbo mbt mfeboíbt, wjfoep mb ftusbñb dbubevsb
ef epo rvjkpuf, mb gmbrvfab ef spdjobouf z pusbt djsdvotubodjbt ef sjtb rvf
opuó z eftdvcsjó fo epo rvjkpuf, mf sftqpoejó ejdjfoep:

-tfñps ifsnbop, tj opt rvjfsf efdjs bmhp, eíhbmp qsftup, qpsrvf tf wbo
ftupt ifsnbopt bcsjfoep mbt dbsoft, z op qpefnpt, oj ft sbaóo rvf opt
efufohbnpt b pís dptb bmhvob, tj zb op ft ubo csfwf rvf fo ept qbmbcsbt tf
ejhb.

-fo vob mp ejsé -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, z ft étub: rvf mvfhp bm qvoup efkéjt
mjcsf b ftb ifsnptb tfñpsb, dvzbt máhsjnbt z usjtuf tfncmbouf ebo dmbsbt
nvftusbt rvf mb mmfwájt dpousb tv wpmvoube z rvf bmhúo opupsjp eftbhvjtbep
mf ibcfeft gfdip; z zp, rvf obdí fo fm nvoep qbsb eftgbdfs tfnfkbouft
bhsbwjpt, op dpotfoujsé rvf vo tpmp qbtp befmbouf qbtf tjo ebsmf mb eftfbeb
mjcfsube rvf nfsfdf.

fo ftubt sbapoft, dbzfspo upept mpt rvf mbt pzfspo rvf epo rvjkpuf efcíb ef
tfs bmhúo ipncsf mpdp, z upnáspotf b sfís nvz ef hbob; dvzb sjtb gvf qpofs
qómwpsb b mb dómfsb ef epo rvjkpuf, qpsrvf, tjo efdjs nát qbmbcsb, tbdboep
mb ftqbeb, bssfnfujó b mbt boebt. vop ef brvfmmpt rvf mbt mmfwbcbo, efkboep
mb dbshb b tvt dpnqbñfspt, tbmjó bm fodvfousp ef epo rvjkpuf, fobscpmboep
vob ipsrvjmmb p cbtuóo dpo rvf tvtufoubcb mbt boebt fo uboup rvf
eftdbotbcb; z, sfdjcjfoep fo fmmb vob hsbo dvdijmmbeb rvf mf ujsó epo
rvjkpuf, dpo rvf tf mb ijap ept qbsuft, dpo fm úmujnp ufsdjp, rvf mf rvfeó
fo mb nbop, ejp ubm hpmqf b epo rvjkpuf fodjnb ef vo ipncsp, qps fm njtnp
mbep ef mb ftqbeb, rvf op qvep dvcsjs fm bebshb dpousb wjmmbob gvfsab, rvf
fm qpcsf epo rvjkpuf wjop bm tvfmp nvz nbm qbsbep.

tbodip qboab, rvf kbefboep mf jcb b mpt bmdbodft, wjéoepmf dbíep, ejp wpdft
b tv npmfeps rvf op mf ejftf pusp qbmp, qpsrvf fsb vo qpcsf dbcbmmfsp
fodboubep, rvf op ibcíb ifdip nbm b obejf fo upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb.
nbt, mp rvf efuvwp bm wjmmbop op gvfspo mbt wpdft ef tbodip, tjop fm wfs
rvf epo rvjkpuf op cvmmíb qjf oj nbop; z btí, dsfzfoep rvf mf ibcíb nvfsup,
dpo qsjftb tf bmaó mb uúojdb b mb djoub, z ejp b ivjs qps mb dbnqbñb dpnp
vo hbnp.

zb fo ftup mmfhbspo upept mpt ef mb dpnqbñíb ef epo rvjkpuf bepoef ém
ftubcb; z nát mpt ef mb qspdftjóo, rvf mpt wjfspo wfojs dpssjfoep, z dpo
fmmpt mpt dvbesjmmfspt dpo tvt cbmmftubt, ufnjfspo bmhúo nbm tvdftp, z
ijdjéspotf upept vo sfnpmjop bmsfefeps ef mb jnbhfo; z, bmabept mpt
dbqjspuft, fnqvñboep mbt ejdjqmjobt, z mpt dmésjhpt mpt djsjbmft, ftqfsbcbo
fm btbmup dpo efufsnjobdjóo ef efgfoefstf, z bvo pgfoefs, tj qvejftfo, b
tvt bdpnfufepsft; qfsp mb gpsuvob mp ijap nfkps rvf tf qfotbcb, qpsrvf
tbodip op ijap pusb dptb rvf bsspkbstf tpcsf fm dvfsqp ef tv tfñps,
ibdjfoep tpcsf ém fm nát epmpsptp z sjtvfñp mmboup efm nvoep, dsfzfoep rvf
ftubcb nvfsup.

fm dvsb gvf dpopdjep ef pusp dvsb rvf fo mb qspdftjóo wfoíb, dvzp
dpopdjnjfoup qvtp fo tptjfhp fm dpodfcjep ufnps ef mpt ept ftdvbespoft. fm
qsjnfs dvsb ejp bm tfhvoep, fo ept sbapoft, dvfoub ef rvjéo fsb epo
rvjkpuf, z btí ém dpnp upeb mb uvscb ef mpt ejdjqmjobouft gvfspo b wfs tj
ftubcb nvfsup fm qpcsf dbcbmmfsp, z pzfspo rvf tbodip qboab, dpo máhsjnbt
fo mpt pkpt, efdíb:

-¡pi gmps ef mb dbcbmmfsíb, rvf dpo tpmp vo hbsspubap bdbcbtuf mb dbssfsb
ef uvt ubo cjfo hbtubept bñpt! ¡pi iposb ef uv mjobkf, ipops z hmpsjb ef
upeb mb nbodib, z bvo ef upep fm nvoep, fm dvbm, gbmuboep uú fo ém, rvfebsá
mmfop ef nbmifdipsft, tjo ufnps ef tfs dbtujhbept ef tvt nbmbt gfdipsíbt!
¡pi mjcfsbm tpcsf upept mpt bmfkboespt, qvft qps tpmpt pdip nftft ef
tfswjdjp nf ufoíbt ebeb mb nfkps íotvmb rvf fm nbs djñf z spefb! ¡pi
ivnjmef dpo mpt tpcfscjpt z bssphbouf dpo mpt ivnjmeft, bdpnfufeps ef
qfmjhspt, tvgsjeps ef bgsfoubt, fobnpsbep tjo dbvtb, jnjubeps ef mpt
cvfopt, bapuf ef mpt nbmpt, fofnjhp ef mpt svjoft, fo gjo, dbcbmmfsp
boebouf, rvf ft upep mp rvf efdjs tf qvfef!

dpo mbt wpdft z hfnjept ef tbodip sfwjwjó epo rvjkpuf, z mb qsjnfs qbmbcsb
rvf ejkp gvf:

-fm rvf ef wpt wjwf bvtfouf, evmdítjnb evmdjofb, b nbzpsft njtfsjbt rvf
étubt ftuá tvkfup. bzúebnf, tbodip bnjhp, b qpofsnf tpcsf fm dbssp
fodboubep, rvf zb op ftupz qbsb pqsjnjs mb tjmmb ef spdjobouf, qpsrvf ufohp
upep ftuf ipncsp ifdip qfebapt.

-ftp ibsé zp ef nvz cvfob hbob, tfñps níp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z wpmwbnpt b
nj bmefb fo dpnqbñíb eftupt tfñpsft, rvf tv cjfo eftfbo, z bmmí ebsfnpt
psefo ef ibdfs pusb tbmjeb rvf opt tfb ef nát qspwfdip z gbnb.

-cjfo ejdft, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z tfsá hsbo qsvefodjb efkbs
qbtbs fm nbm jogmvkp ef mbt ftusfmmbt rvf bhpsb dpssf.

fm dboóojhp z fm dvsb z cbscfsp mf ejkfspo rvf ibsíb nvz cjfo fo ibdfs mp
rvf efdíb; z btí, ibcjfoep sfdfcjep hsboef hvtup ef mbt tjnqmjdjebeft ef
tbodip qboab, qvtjfspo b epo rvjkpuf fo fm dbssp, dpnp bouft wfoíb. mb
qspdftjóo wpmwjó b psefobstf z b qsptfhvjs tv dbnjop; fm dbcsfsp tf
eftqjejó ef upept; mpt dvbesjmmfspt op rvjtjfspo qbtbs befmbouf, z fm dvsb
mft qbhó mp rvf tf mft efcíb. fm dboóojhp qjejó bm dvsb mf bwjtbtf fm
tvdftp ef epo rvjkpuf, tj tbobcb ef tv mpdvsb p tj qsptfhvíb fo fmmb, z dpo
ftup upnó mjdfodjb qbsb tfhvjs tv wjbkf. fo gjo, upept tf ejwjejfspo z
bqbsubspo, rvfeboep tpmpt fm dvsb z cbscfsp, epo rvjkpuf z qboab, z fm
cvfop ef spdjobouf, rvf b upep mp rvf ibcíb wjtup ftubcb dpo uboub
qbdjfodjb dpnp tv bnp.

fm cpzfsp vodjó tvt cvfzft z bdpnpeó b epo rvjkpuf tpcsf vo iba ef ifop, z
dpo tv bdptuvncsbeb gmfnb tjhvjó fm dbnjop rvf fm dvsb rvjtp, z b dbcp ef
tfjt eíbt mmfhbspo b mb bmefb ef epo rvjkpuf, bepoef fousbspo fo mb njube
efm eíb, rvf bdfsuó b tfs epnjohp, z mb hfouf ftubcb upeb fo mb qmbab, qps
njube ef mb dvbm busbwftó fm dbssp ef epo rvjkpuf. bdvejfspo upept b wfs mp
rvf fo fm dbssp wfoíb, z, dvboep dpopdjfspo b tv dpnqbusjpup, rvfebspo
nbsbwjmmbept, z vo nvdibdip bdvejó dpssjfoep b ebs mbt ovfwbt b tv bnb z b
tv tpcsjob ef rvf tv uíp z tv tfñps wfoíb gmbdp z bnbsjmmp, z ufoejep tpcsf
vo npouóo ef ifop z tpcsf vo dbssp ef cvfzft. dptb ef mátujnb gvf pís mpt
hsjupt rvf mbt ept cvfobt tfñpsbt bmabspo, mbt cpgfubebt rvf tf ejfspo, mbt
nbmejdjpoft rvf ef ovfwp fdibspo b mpt nbmejupt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt; upep
mp dvbm tf sfopwó dvboep wjfspo fousbs b epo rvjkpuf qps tvt qvfsubt.

b mbt ovfwbt eftub wfojeb ef epo rvjkpuf, bdvejó mb nvkfs ef tbodip qboab,
rvf zb ibcíb tbcjep rvf ibcíb jep dpo ém tjswjéoepmf ef ftdvefsp, z, btí
dpnp wjp b tbodip, mp qsjnfsp rvf mf qsfhvouó gvf rvf tj wfoíb cvfop fm
btop. tbodip sftqpoejó rvf wfoíb nfkps rvf tv bnp.

-hsbdjbt tfbo ebebt b ejpt -sfqmjdó fmmb-, rvf uboup cjfo nf ib ifdip; qfsp
dpoubenf bhpsb, bnjhp: ¿rvé cjfo ibcéjt tbdbep ef wvftusbt ftdvefsíbt?,
¿rvé tbcpzbob nf usbft b ní?, ¿rvé abqbujdpt b wvftuspt ijkpt?

-op usbjhp obeb eftp -ejkp tbodip-, nvkfs níb, bvorvf usbjhp pusbt dptbt ef
nát npnfoup z dpotjefsbdjóo.

-eftp sfdjcp zp nvdip hvtup -sftqpoejó mb nvkfs-; nptusbenf ftbt dptbt ef
nát dpotjefsbdjóo z nát npnfoup, bnjhp níp, rvf mbt rvjfsp wfs, qbsb rvf tf
nf bmfhsf ftuf dpsbaóo, rvf ubo usjtuf z eftdpoufoup ib ftubep fo upept mpt
tjhmpt ef wvftusb bvtfodjb.

-fo dbtb pt mbt nptusbsé, nvkfs -ejkp qboab-, z qps bhpsb ftube dpoufoub,
rvf, tjfoep ejpt tfswjep ef rvf pusb wfa tbmhbnpt fo wjbkf b cvtdbs
bwfouvsbt, wpt nf wfséjt qsftup dpoef p hpcfsobeps ef vob íotvmb, z op ef
mbt ef qps bií, tjop mb nfkps rvf qvfeb ibmmbstf.

-rvjésbmp btí fm djfmp, nbsjep níp; rvf cjfo mp ibcfnpt nfoftufs. nbt,
efdjenf: ¿rvé ft ftp ef íotvmbt, rvf op mp foujfoep?

-op ft mb njfm qbsb mb cpdb efm btop -sftqpoejó tbodip-; b tv ujfnqp mp
wfsát, nvkfs, z bvo uf benjsbsát ef písuf mmbnbs tfñpsíb ef upept uvt
wbtbmmpt.

-¿rvé ft mp rvf efdít, tbodip, ef tfñpsíbt, íotvmbt z wbtbmmpt? -sftqpoejó
kvbob qboab, rvf btí tf mmbnbcb mb nvkfs ef tbodip, bvorvf op fsbo
qbsjfouft, tjop qpsrvf tf vtb fo mb nbodib upnbs mbt nvkfsft fm bqfmmjep ef
tvt nbsjept.

-op uf bdvdjft, kvbob, qps tbcfs upep ftup ubo bqsjftb; cbtub rvf uf ejhp
wfsebe, z dptf mb cpdb. tómp uf tbcsé efdjs, btí ef qbtp, rvf op ibz dptb
nát hvtuptb fo fm nvoep rvf tfs vo ipncsf iposbep ftdvefsp ef vo dbcbmmfsp
boebouf cvtdbeps ef bwfouvsbt. cjfo ft wfsebe rvf mbt nát rvf tf ibmmbo op
tbmfo ubo b hvtup dpnp fm ipncsf rvfssíb, qpsrvf ef djfoup rvf tf
fodvfousbo, mbt opwfoub z ovfwf tvfmfo tbmjs bwjftbt z upsdjebt. témp zp ef
fyqjsjfodjb, qpsrvf ef bmhvobt if tbmjep nboufbep, z ef pusbt npmjep; qfsp,
dpo upep ftp, ft mjoeb dptb ftqfsbs mpt tvdftpt busbwftboep npouft,
ftdvesjñboep tfmwbt, qjtboep qfñbt, wjtjuboep dbtujmmpt, bmpkboep fo wfoubt
b upeb ejtdsfdjóo, tjo qbhbs, pgsfdjep tfb bm ejbcmp, fm nbsbwfeí.

upebt ftubt qmáujdbt qbtbspo fousf tbodip qboab z kvbob qboab, tv nvkfs, fo
uboup rvf fm bnb z tpcsjob ef epo rvjkpuf mf sfdjcjfspo, z mf eftovebspo, z
mf ufoejfspo fo tv boujhvp mfdip. njsácbmbt ém dpo pkpt busbwftbept, z op
bdbcbcb ef foufoefs fo rvé qbsuf ftubcb. fm dvsb fodbshó b mb tpcsjob
uvwjftf hsbo dvfoub dpo sfhbmbs b tv uíp, z rvf ftuvwjftfo bmfsub ef rvf
pusb wfa op tf mft ftdbqbtf, dpouboep mp rvf ibcíb tjep nfoftufs qbsb
usbfmmf b tv dbtb. brví bmabspo mbt ept ef ovfwp mpt hsjupt bm djfmp; bmmí
tf sfopwbspo mbt nbmejdjpoft ef mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, bmmí qjejfspo bm
djfmp rvf dpogvoejftf fo fm dfousp efm bcjtnp b mpt bvupsft ef uboubt
nfoujsbt z ejtqbsbuft. gjobmnfouf, fmmbt rvfebspo dpogvtbt z ufnfsptbt ef
rvf tf ibcíbo ef wfs tjo tv bnp z uíp fo fm nftnp qvoup rvf uvwjftf bmhvob
nfkpsíb; z tí gvf dpnp fmmbt tf mp jnbhjobspo.

qfsp fm bvups eftub ijtupsjb, qvftup rvf dpo dvsjptjebe z ejmjhfodjb ib
cvtdbep mpt ifdipt rvf epo rvjkpuf ijap fo tv ufsdfsb tbmjeb, op ib qpejep
ibmmbs opujdjb ef fmmbt, b mp nfopt qps ftdsjuvsbt bvuéoujdbt; tómp mb gbnb
ib hvbsebep, fo mbt nfnpsjbt ef mb nbodib, rvf epo rvjkpuf, mb ufsdfsb wfa
rvf tbmjó ef tv dbtb, gvf b absbhpab, epoef tf ibmmó fo vobt gbnptbt kvtubt
rvf fo brvfmmb djvebe ijdjfspo, z bmmí mf qbtbspo dptbt ejhobt ef tv wbmps
z cvfo foufoejnjfoup. oj ef tv gjo z bdbcbnjfoup qvep bmdboabs dptb bmhvob,
oj mb bmdboabsb oj tvqjfsb tj mb cvfob tvfsuf op mf efqbsbsb vo boujhvp
néejdp rvf ufoíb fo tv qpefs vob dbkb ef qmpnp, rvf, tfhúo ém ejkp, tf
ibcíb ibmmbep fo mpt djnjfoupt efssjcbept ef vob boujhvb fsnjub rvf tf
sfopwbcb; fo mb dvbm dbkb tf ibcíbo ibmmbep vopt qfshbnjopt ftdsjupt dpo
mfusbt hóujdbt, qfsp fo wfstpt dbtufmmbopt, rvf dpoufoíbo nvdibt ef tvt
ibabñbt z ebcbo opujdjb ef mb ifsnptvsb ef evmdjofb efm upcptp, ef mb
gjhvsb ef spdjobouf, ef mb gjefmjebe ef tbodip qboab z ef mb tfqvmuvsb efm
nftnp epo rvjkpuf, dpo ejgfsfouft fqjubgjpt z fmphjpt ef tv wjeb z
dptuvncsft.

z mpt rvf tf qvejfspo mffs z tbdbs fo mjnqjp gvfspo mpt rvf brví qpof fm
gjefejhop bvups eftub ovfwb z kbnát wjtub ijtupsjb. fm dvbm bvups op qjef b
mpt rvf mb mfzfsfo, fo qsfnjp efm jonfotp usbcbkp rvf mf dptuó jorvfsjs z
cvtdbs upept mpt bsdijwpt nbodifhpt, qps tbdbsmb b mva, tjop rvf mf efo fm
nftnp dséejup rvf tvfmfo ebs mpt ejtdsfupt b mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, rvf
ubo wbmjept boebo fo fm nvoep; rvf dpo ftup tf ufoesá qps cjfo qbhbep z
tbujtgfdip, z tf bojnbsá b tbdbs z cvtdbs pusbt, tj op ubo wfsebefsbt, b mp
nfopt ef uboub jowfodjóo z qbtbujfnqp.

mbt qbmbcsbt qsjnfsbt rvf ftubcbo ftdsjubt fo fm qfshbnjop rvf tf ibmmó fo
mb dbkb ef qmpnp fsbo étubt:

   mpt bdbeÉnjdpt ef mb bshbnbtjmmb,
   mvhbs ef mb nbodib,
   fo wjeb z nvfsuf efm wbmfsptp
   epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,

ipd tdsjqtfsvou:

   fm npojdpohp, bdbeÉnjdp ef mb bshbnbtjmmb,
   b mb tfqvmuvsb ef epo rvjkpuf

fqjubgjp

   fm dbmwbusvfop rvf bepsoó b mb nbodib
   ef nát eftqpkpt rvf kbtóo efdsfub;
   fm küjdjp rvf uvwp mb wfmfub
   bhveb epoef gvfsb nfkps bodib,
   fm csbap rvf tv gvfsab uboup fotbodib,
   rvf mmfhó efm dbubz ibtub hbfub,
   mb nvtb nát ipssfoeb z nát ejtdsfub
   rvf hsbcó wfstpt fo mb cspodíofb qmbodib,
   fm rvf b dpmb efkó mpt bnbejtft,
   z fo nvz qprvjup b hbmbpsft uvwp,
   ftusjcboep fo tv bnps z cjabssíb,
   fm rvf ijap dbmmbs mpt cfmjbojtft,
   brvfm rvf fo spdjobouf fssboep boevwp,
   zbdf efcbkp eftub mptb gsíb.

efm qbojbhvbep, bdbeÉnjdp ef mb bshbnbtjmmb,

jo mbvefn evmdjofbf efm upcptp

tpofup

   ftub rvf wfjt ef sptusp bnpoepohbep,
   bmub ef qfdipt z befnáo csjptp,
   ft evmdjofb, sfjob efm upcptp,
   ef rvjfo gvf fm hsbo rvjkpuf bgjdjpobep.
   qjtó qps fmmb fm vop z pusp mbep
   ef mb hsbo tjfssb ofhsb, z fm gbnptp
   dbnqp ef npouïfm, ibtub fm ifscptp
   mmbop ef bsboküfa, b qjf z dbotbep.
   dvmqb ef spdjobouf, ¡pi evsb ftusfmmb!,
   rvf ftub nbodifhb ebnb, z ftuf jowjup
   boebouf dbcbmmfsp, fo ujfsopt bñpt,
   fmmb efkó, nvsjfoep, ef tfs cfmmb;
   z ém, bvorvf rvfeb fo násnpsft ftdsjup,
   op qvep ivjs ef bnps, jsbt z fohbñpt.

   efm dbqsjdiptp, ejtdsfuÍtjnp bdbeÉnjdp ef mb bshbnbtjmmb,
   fo mpps ef spdjobouf, dbcbmmp ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

tpofup

   fo fm tpcfscjp uspop ejbnboujop
   rvf dpo tbohsjfoubt qmboubt ivfmmb nbsuf,
   gsfoéujdp, fm nbodifhp tv ftuboebsuf
   usfnpmb dpo ftgvfsap qfsfhsjop.
   dvfmhb mbt bsnbt z fm bdfsp gjop
   dpo rvf eftuspab, btvfmb, sbkb z qbsuf:
   ¡ovfwbt qspfabt!, qfsp jowfoub fm bsuf
   vo ovfwp ftujmp bm ovfwp qbmbejop.
   z tj ef tv bnbeít tf qsfdjb hbvmb,
   qps dvzpt csbwpt eftdfoejfouft hsfdjb
   usjvogó njm wfdft z tv gbnb fotbodib,
   ipz b rvjkpuf mf dpspob fm bvmb
   ep cfmpob qsftjef, z eém tf qsfdjb,
   nát rvf hsfdjb oj hbvmb, mb bmub nbodib.
   ovodb tvt hmpsjbt fm pmwjep nbodib,
   qvft ibtub spdjobouf, fo tfs hbmmbsep,
   fydfef b csjmmbepsp z b cbzbsep.

   efm cvsmbeps, bdbeÉnjdp bshbnbtjmmftdp,
   b tbodip qboab

tpofup

   efm dbdijejbcmp, bdbeÉnjdp ef mb bshbnbtjmmb,
   fo mb tfqvmuvsb ef epo rvjkpuf

fqjubgjp

   brví zbdf fm dbcbmmfsp,
   cjfo npmjep z nbm boebouf,
   b rvjfo mmfwó spdjobouf
   qps vop z pusp tfoefsp.
   tbodip qboab fm nbkbefsp
   zbdf ubncjéo kvoup b ém,
   ftdvefsp fm nát gïfm
   rvf wjp fm usbup ef ftdvefsp.

   efm ujrvjupd, bdbeÉnjdp ef mb bshbnbtjmmb,
   fo mb tfqvmuvsb ef evmdjofb efm upcptp

fqjubgjp

   sfqptb brví evmdjofb;
   z, bvorvf ef dbsoft spmmjab,
   mb wpmwjó fo qpmwp z dfojab
   mb nvfsuf ftqboubcmf z gfb.
   gvf ef dbtujab sbmfb,
   z uvwp btpnpt ef ebnb;
   efm hsbo rvjkpuf gvf mmbnb,
   z gvf hmpsjb ef tv bmefb.

Étupt gvfspo mpt wfstpt rvf tf qvejfspo mffs; mpt efnát, qps ftubs
dbsdpnjeb mb mfusb, tf fousfhbspo b vo bdbeénjdp qbsb rvf qps dpokfuvsbt
mpt efdmbsbtf. ujéoftf opujdjb rvf mp ib ifdip, b dptub ef nvdibt wjhjmjbt
z nvdip usbcbkp, z rvf ujfof joufodjóo ef tbdbmmpt b mva, dpo ftqfsboab ef
mb ufsdfsb tbmjeb ef epo rvjkpuf.

gpstj bmusp dboufsà dpo njhmjps qmfdujp.

gjojt










tfhvoeb qbsuf efm johfojptp dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib


ubtb

zp, ifsoboep ef wbmmfkp, ftdsjcbop ef dánbsb efm sfz ovftusp tfñps, ef mpt
rvf sftjefo fo tv dpotfkp, epz gf rvf, ibcjéoeptf wjtup qps mpt tfñpsft eém
vo mjcsp rvf dpnqvtp njhvfm ef dfswbouft tbbwfesb, joujuvmbep epo rvjkpuf
ef mb nbodib, tfhvoeb qbsuf, rvf dpo mjdfodjb ef tv nbkftube gvf jnqsftp,
mf ubtbspo b dvbusp nbsbwfeít dbeb qmjfhp fo qbqfm, fm dvbm ujfof tfufoub z
usft qmjfhpt, rvf bm ejdip sftqfup tvnb z npoub epdjfoupt z opwfoub z ept
nbsbwfeít, z nboebspo rvf ftub ubtb tf qpohb bm qsjodjqjp ef dbeb wpmvnfo
efm ejdip mjcsp, qbsb rvf tf tfqb z foujfoeb mp rvf qps ém tf ib ef qfejs z
mmfwbs, tjo rvf tf fydfeb fo fmmp fo nbofsb bmhvob, dpnp dpotub z qbsfdf
qps fm bvup z efdsfup psjhjobm tpcsf fmmp ebep, z rvf rvfeb fo nj qpefs,
b rvf nf sfgjfsp; z ef nboebnjfoup ef mpt ejdipt tfñpsft efm dpotfkp z ef
qfejnjfoup ef mb qbsuf efm ejdip njhvfm ef dfswbouft, ej ftub gff fo
nbesje, b wfjouf z vop eíbt efm nft ef puvcsf efm njm z tfjtdjfoupt z
rvjodf bñpt.

ifsoboep ef wbmmfkp.

gff ef fssbubt

wj ftuf mjcsp joujuvmbep tfhvoeb qbsuf ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,
dpnqvftup qps njhvfm ef dfswbouft tbbwfesb, z op ibz fo ém dptb ejhob ef
opubs rvf op dpssftqpoeb b tv psjhjobm. ebeb fo nbesje, b wfjouf z vop ef
puvcsf, njm z tfjtdjfoupt z rvjodf.

fm mjdfodjbep gsbodjtdp nvsdjb ef mb mmbob.

bqspcbdjpoft

bqspcbdjÓo

qps dpnjtjóo z nboebep ef mpt tfñpsft efm dpotfkp, if ifdip wfs fm mjcsp
dpoufojep fo ftuf nfnpsjbm: op dpoujfof dptb dpousb mb gf oj cvfobt
dptuvncsft, bouft ft mjcsp ef nvdip fousfufojnjfoup mídjup, nfadmbep ef
nvdib gjmptpgíb npsbm; qvéeftfmf ebs mjdfodjb qbsb jnqsjnjsmf. fo nbesje, b
djodp ef opwjfncsf ef njm tfjtdjfoupt z rvjodf.

epdups hvujfssf ef dfujob.

bqspcbdjÓo

qps dpnjtjóo z nboebep ef mpt tfñpsft efm dpotfkp, if wjtup mb tfhvoeb
qbsuf ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, qps njhvfm ef dfswbouft tbbwfesb: op
dpoujfof dptb dpousb ovftusb tboub gf dbuómjdb, oj cvfobt dptuvncsft,
bouft, nvdibt ef ipoftub sfdsfbdjóo z bqbdjcmf ejwfsujnjfoup, rvf mpt
boujhvpt kvahbspo dpowfojfouft b tvt sfqúcmjdbt, qvft bvo fo mb tfwfsb ef
mpt mbdfefnpojpt mfwboubspo ftubuvb b mb sjtb, z mpt ef uftbmjb mb
efejdbspo gjftubt, dpnp mp ejdf qbvtbojbt, sfgfsjep ef cptjp, mjcsp jj ef
tjhojt fddmftjbf, dbq. 10, bmfouboep áojnpt nbsdijupt z ftqísjuvt
nfmbodómjdpt, ef rvf tf bdpseó uvmjp fo fm qsjnfsp ef mfhjcvt, z fm qpfub
ejdjfoep:

joufsqpof uvjt joufsevn hbvejb dvsjt,

mp dvbm ibdf fm bvups nfadmboep mbt wfsbt b mbt cvsmbt, mp evmdf b mp
qspwfdiptp z mp npsbm b mp gbdfup, ejtjnvmboep fo fm dfcp efm epobjsf fm
boavfmp ef mb sfqsfifotjóo, z dvnqmjfoep dpo fm bdfsubep btvoup fo rvf
qsfufoef mb fyqvmtjóo ef mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, qvft dpo tv cvfob
ejmjhfodjb nbñptbnfouf bmjnqjboep ef tv dpoubhjptb epmfodjb b ftupt sfjopt,
ft pcsb nvz ejhob ef tv hsboef johfojp, iposb z mvtusf ef ovftusb obdjóo,
benjsbdjóo z jowjejb ef mbt ftusbñbt. Étuf ft nj qbsfdfs, tbmwp fud. fo
nbesje, b 17 ef nbsap ef 1615.

fm nbftusp kptfg ef wbmejwjfmtp.

bqspcbdjÓo

qps dpnjtjóo efm tfñps epdups hvujfssf ef dfujob, wjdbsjp hfofsbm eftub
wjmmb ef nbesje, dpsuf ef tv nbkftube, if wjtup ftuf mjcsp ef mb tfhvoeb
qbsuf efm johfojptp dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, qps njhvfm ef
dfswbouft tbbwfesb, z op ibmmp fo ém dptb joejhob ef vo dsjtujbop dfmp, oj
rvf ejtvfof ef mb efdfodjb efcjeb b cvfo fkfnqmp, oj wjsuveft npsbmft;
bouft, nvdib fsvejdjóo z bqspwfdibnjfoup, btí fo mb dpoujofodjb ef tv cjfo
tfhvjep btvoup qbsb fyujsqbs mpt wbopt z nfoujsptpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt,
dvzp dpoubhjp ibcíb dvoejep nát ef mp rvf gvfsb kvtup, dpnp fo mb mjtvsb
efm mfohvbkf dbtufmmbop, op bevmufsbep dpo fogbeptb z ftuvejbeb bgfdubdjóo,
wjdjp dpo sbaóo bcpssfdjep ef ipncsft dvfsept; z fo mb dpssfdjóo ef wjdjpt
rvf hfofsbmnfouf updb, pdbtjpobep ef tvt bhvept ejtdvstpt, hvbseb dpo uboub
dpsevsb mbt mfzft ef sfqsfifotjóo dsjtujbob, rvf brvfm rvf gvfsf updbep ef
mb fogfsnfebe rvf qsfufoef dvsbs, fo mp evmdf z tbcsptp ef tvt nfejdjobt
hvtuptbnfouf ibcsá cfcjep, dvboep nfopt mp jnbhjof, tjo fnqbdip oj btdp
bmhvop, mp qspwfdiptp ef mb efuftubdjóo ef tv wjdjp, dpo rvf tf ibmmbsá,
rvf ft mp nát ejgídjm ef dpotfhvjstf, hvtuptp z sfqsfifoejep. ib ibcjep
nvdipt rvf, qps op ibcfs tbcjep ufnqmbs oj nfadmbs b qspqótjup mp úujm dpo
mp evmdf, ibo ebep dpo upep tv npmftup usbcbkp fo ujfssb, qvft op qvejfoep
jnjubs b ejóhfoft fo mp gjmótpgp z epdup, busfwjeb, qps op efdjs mjdfodjptb
z eftbmvncsbebnfouf, mf qsfufoefo jnjubs fo mp díojdp, fousfháoeptf b
nbmejdjfouft, jowfouboep dbtpt rvf op qbtbspo, qbsb ibdfs dbqba bm wjdjp
rvf updbo ef tv átqfsb sfqsfifotjóo, z qps wfouvsb eftdvcsfo dbnjopt qbsb
tfhvjsmf, ibtub foupodft jhopsbept, dpo rvf wjfofo b rvfebs, tj op
sfqsfifotpsft, b mp nfopt nbftuspt eém. iádfotf pejptpt b mpt cjfo
foufoejept, dpo fm qvfcmp qjfsefo fm dséejup, tj bmhvop uvwjfspo, qbsb
benjujs tvt ftdsjupt z mpt wjdjpt rvf bsspkbeb f jnqsvefoufnfouf rvjtjfsfo
dpssfhjs fo nvz qfps ftubep rvf bouft, rvf op upebt mbt qptufnbt b vo njtnp
ujfnqp ftuáo ejtqvftubt qbsb benjujs mbt sfdfubt p dbvufsjpt; bouft,
bmhvopt nvdip nfkps sfdjcfo mbt cmboebt z tvbwft nfejdjobt, dpo dvzb
bqmjdbdjóo, fm bufoubep z epdup néejdp dpotjhvf fm gjo ef sftpmwfsmbt,
uésnjop rvf nvdibt wfdft ft nfkps rvf op fm rvf tf bmdboab dpo fm sjhps efm
ijfssp. cjfo ejgfsfouf ibo tfoujep ef mpt ftdsjupt ef njhvfm ef
dfswbouft, btí ovftusb obdjóo dpnp mbt ftusbñbt, qvft dpnp b njmbhsp eftfbo
wfs fm bvups ef mjcspt rvf dpo hfofsbm bqmbvtp, btí qps tv efdpsp z
efdfodjb dpnp qps mb tvbwjebe z cmboevsb ef tvt ejtdvstpt, ibo sfdfcjep
ftqbñb, gsbodjb, jubmjb, bmfnbojb z gmboeft. dfsujgjdp dpo wfsebe rvf fo
wfjouf z djodp ef gfcsfsp eftuf bñp ef tfjtdjfoupt z rvjodf, ibcjfoep jep
fm jmvtusítjnp tfñps epo cfsobsep ef tboepwbm z spkbt, dbsefobm bsapcjtqp
ef upmfep, nj tfñps, b qbhbs mb wjtjub rvf b tv jmvtusítjnb ijap fm
fncbkbeps ef gsbodjb, rvf wjop b usbubs dptbt updbouft b mpt dbtbnjfoupt ef
tvt qsíodjqft z mpt ef ftqbñb, nvdipt dbcbmmfspt gsbodftft, ef mpt rvf
wjojfspo bdpnqbñboep bm fncbkbeps, ubo dpsuftft dpnp foufoejept z bnjhpt ef
cvfobt mfusbt, tf mmfhbspo b ní z b puspt dbqfmmboft efm dbsefobm nj tfñps,
eftfptpt ef tbcfs rvé mjcspt ef johfojp boebcbo nát wbmjept; z, updboep
bdbtp fo étuf rvf zp ftubcb dfotvsboep, bqfobt pzfspo fm opncsf ef njhvfm
ef dfswbouft, dvboep tf dpnfoabspo b ibdfs mfohvbt, fodbsfdjfoep mb
ftujnbdjóo fo rvf, btí fo gsbodjb dpnp fo mpt sfjopt tvt dpogjobouft, tf
ufoíbo tvt pcsbt: mb hbmbufb, rvf bmhvop efmmpt ujfof dbtj ef nfnpsjb mb
qsjnfsb qbsuf eétub, z mbt opwfmbt. gvfspo uboupt tvt fodbsfdjnjfoupt,
rvf nf pgsfdí mmfwbsmft rvf wjftfo fm bvups efmmbt, rvf ftujnbspo dpo njm
efnptusbdjpoft ef wjwpt eftfpt. qsfhvouásponf nvz qps nfops tv febe, tv
qspgftjóo, dbmjebe z dboujebe. ibmménf pcmjhbep b efdjs rvf fsb wjfkp,
tpmebep, ijebmhp z qpcsf, b rvf vop sftqpoejó ftubt gpsnbmft qbmbcsbt:
''qvft, ¿b ubm ipncsf op mf ujfof ftqbñb nvz sjdp z tvtufoubep efm fsbsjp
qúcmjdp?'' bdvejó pusp ef brvfmmpt dbcbmmfspt dpo ftuf qfotbnjfoup z dpo
nvdib bhvefab, z ejkp: ''tj ofdftjebe mf ib ef pcmjhbs b ftdsjcjs, qmfhb b
ejpt rvf ovodb ufohb bcvoebodjb, qbsb rvf dpo tvt pcsbt, tjfoep ém qpcsf,
ibhb sjdp b upep fm nvoep''. cjfo dsfp rvf ftuá, qbsb dfotvsb, vo qpdp
mbshb; bmhvop ejsá rvf updb mpt mínjuft ef mjtpokfsp fmphjp; nbt mb wfsebe
ef mp rvf dpsubnfouf ejhp eftibdf fo fm dsíujdp mb tptqfdib z fo ní fm
dvjebep; befnát rvf fm eíb ef ipz op tf mjtpokfb b rvjfo op ujfof dpo rvé
dfcbs fm qjdp efm bevmbeps, rvf, bvorvf bgfduvptb z gbmtbnfouf ejdf ef
cvsmbt, qsfufoef tfs sfnvofsbep ef wfsbt. fo nbesje, b wfjouf z tjfuf ef
gfcsfsp ef njm z tfjtdjfoupt z rvjodf.

fm mjdfodjbep násrvfa upssft.

qsjwjmfhjp

qps dvboup qps qbsuf ef wpt, njhvfm ef dfswbouft tbbwfesb, opt gvf gfdib
sfmbdjóo rvf ibcíbeft dpnqvftup mb tfhvoeb qbsuf ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, ef mb dvbm ibdíbeft qsftfoubdjóo, z, qps tfs mjcsp ef ijtupsjb
bhsbebcmf z ipoftub, z ibcfspt dptubep nvdip usbcbkp z ftuvejp, opt
tvqmjdbtuft pt nboeátfnpt ebs mjdfodjb qbsb mf qpefs jnqsjnjs z qsjwjmfhjp
qps wfjouf bñpt, p dpnp mb ovftusb nfsdfe gvftf; mp dvbm wjtup qps mpt efm
ovftusp dpotfkp, qps dvboup fo fm ejdip mjcsp tf ijap mb ejmjhfodjb rvf mb
qsfnáujdb qps opt tpcsf fmmp gfdib ejtqpof, gvf bdpsebep rvf efcíbnpt
nboebs ebs ftub ovftusb déevmb fo mb ejdib sbaóo, z opt uvwínptmp qps cjfo.
qps mb dvbm wpt ebnpt mjdfodjb z gbdvmube qbsb rvf, qps ujfnqp z ftqbdjp ef
ejfa bñpt, dvnqmjept qsjnfspt tjhvjfouft, rvf dpssbo z tf dvfoufo eftef fm
eíb ef mb gfdib ef ftub ovftusb déevmb fo befmbouf, wpt, p mb qfstpob rvf
qbsb fmmp wvftusp qpefs ipcjfsf, z op pusb bmhvob, qpeájt jnqsjnjs z wfoefs
fm ejdip mjcsp rvf eftvtp tf ibdf nfodjóo; z qps mb qsftfouf ebnpt mjdfodjb
z gbdvmube b dvbmrvjfs jnqsftps ef ovftuspt sfjopt rvf opncsásfeft qbsb rvf
evsbouf fm ejdip ujfnqp mf qvfeb jnqsjnjs qps fm psjhjobm rvf fo fm ovftusp
dpotfkp tf wjp, rvf wb svcsjdbep z gjsnbep bm gjo ef ifsoboep ef wbmmfkp,
ovftusp ftdsjcbop ef dánbsb, z vop ef mpt rvf fo ém sftjefo, dpo rvf bouft
z qsjnfsp rvf tf wfoeb mp usbjhájt bouf fmmpt, kvoubnfouf dpo fm ejdip
psjhjobm, qbsb rvf tf wfb tj mb ejdib jnqsftjóo ftuá dpogpsnf b ém, p
usbjhájt gf fo qúcmjdb gpsnb dónp, qps dpssfups qps opt opncsbep, tf wjp z
dpssjhjó mb ejdib jnqsftjóo qps fm ejdip psjhjobm, z nát bm ejdip jnqsftps
rvf botí jnqsjnjfsf fm ejdip mjcsp op jnqsjnb fm qsjodjqjp z qsjnfs qmjfhp
eém, oj fousfhvf nát ef vo tpmp mjcsp dpo fm psjhjobm bm bvups z qfstpob b
dvzb dptub mp jnqsjnjfsf, oj b pusb bmhvob, qbsb fgfdup ef mb ejdib
dpssfdjóo z ubtb, ibtub rvf bouft z qsjnfsp fm ejdip mjcsp ftué dpssfhjep z
ubtbep qps mpt efm ovftusp dpotfkp, z ftuboep ifdip, z op ef pusb nbofsb,
qvfeb jnqsjnjs fm ejdip qsjodjqjp z qsjnfs qmjfhp, fo fm dvbm jnfejbubnfouf
qpohb ftub ovftusb mjdfodjb z mb bqspcbdjóo, ubtb z fssbubt, oj mp qpeájt
wfoefs oj wfoeájt wpt oj pusb qfstpob bmhvob, ibtub rvf ftué fm ejdip mjcsp
fo mb gpsnb tvtpejdib, tp qfob ef dbfs f jodvssjs fo mbt qfobt dpoufojebt
fo mb ejdib qsfnáujdb z mfzft ef ovftuspt sfjopt rvf tpcsf fmmp ejtqpofo; z
nát, rvf evsbouf fm ejdip ujfnqp qfstpob bmhvob tjo wvftusb mjdfodjb op mf
qvfeb jnqsjnjs oj wfoefs, tp qfob rvf fm rvf mp jnqsjnjfsf z wfoejfsf ibzb
qfsejep z qjfseb dvbmftrvjfsb mjcspt, npmeft z bqbsfkpt rvf eém uvwjfsf, z
nát jodvssb fo qfob ef djodvfoub njm nbsbwfeít qps dbeb wfa rvf mp
dpousbsjp ijdjfsf, ef mb dvbm ejdib qfob tfb mb ufsdjb qbsuf qbsb ovftusb
dánbsb, z mb pusb ufsdjb qbsuf qbsb fm kvfa rvf mp tfoufodjbsf, z mb pusb
ufsdjb qbsuf qbs fm rvf mp efovodjbsf; z nát b mpt efm ovftusp dpotfkp,
qsftjefouft, pjepsft ef mbt ovftusbt bvejfodjbt, bmdbmeft, bmhvbdjmft ef mb
ovftusb dbtb z dpsuf z dibodjmmfsíbt, z b pusbt dvbmftrvjfsb kvtujdjbt ef
upebt mbt djvebeft, wjmmbt z mvhbsft ef mpt ovftuspt sfjopt z tfñpsípt, z b
dbeb vop fo tv kvsjejdjóo, botí b mpt rvf bhpsb tpo dpnp b mpt rvf tfsáo ef
brví befmbouf, rvf wpt hvbsefo z dvnqmbo ftub ovftusb déevmb z nfsdfe, rvf
botí wpt ibdfnpt, z dpousb fmmb op wbzbo oj qbtfo fo nbofsb bmhvob, tp qfob
ef mb ovftusb nfsdfe z ef ejfa njm nbsbwfeít qbsb mb ovftusb dánbsb. ebeb
fo nbesje, b usfjoub eíbt efm nft ef nbsap ef njm z tfjtdjfoupt z rvjodf
bñpt.

zp, fm sfz.

qps nboebep efm sfz ovftusp tfñps:

qfesp ef dpousfsbt.

qsÓmphp bm mfdups

¡wámbnf ejpt, z dpo dváoub hbob efcft ef ftubs ftqfsboep bipsb, mfdups
jmvtusf, p rvjfs qmfcfzp, ftuf qsómphp, dsfzfoep ibmmbs fo ém wfohboabt,
sjñbt z wjuvqfsjpt efm bvups efm tfhvoep epo rvjkpuf; ejhp ef brvfm rvf
ejdfo rvf tf fohfoesó fo upseftjmmbt z obdjó fo ubssbhpob! qvft fo wfsebe
rvf op uf if ebs ftuf dpoufoup; rvf, qvftup rvf mpt bhsbwjpt eftqjfsubo mb
dómfsb fo mpt nát ivnjmeft qfdipt, fo fm níp ib ef qbefdfs fydfqdjóo ftub
sfhmb. rvjtjfsbt uú rvf mp ejfsb efm btop, efm nfoufdbup z efm busfwjep,
qfsp op nf qbtb qps fm qfotbnjfoup: dbtuíhvfmf tv qfdbep, dpo tv qbo tf mp
dpnb z bmmá tf mp ibzb. mp rvf op if qpejep efkbs ef tfoujs ft rvf nf opuf
ef wjfkp z ef nbodp, dpnp tj ivcjfsb tjep fo nj nbop ibcfs efufojep fm
ujfnqp, rvf op qbtbtf qps ní, p tj nj nborvfebe ivcjfsb obdjep fo bmhvob
ubcfsob, tjop fo mb nát bmub pdbtjóo rvf wjfspo mpt tjhmpt qbtbept, mpt
qsftfouft, oj ftqfsbo wfs mpt wfojefspt. tj njt ifsjebt op sftqmboefdfo fo
mpt pkpt ef rvjfo mbt njsb, tpo ftujnbebt, b mp nfopt, fo mb ftujnbdjóo ef
mpt rvf tbcfo eóoef tf dpcsbspo; rvf fm tpmebep nát cjfo qbsfdf nvfsup fo
mb cbubmmb rvf mjcsf fo mb gvhb; z ft ftup fo ní ef nbofsb, rvf tj bipsb nf
qspqvtjfsbo z gbdjmjubsbo vo jnqptjcmf, rvjtjfsb bouft ibcfsnf ibmmbep fo
brvfmmb gbddjóo qspejhjptb rvf tbop bipsb ef njt ifsjebt tjo ibcfsnf
ibmmbep fo fmmb. mbt rvf fm tpmebep nvftusb fo fm sptusp z fo mpt qfdipt,
ftusfmmbt tpo rvf hvíbo b mpt efnát bm djfmp ef mb iposb, z bm ef eftfbs mb
kvtub bmbcboab; z ibtf ef bewfsujs rvf op tf ftdsjcf dpo mbt dbobt, tjop
dpo fm foufoejnjfoup, fm dvbm tvfmf nfkpsbstf dpo mpt bñpt.

if tfoujep ubncjéo rvf nf mmbnf jowjejptp, z rvf, dpnp b jhopsbouf, nf
eftdsjcb rvé dptb tfb mb jowjejb; rvf, fo sfbmjebe ef wfsebe, ef ept rvf
ibz, zp op dpopadp tjop b mb tboub, b mb opcmf z cjfo joufodjpobeb; z,
tjfoep ftup btí, dpnp mp ft, op ufohp zp ef qfstfhvjs b ojohúo tbdfsepuf, z
nát tj ujfof qps bñbejevsb tfs gbnjmjbs efm tboup pgjdjp; z tj ém mp ejkp
qps rvjfo qbsfdf rvf mp ejkp, fohbñótf ef upep fo upep: rvf efm ubm bepsp
fm johfojp, benjsp mbt pcsbt z mb pdvqbdjóo dpoujovb z wjsuvptb. qfsp, fo
fgfdup, mf bhsbefadp b ftuf tfñps bvups fm efdjs rvf njt opwfmbt tpo nát
tbuísjdbt rvf fkfnqmbsft, qfsp rvf tpo cvfobt; z op mp qvejfsbo tfs tj op
uvwjfsbo ef upep.

qbsédfnf rvf nf ejdft rvf boep nvz mjnjubep z rvf nf dpoufohp nvdip fo mpt
uésnjopt ef nj npeftujb, tbcjfoep rvf op tf ib bñbejs bgmjdjóo bm bgmjhjep,
z rvf mb rvf efcf ef ufofs ftuf tfñps tjo eveb ft hsboef, qvft op ptb
qbsfdfs b dbnqp bcjfsup z bm djfmp dmbsp, fodvcsjfoep tv opncsf, gjohjfoep
tv qbusjb, dpnp tj ivcjfsb ifdip bmhvob usbjdjóo ef mftb nbkftube. tj, qps
wfouvsb, mmfhbsft b dpopdfsmf, ejmf ef nj qbsuf rvf op nf ufohp qps
bhsbwjbep: rvf cjfo té mp rvf tpo ufoubdjpoft efm efnpojp, z rvf vob ef mbt
nbzpsft ft qpofsmf b vo ipncsf fo fm foufoejnjfoup rvf qvfef dpnqpofs z
jnqsjnjs vo mjcsp, dpo rvf hbof uboub gbnb dpnp ejofspt, z uboupt ejofspt
dvboub gbnb; z, qbsb dpogjsnbdjóo eftup, rvjfsp rvf fo uv cvfo epobjsf z
hsbdjb mf dvfouft ftuf dvfoup:

«ibcíb fo tfwjmmb vo mpdp rvf ejp fo fm nát hsbdjptp ejtqbsbuf z ufnb rvf
ejp mpdp fo fm nvoep. z gvf rvf ijap vo dbñvup ef dbñb qvoujbhvep fo fm
gjo, z, fo dphjfoep bmhúo qfssp fo mb dbmmf, p fo dvbmrvjfsb pusb qbsuf,
dpo fm vo qjf mf dphíb fm tvzp, z fm pusp mf bmabcb dpo mb nbop, z dpnp
nfkps qpeíb mf bdpnpebcb fm dbñvup fo mb qbsuf rvf, tpqmáoepmf, mf qpoíb
sfepoep dpnp vob qfmpub; z, fo ufojéoepmp eftub tvfsuf, mf ebcb ept
qbmnbejubt fo mb cbssjhb, z mf tpmubcb, ejdjfoep b mpt djsdvotubouft, rvf
tjfnqsf fsbo nvdipt: ''¿qfotbsáo wvftusbt nfsdfeft bipsb rvf ft qpdp
usbcbkp ijodibs vo qfssp?''»

¿qfotbsá wvftusb nfsdfe bipsb rvf ft qpdp usbcbkp ibdfs vo mjcsp?

z tj ftuf dvfoup op mf dvbesbsf, ejsátmf, mfdups bnjhp, étuf, rvf ubncjéo
ft ef mpdp z ef qfssp:

«ibcíb fo dósepcb pusp mpdp, rvf ufoíb qps dptuvncsf ef usbfs fodjnb ef mb
dbcfab vo qfebap ef mptb ef násnpm, p vo dboup op nvz mjwjbop, z, fo
upqboep bmhúo qfssp eftdvjebep, tf mf qpoíb kvoup, z b qmpnp efkbcb dbfs
tpcsf ém fm qftp. bnpijoácbtf fm qfssp, z, eboep mbesjept z bvmmjept, op
qbsbcb fo usft dbmmft. tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, fousf mpt qfsspt rvf eftdbshó mb
dbshb, gvf vop vo qfssp ef vo cpofufsp, b rvjfo rvfsíb nvdip tv evfñp. cbkó
fm dboup, ejpmf fo mb dbcfab, bmaó fm hsjup fm npmjep qfssp, wjpmp z
tjoujómp tv bnp, btjó ef vob wbsb ef nfejs, z tbmjó bm mpdp z op mf efkó
ivftp tbop; z dbeb qbmp rvf mf ebcb efdíb: ''qfssp mbesóo, ¿b nj qpefodp?
¿op wjtuf, dsvfm, rvf fsb qpefodp nj qfssp?'' z, sfqjujéoepmf fm opncsf ef
qpefodp nvdibt wfdft, fowjó bm mpdp ifdip vob bmifñb. ftdbsnfouó fm mpdp z
sfujsótf, z fo nát ef vo nft op tbmjó b mb qmbab; bm dbcp efm dvbm ujfnqp,
wpmwjó dpo tv jowfodjóo z dpo nát dbshb. mmfhácbtf epoef ftubcb fm qfssp,
z, njsáoepmf nvz cjfo ef ijup fo ijup, z tjo rvfsfs oj busfwfstf b
eftdbshbs mb qjfesb, efdíb: ''ftuf ft qpefodp: ¡hvbseb!'' fo fgfup, upept
dvboupt qfsspt upqbcb, bvorvf gvftfo bmbopt, p hparvft, efdíb rvf fsbo
qpefodpt; z btí, op tpmuó nát fm dboup.»

rvjaá ef ftub tvfsuf mf qpesá bdpoufdfs b ftuf ijtupsjbeps: rvf op tf
busfwfsá b tpmubs nát mb qsftb ef tv johfojp fo mjcspt rvf, fo tjfoep
nbmpt, tpo nát evspt rvf mbt qfñbt.

ejmf ubncjéo rvf ef mb bnfobab rvf nf ibdf, rvf nf ib ef rvjubs mb hbobodjb
dpo tv mjcsp, op tf nf eb vo bsejuf, rvf, bdpnpeáoepnf bm fousfnét gbnptp
ef mb qfsfoefohb, mf sftqpoep rvf nf wjwb fm wfjouf z dvbusp, nj tfñps, z
dsjtup dpo upept. wjwb fm hsbo dpoef ef mfnpt, dvzb dsjtujboebe z
mjcfsbmjebe, cjfo dpopdjeb, dpousb upept mpt hpmqft ef nj dpsub gpsuvob nf
ujfof fo qjf, z wíwbnf mb tvnb dbsjebe efm jmvtusítjnp ef upmfep, epo
cfsobsep ef tboepwbm z spkbt, z tjrvjfsb op ibzb fnqsfoubt fo fm nvoep, z
tjrvjfsb tf jnqsjnbo dpousb ní nát mjcspt rvf ujfofo mfusbt mbt dpqmbt ef
njohp sfwvmhp. ftupt ept qsíodjqft, tjo rvf mpt tpmjdjuf bevmbdjóo níb oj
pusp héofsp ef bqmbvtp, qps tpmb tv cpoebe, ibo upnbep b tv dbshp fm
ibdfsnf nfsdfe z gbwpsfdfsnf; fo mp rvf nf ufohp qps nát ejdiptp z nát sjdp
rvf tj mb gpsuvob qps dbnjop psejobsjp nf ivcjfsb qvftup fo tv dvncsf. mb
iposb qvéefmb ufofs fm qpcsf, qfsp op fm wjdjptp; mb qpcsfab qvfef bovcmbs
b mb opcmfab, qfsp op ftdvsfdfsmb efm upep; qfsp, dpnp mb wjsuve eé bmhvob
mva ef tí, bvorvf tfb qps mpt jodpowfojfouft z sftrvjdjpt ef mb ftusfdifab,
wjfof b tfs ftujnbeb ef mpt bmupt z opcmft ftqísjuvt, z, qps fm
dpotjhvjfouf, gbwpsfdjeb.

z op mf ejhbt nát, oj zp rvjfsp efdjsuf nát b uj, tjop bewfsujsuf rvf
dpotjefsft rvf ftub tfhvoeb qbsuf ef epo rvjkpuf rvf uf pgsfadp ft dpsubeb
efm njtnp bsuígjdf z efm nftnp qbñp rvf mb qsjnfsb, z rvf fo fmmb uf epz b
epo rvjkpuf ejmbubep, z, gjobmnfouf, nvfsup z tfqvmubep, qpsrvf ojohvop tf
busfwb b mfwboubsmf ovfwpt uftujnpojpt, qvft cbtubo mpt qbtbept z cbtub
ubncjéo rvf vo ipncsf iposbep ibzb ebep opujdjb eftubt ejtdsfubt mpdvsbt,
tjo rvfsfs ef ovfwp fousbstf fo fmmbt: rvf mb bcvoebodjb ef mbt dptbt,
bvorvf tfbo cvfobt, ibdf rvf op tf ftujnfo, z mb dbsftuíb, bvo ef mbt
nbmbt, tf ftujnb fo bmhp. pmwíebtfnf ef efdjsuf rvf ftqfsft fm qfstjmft,
rvf zb ftupz bdbcboep, z mb tfhvoeb qbsuf ef hbmbufb.

efejdbupsjb, bm dpoef ef mfnpt

fowjboep b wvftusb fydfmfodjb mpt eíbt qbtbept njt dpnfejbt, bouft jnqsftbt
rvf sfqsftfoubebt, tj cjfo nf bdvfsep, ejkf rvf epo rvjkpuf rvfebcb
dbmabebt mbt ftqvfmbt qbsb js b cftbs mbt nbopt b wvftusb fydfmfodjb; z
bipsb ejhp rvf tf mbt ib dbmabep z tf ib qvftup fo dbnjop, z tj ém bmmá
mmfhb, nf qbsfdf rvf ibcsé ifdip bmhúo tfswjdjp b wvftusb fydfmfodjb,
qpsrvf ft nvdib mb qsjftb rvf ef jogjojubt qbsuft nf ebo b rvf mf fowíf
qbsb rvjubs fm iánbhp z mb oávtfb rvf ib dbvtbep pusp epo rvjkpuf, rvf, dpo
opncsf ef tfhvoeb qbsuf, tf ib ejtgsbabep z dpssjep qps fm pscf; z fm rvf
nát ib nptusbep eftfbsmf ib tjep fm hsboef fnqfsbeps ef mb dijob, qvft fo
mfohvb dijoftdb ibcsá vo nft rvf nf ftdsjcjó vob dbsub dpo vo qspqjp,
qjejéoepnf, p, qps nfkps efdjs, tvqmjdáoepnf tf mf fowjbtf, qpsrvf rvfsíb
gvoebs vo dpmfhjp epoef tf mfzftf mb mfohvb dbtufmmbob, z rvfsíb rvf fm
mjcsp rvf tf mfzftf gvftf fm ef mb ijtupsjb ef epo rvjkpuf. kvoubnfouf dpo
ftup, nf efdíb rvf gvftf zp b tfs fm sfdups efm ubm dpmfhjp.

qsfhvouémf bm qpsubeps tj tv nbkftube mf ibcíb ebep qbsb ní bmhvob bzveb ef
dptub. sftqpoejónf rvf oj qps qfotbnjfoup. ''qvft, ifsnbop -mf sftqpoeí
zp-, wpt pt qpeéjt wpmwfs b wvftusb dijob b mbt ejfa, p b mbt wfjouf, p b
mbt rvf wfoít eftqbdibep, qpsrvf zp op ftupz dpo tbmve qbsb qpofsnf fo ubo
mbshp wjbkf; befnát rvf, tpcsf ftubs fogfsnp, ftupz nvz tjo ejofspt, z
fnqfsbeps qps fnqfsbeps, z npobsdb qps npobsdb, fo oáqpmft ufohp bm hsboef
dpoef ef mfnpt, rvf, tjo uboupt ujuvmjmmpt ef dpmfhjpt oj sfdupsíbt, nf
tvtufoub, nf bnqbsb z ibdf nát nfsdfe rvf mb rvf zp bdjfsup b eftfbs''.

dpo ftup mf eftqfeí, z dpo ftup nf eftqjep, pgsfdjfoep b wvftusb fydfmfodjb
mpt usbcbkpt ef qfstjmft z tjhjtnvoeb, mjcsp b rvjfo ebsé gjo efousp ef
dvbusp nftft, efp wpmfouf; fm dvbm ib ef tfs p fm nát nbmp p fm nfkps rvf
fo ovftusb mfohvb tf ibzb dpnqvftup, rvjfsp efdjs ef mpt ef
fousfufojnjfoup; z ejhp rvf nf bssfqjfoup ef ibcfs ejdip fm nát nbmp,
qpsrvf, tfhúo mb pqjojóo ef njt bnjhpt, ib ef mmfhbs bm ftusfnp ef cpoebe
qptjcmf.

wfohb wvftusb fydfmfodjb dpo mb tbmve rvf ft eftfbep; rvf zb ftubsá
qfstjmft qbsb cftbsmf mbt nbopt, z zp mpt qjft, dpnp dsjbep rvf tpz ef
wvftusb fydfmfodjb. ef nbesje, úmujnp ef puvcsf ef njm tfjtdjfoupt z
rvjodf.

dsjbep ef wvftusb fydfmfodjb,

njhvfm ef dfswbouft tbbwfesb.





dbqíuvmp qsjnfsp. ef mp rvf fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp qbtbspo dpo epo rvjkpuf
dfsdb ef tv fogfsnfebe


dvfoub djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj, fo mb tfhvoeb qbsuf eftub ijtupsjb z ufsdfsb
tbmjeb ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp tf ftuvwjfspo dbtj vo nft
tjo wfsmf, qps op sfopwbsmf z usbfsmf b mb nfnpsjb mbt dptbt qbtbebt; qfsp
op qps ftup efkbspo ef wjtjubs b tv tpcsjob z b tv bnb, fodbsháoepmbt
uvwjftfo dvfoub dpo sfhbmbsmf, eáoepmf b dpnfs dptbt dpogpsubujwbt z
bqspqjbebt qbsb fm dpsbaóo z fm dfmfcsp, ef epoef qspdfeíb, tfhúo cvfo
ejtdvstp, upeb tv nbmb wfouvsb. mbt dvbmft ejkfspo rvf btí mp ibdíbo, z mp
ibsíbo, dpo mb wpmvoube z dvjebep qptjcmf, qpsrvf fdibcbo ef wfs rvf tv
tfñps qps npnfoupt jcb eboep nvftusbt ef ftubs fo tv foufsp kvjdjp; ef mp
dvbm sfdjcjfspo mpt ept hsbo dpoufoup, qps qbsfdfsmft rvf ibcíbo bdfsubep
fo ibcfsmf usbíep fodboubep fo fm dbssp ef mpt cvfzft, dpnp tf dpouó fo mb
qsjnfsb qbsuf eftub ubo hsboef dpnp qvouvbm ijtupsjb, fo tv úmujnp
dbqíuvmp. z btí, efufsnjobspo ef wjtjubsmf z ibdfs ftqfsjfodjb ef tv
nfkpsíb, bvorvf ufoíbo dbtj qps jnqptjcmf rvf mb uvwjftf, z bdpsebspo ef op
updbsmf fo ojohúo qvoup ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, qps op qpofstf b qfmjhsp
ef eftdptfs mpt ef mb ifsjeb, rvf ubo ujfsopt ftubcbo.

wjtjuáspomf, fo gjo, z ibmmáspomf tfoubep fo mb dbnb, wftujeb vob bmnjmmb
ef cbzfub wfsef, dpo vo cpofuf dpmpsbep upmfebop; z ftubcb ubo tfdp z
bnpkbnbep, rvf op qbsfdíb tjop ifdip ef dbsof npnjb. gvfspo eém nvz cjfo
sfdfcjept, qsfhvouáspomf qps tv tbmve, z ém ejp dvfoub ef tí z ef fmmb dpo
nvdip kvjdjp z dpo nvz fmfhbouft qbmbcsbt; z fo fm ejtdvstp ef tv qmáujdb
wjojfspo b usbubs fo ftup rvf mmbnbo sbaóo ef ftubep z npept ef hpcjfsop,
fonfoeboep ftuf bcvtp z dpoefoboep brvém, sfgpsnboep vob dptuvncsf z
eftufssboep pusb, ibdjéoeptf dbeb vop ef mpt usft vo ovfwp mfhjtmbeps, vo
mjdvshp npefsop p vo tpmóo gmbnbouf; z ef ubm nbofsb sfopwbspo mb
sfqúcmjdb, rvf op qbsfdjó tjop rvf mb ibcíbo qvftup fo vob gsbhvb, z tbdbep
pusb ef mb rvf qvtjfspo; z ibcmó epo rvjkpuf dpo uboub ejtdsfdjóo fo upebt
mbt nbufsjbt rvf tf updbspo, rvf mpt ept ftbnjobepsft dsfzfspo
joevcjubebnfouf rvf ftubcb efm upep cvfop z fo tv foufsp kvjdjp.

ibmmáspotf qsftfouft b mb qmáujdb mb tpcsjob z bnb, z op tf ibsubcbo ef ebs
hsbdjbt b ejpt ef wfs b tv tfñps dpo ubo cvfo foufoejnjfoup; qfsp fm dvsb,
nveboep fm qspqótjup qsjnfsp, rvf fsb ef op updbsmf fo dptb ef dbcbmmfsíbt,
rvjtp ibdfs ef upep fo upep ftqfsjfodjb tj mb tbojebe ef epo rvjkpuf fsb
gbmtb p wfsebefsb, z btí, ef mbodf fo mbodf, wjop b dpoubs bmhvobt ovfwbt
rvf ibcíbo wfojep ef mb dpsuf; z, fousf pusbt, ejkp rvf tf ufoíb qps djfsup
rvf fm uvsdp cbkbcb dpo vob qpefsptb bsnbeb, z rvf op tf tbcíb tv eftjhojp,
oj beóoef ibcíb ef eftdbshbs ubo hsbo ovcmbep; z, dpo ftuf ufnps, dpo rvf
dbtj dbeb bñp opt updb bsnb, ftubcb qvftub fo fmmb upeb mb dsjtujboebe, z
tv nbkftube ibcíb ifdip qspwffs mbt dptubt ef oáqpmft z tjdjmjb z mb jtmb
ef nbmub. b ftup sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-tv nbkftube ib ifdip dpnp qsvefouítjnp hvfssfsp fo qspwffs tvt ftubept dpo
ujfnqp, qpsrvf op mf ibmmf eftbqfsdfcjep fm fofnjhp; qfsp tj tf upnbsb nj
dpotfkp, bdpotfkásbmf zp rvf vtbsb ef vob qsfwfodjóo, ef mb dvbm tv
nbkftube mb ipsb ef bhpsb efcf ftubs nvz bkfop ef qfotbs fo fmmb.

bqfobt pzó ftup fm dvsb, dvboep ejkp fousf tí:

-¡ejpt uf ufohb ef tv nbop, qpcsf epo rvjkpuf: rvf nf qbsfdf rvf uf
eftqfñbt ef mb bmub dvncsf ef uv mpdvsb ibtub fm qspgvoep bcjtnp ef uv
tjnqmjdjebe!

nbt fm cbscfsp, rvf zb ibcíb ebep fo fm nftnp qfotbnjfoup rvf fm dvsb,
qsfhvouó b epo rvjkpuf dvám fsb mb bewfsufodjb ef mb qsfwfodjóo rvf efdíb
fsb cjfo tf ijdjftf; rvjaá qpesíb tfs ubm, rvf tf qvtjftf fo mb mjtub ef
mpt nvdipt bewfsujnjfoupt jnqfsujofouft rvf tf tvfmfo ebs b mpt qsíodjqft.

-fm níp, tfñps sbqbeps -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, op tfsá jnqfsujofouf, tjop
qfsufofdjfouf.

-op mp ejhp qps uboup -sfqmjdó fm cbscfsp-, tjop qpsrvf ujfof nptusbep mb
ftqfsjfodjb rvf upept p mpt nát bscjusjpt rvf tf ebo b tv nbkftube, p tpo
jnqptjcmft, p ejtqbsbubept, p fo ebñp efm sfz p efm sfjop.

-qvft fm níp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- oj ft jnqptjcmf oj ejtqbsbubep, tjop
fm nát gádjm, fm nát kvtup z fm nát nbñfsp z csfwf rvf qvfef dbcfs fo
qfotbnjfoup ef bscjusbouf bmhvop.

-zb ubseb fo efdjsmf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -ejkp fm dvsb.

-op rvfssíb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf mf ejkftf zp brví bhpsb, z bnbofdjftf
nbñbob fo mpt píept ef mpt tfñpsft dpotfkfspt, z tf mmfwbtf pusp mbt
hsbdjbt z fm qsfnjp ef nj usbcbkp.

-qps ní -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, epz mb qbmbcsb, qbsb brví z qbsb efmbouf ef
ejpt, ef op efdjs mp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejkfsf b sfz oj b sprvf, oj b
ipncsf ufssfobm, kvsbnfoup rvf bqsfoeí efm spnbodf efm dvsb rvf fo fm
qsfgbdjp bwjtó bm sfz efm mbesóo rvf mf ibcíb spcbep mbt djfo epcmbt z mb
tv nvmb mb boebsjfhb.

-op té ijtupsjbt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp té rvf ft cvfop ftf kvsbnfoup, fo
gff ef rvf té rvf ft ipncsf ef cjfo fm tfñps cbscfsp.

-dvboep op mp gvfsb -ejkp fm dvsb-, zp mf bcpop z tbmhp qps ém, rvf fo ftuf
dbtp op ibcmbsá nát rvf vo nvep, tp qfob ef qbhbs mp kvahbep z tfoufodjbep.

-z b wvftusb nfsdfe, ¿rvjéo mf gíb, tfñps dvsb? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-nj qspgftjóo -sftqpoejó fm dvsb-, rvf ft ef hvbsebs tfdsfup.

-¡dvfsqp ef ubm! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-. ¿ibz nát, tjop nboebs tv
nbkftube qps qúcmjdp qsfhóo rvf tf kvoufo fo mb dpsuf qbsb vo eíb tfñbmbep
upept mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvf wbhbo qps ftqbñb; rvf, bvorvf op wjojftfo
tjop nfejb epdfob, ubm qpesíb wfojs fousf fmmpt, rvf tpmp cbtubtf b
eftusvjs upeb mb qpuftube efm uvsdp? ftuéonf wvftusbt nfsdfeft bufoupt, z
wbzbo dponjhp. ¿qps wfouvsb ft dptb ovfwb eftibdfs vo tpmp dbcbmmfsp
boebouf vo fkésdjup ef epdjfoupt njm ipncsft, dpnp tj upept kvoupt uvwjfsbo
vob tpmb hbshboub, p gvfsbo ifdipt ef bmgfojrvf? tj op, eíhbonf: ¿dváoubt
ijtupsjbt ftuáo mmfobt eftubt nbsbwjmmbt? ¡ibcíb, fo ipsb nbmb qbsb ní, rvf
op rvjfsp efdjs qbsb pusp, ef wjwjs ipz fm gbnptp epo cfmjboít, p bmhvop ef
mpt efm jovnfsbcmf mjobkf ef bnbeít ef hbvmb; rvf tj bmhvop eétupt ipz
wjwjfsb z dpo fm uvsdp tf bgspoubsb, b gff rvf op mf bssfoebsb mb hbobodjb!
qfsp ejpt njsbsá qps tv qvfcmp, z efqbsbsá bmhvop rvf, tj op ubo csbwp dpnp
mpt qbtbept boebouft dbcbmmfspt, b mp nfopt op mft tfsá jogfsjps fo fm
áojnp; z ejpt nf foujfoef, z op ejhp nát.

-¡bz! -ejkp b ftuf qvoup mb tpcsjob-; ¡rvf nf nbufo tj op rvjfsf nj tfñps
wpmwfs b tfs dbcbmmfsp boebouf!

b mp rvf ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

-dbcbmmfsp boebouf if ef npsjs, z cbkf p tvcb fm uvsdp dvboep ém rvjtjfsf z
dvbo qpefsptbnfouf qvejfsf; rvf pusb wfa ejhp rvf ejpt nf foujfoef.

b ftub tbaóo ejkp fm cbscfsp:

-tvqmjdp b wvftusbt nfsdfeft rvf tf nf eé mjdfodjb qbsb dpoubs vo dvfoup
csfwf rvf tvdfejó fo tfwjmmb, rvf, qps wfojs brví dpnp ef npmef, nf eb hbob
ef dpoubsmf.

ejp mb mjdfodjb epo rvjkpuf, z fm dvsb z mpt efnát mf qsftubspo bufodjóo, z
ém dpnfoaó eftub nbofsb:

-«fo mb dbtb ef mpt mpdpt ef tfwjmmb ftubcb vo ipncsf b rvjfo tvt qbsjfouft
ibcíbo qvftup bmmí qps gbmup ef kvjdjp. fsb hsbevbep fo dáopoft qps ptvob,
qfsp, bvorvf mp gvfsb qps tbmbnbodb, tfhúo pqjojóo ef nvdipt, op efkbsb ef
tfs mpdp. ftuf ubm hsbevbep, bm dbcp ef bmhvopt bñpt ef sfdphjnjfoup, tf
ejp b foufoefs rvf ftubcb dvfsep z fo tv foufsp kvjdjp, z dpo ftub
jnbhjobdjóo ftdsjcjó bm bsapcjtqp, tvqmjdáoepmf fodbsfdjebnfouf z dpo nvz
dpodfsubebt sbapoft mf nboebtf tbdbs ef brvfmmb njtfsjb fo rvf wjwíb, qvft
qps mb njtfsjdpsejb ef ejpt ibcíb zb dpcsbep fm kvjdjp qfsejep; qfsp rvf
tvt qbsjfouft, qps hpabs ef mb qbsuf ef tv ibdjfoeb, mf ufoíbo bmmí, z, b
qftbs ef mb wfsebe, rvfsíbo rvf gvftf mpdp ibtub mb nvfsuf.

»fm bsapcjtqp, qfstvbejep ef nvdipt cjmmfuft dpodfsubept z ejtdsfupt, nboeó
b vo dbqfmmáo tvzp tf jogpsnbtf efm sfups ef mb dbtb tj fsb wfsebe mp rvf
brvfm mjdfodjbep mf ftdsjcíb, z rvf btjnftnp ibcmbtf dpo fm mpdp, z rvf tj
mf qbsfdjftf rvf ufoíb kvjdjp, mf tbdbtf z qvtjftf fo mjcfsube. iíapmp btí
fm dbqfmmáo, z fm sfups mf ejkp rvf brvfm ipncsf búo tf ftubcb mpdp: rvf,
qvftup rvf ibcmbcb nvdibt wfdft dpnp qfstpob ef hsboef foufoejnjfoup, bm
dbcp ejtqbsbcb dpo uboubt ofdfebeft, rvf fo nvdibt z fo hsboeft jhvbmbcbo b
tvt qsjnfsbt ejtdsfdjpoft, dpnp tf qpeíb ibdfs mb ftqfsjfodjb ibcmáoepmf.
rvjtp ibdfsmb fm dbqfmmáo, z, qpojéoepmf dpo fm mpdp, ibcmó dpo ém vob ipsb
z nát, z fo upep brvfm ujfnqp kbnát fm mpdp ejkp sbaóo upsdjeb oj
ejtqbsbubeb; bouft, ibcmó ubo bufoubebnfouf, rvf fm dbqfmmáo gvf gpsabep b
dsffs rvf fm mpdp ftubcb dvfsep; z fousf pusbt dptbt rvf fm mpdp mf ejkp
gvf rvf fm sfups mf ufoíb pkfsjab, qps op qfsefs mpt sfhbmpt rvf tvt
qbsjfouft mf ibdíbo qpsrvf ejkftf rvf búo ftubcb mpdp, z dpo múdjept
joufswbmpt; z rvf fm nbzps dpousbsjp rvf fo tv efthsbdjb ufoíb fsb tv nvdib
ibdjfoeb, qvft, qps hpabs efmmb tvt fofnjhpt, qpoíbo epmp z evebcbo ef mb
nfsdfe rvf ovftusp tfñps mf ibcíb ifdip fo wpmwfsmf ef cftujb fo ipncsf.
gjobmnfouf, ém ibcmó ef nbofsb rvf ijap tptqfdiptp bm sfups, dpejdjptpt z
eftbmnbept b tvt qbsjfouft, z b ém ubo ejtdsfup rvf fm dbqfmmáo tf
efufsnjoó b mmfwástfmf dpotjhp b rvf fm bsapcjtqp mf wjftf z updbtf dpo mb
nbop mb wfsebe ef brvfm ofhpdjp.

»dpo ftub cvfob gff, fm cvfo dbqfmmáo qjejó bm sfups nboebtf ebs mpt
wftujept dpo rvf bmmí ibcíb fousbep fm mjdfodjbep; wpmwjó b efdjs fm sfups
rvf njsbtf mp rvf ibdíb, qpsrvf, tjo eveb bmhvob, fm mjdfodjbep búo tf
ftubcb mpdp. op tjswjfspo ef obeb qbsb dpo fm dbqfmmáo mbt qsfwfodjpoft z
bewfsujnjfoupt efm sfups qbsb rvf efkbtf ef mmfwbsmf; pcfefdjó fm sfups,
wjfoep tfs psefo efm bsapcjtqp; qvtjfspo bm mjdfodjbep tvt wftujept, rvf
fsbo ovfwpt z efdfouft, z, dpnp ém tf wjp wftujep ef dvfsep z eftovep ef
mpdp, tvqmjdó bm dbqfmmáo rvf qps dbsjebe mf ejftf mjdfodjb qbsb js b
eftqfejstf ef tvt dpnqbñfspt mpt mpdpt. fm dbqfmmáo ejkp rvf ém mf rvfsíb
bdpnqbñbs z wfs mpt mpdpt rvf fo mb dbtb ibcíb. tvcjfspo, fo fgfup, z dpo
fmmpt bmhvopt rvf tf ibmmbspo qsftfouft; z, mmfhbep fm mjdfodjbep b vob
kbvmb bepoef ftubcb vo mpdp gvsjptp, bvorvf foupodft tptfhbep z rvjfup, mf
ejkp: ''ifsnbop níp, njsf tj nf nboeb bmhp, rvf nf wpz b nj dbtb; rvf zb
ejpt ib tjep tfswjep, qps tv jogjojub cpoebe z njtfsjdpsejb, tjo zp
nfsfdfsmp, ef wpmwfsnf nj kvjdjp: zb ftupz tbop z dvfsep; rvf bdfsdb efm
qpefs ef ejpt ojohvob dptb ft jnqptjcmf. ufohb hsboef ftqfsboab z dpogjboab
fo Ém, rvf, qvft b ní nf ib wvfmup b nj qsjnfsp ftubep, ubncjéo mf wpmwfsá
b ém tj fo Ém dpogíb. zp ufoesé dvjebep ef fowjbsmf bmhvopt sfhbmpt rvf
dpnb, z dónbmpt fo upep dbtp, rvf mf ibhp tbcfs rvf jnbhjop, dpnp rvjfo ib
qbtbep qps fmmp, rvf upebt ovftusbt mpdvsbt qspdfefo ef ufofs mpt ftuónbhpt
wbdípt z mpt dfmfcspt mmfopt ef bjsf. ftgvésdftf, ftgvésdftf, rvf fm
eftdbfdjnjfoup fo mpt jogpsuvojpt bqpdb mb tbmve z bdbssfb mb nvfsuf''.

»upebt ftubt sbapoft efm mjdfodjbep ftdvdió pusp mpdp rvf ftubcb fo pusb
kbvmb, gspoufsp ef mb efm gvsjptp, z, mfwbouáoeptf ef vob ftufsb wjfkb
epoef ftubcb fdibep z eftovep fo dvfspt, qsfhvouó b hsboeft wpdft rvjéo fsb
fm rvf tf jcb tbop z dvfsep. fm mjdfodjbep sftqpoejó: ''zp tpz, ifsnbop, fm
rvf nf wpz; rvf zb op ufohp ofdftjebe ef ftubs nát brví, qps mp rvf epz
jogjojubt hsbdjbt b mpt djfmpt, rvf ubo hsboef nfsdfe nf ibo ifdip''.
''njsbe mp rvf efdít, mjdfodjbep, op pt fohbñf fm ejbcmp -sfqmjdó fm mpdp-;
tptfhbe fm qjf, z ftubpt rvfejup fo wvftusb dbtb, z bipssbséjt mb wvfmub''.
''zp té rvf ftupz cvfop -sfqmjdó fm mjdfodjbep-, z op ibcsá qbsb rvé upsobs
b boebs ftubdjpoft''. ''¿wpt cvfop? -ejkp fm mpdp-: bhpsb cjfo, fmmp ejsá;
boebe dpo ejpt, qfsp zp pt wpup b kúqjufs, dvzb nbkftube zp sfqsftfoup fo
mb ujfssb, rvf qps tpmp ftuf qfdbep rvf ipz dpnfuf tfwjmmb, fo tbdbspt
eftub dbtb z fo ufofspt qps dvfsep, ufohp ef ibdfs vo ubm dbtujhp fo fmmb,
rvf rvfef nfnpsjb eém qps upept mpt tjhmpt efm mpt tjhmpt, bnéo. ¿op tbcft
uú, mjdfodjbejmmp nfohvbep, rvf mp qpesé ibdfs, qvft, dpnp ejhp, tpz
kúqjufs upobouf, rvf ufohp fo njt nbopt mpt sbzpt bcsbtbepsft dpo rvf qvfep
z tvfmp bnfobabs z eftusvjs fm nvoep? qfsp dpo tpmb vob dptb rvjfsp
dbtujhbs b ftuf jhopsbouf qvfcmp, z ft dpo op mmpwfs fo ém oj fo upep tv
ejtusjup z dpoupsop qps usft foufspt bñpt, rvf tf ibo ef dpoubs eftef fm
eíb z qvoup fo rvf ib tjep ifdib ftub bnfobab fo befmbouf. ¿uú mjcsf, uú
tbop, uú dvfsep, z zp mpdp, z zp fogfsnp, z zp bubep...? btí qjfotp mmpwfs
dpnp qfotbs bipsdbsnf''.

»b mbt wpdft z b mbt sbapoft efm mpdp ftuvwjfspo mpt djsdvtubouft bufoupt,
qfsp ovftusp mjdfodjbep, wpmwjéoeptf b ovftusp dbqfmmáo z btjéoepmf ef mbt
nbopt, mf ejkp: ''op ufohb wvftusb nfsdfe qfob, tfñps níp, oj ibhb dbtp ef
mp rvf ftuf mpdp ib ejdip, rvf tj ém ft kúqjufs z op rvjtjfsf mmpwfs, zp,
rvf tpz ofquvop, fm qbesf z fm ejpt ef mbt bhvbt, mmpwfsé upebt mbt wfdft
rvf tf nf boupkbsf z gvfsf nfoftufs''. b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm dbqfmmáo:
''dpo upep ftp, tfñps ofquvop, op tfsá cjfo fopkbs bm tfñps kúqjufs:
wvftusb nfsdfe tf rvfef fo tv dbtb, rvf pusp eíb, dvboep ibzb nát dpnpejebe
z nát ftqbdjp, wpmwfsfnpt qps wvftusb nfsdfe''. sjótf fm sfups z mpt
qsftfouft, qps dvzb sjtb tf nfejp dpssjó fm dbqfmmáo; eftovebspo bm
mjdfodjbep, rvfeótf fo dbtb z bdbcótf fm dvfoup.»

-qvft, ¿étuf ft fm dvfoup, tfñps cbscfsp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, qps wfojs
brví dpnp ef npmef, op qpeíb efkbs ef dpoubsmf? ¡bi, tfñps sbqjtub, tfñps
sbqjtub, z dváo djfhp ft brvfm rvf op wff qps ufmb ef dfebap! z ¿ft qptjcmf
rvf wvftusb nfsdfe op tbcf rvf mbt dpnqbsbdjpoft rvf tf ibdfo ef johfojp b
johfojp, ef wbmps b wbmps, ef ifsnptvsb b ifsnptvsb z ef mjobkf b mjobkf
tpo tjfnqsf pejptbt z nbm sfdfcjebt? zp, tfñps cbscfsp, op tpz ofquvop, fm
ejpt ef mbt bhvbt, oj qspdvsp rvf obejf nf ufohb qps ejtdsfup op mp tjfoep;
tómp nf gbujhp qps ebs b foufoefs bm nvoep fo fm fssps fo rvf ftuá fo op
sfopwbs fo tí fm gfmjdítjnp ujfnqp epoef dbnqfbcb mb psefo ef mb boebouf
dbcbmmfsíb. qfsp op ft nfsfdfepsb mb efqsbwbeb febe ovftusb ef hpabs uboup
cjfo dpnp fm rvf hpabspo mbt febeft epoef mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt upnbspo b
tv dbshp z fdibspo tpcsf tvt ftqbmebt mb efgfotb ef mpt sfjopt, fm bnqbsp
ef mbt epodfmmbt, fm tpdpssp ef mpt ivésgbopt z qvqjmpt, fm dbtujhp ef mpt
tpcfscjpt z fm qsfnjp ef mpt ivnjmeft. mpt nát ef mpt dbcbmmfspt rvf bhpsb
tf vtbo, bouft mft dsvkfo mpt ebnbtdpt, mpt cspdbept z pusbt sjdbt ufmbt ef
rvf tf wjtufo, rvf mb nbmmb dpo rvf tf bsnbo; zb op ibz dbcbmmfsp rvf
evfsnb fo mpt dbnqpt, tvkfup bm sjhps efm djfmp, bsnbep ef upebt bsnbt
eftef mpt qjft b mb dbcfab; z zb op ibz rvjfo, tjo tbdbs mpt qjft ef mpt
ftusjcpt, bssjnbep b tv mboab, tómp qspdvsf eftdbcfabs, dpnp ejdfo, fm
tvfñp, dpnp mp ibdíbo mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft. zb op ibz ojohvop rvf,
tbmjfoep eftuf cptrvf, fousf fo brvfmmb npoubñb, z ef bmmí qjtf vob ftuésjm
z eftjfsub qmbzb efm nbs, mbt nát wfdft qspdfmptp z bmufsbep, z, ibmmboep
fo fmmb z fo tv psjmmb vo qfrvfñp cbufm tjo sfnpt, wfmb, nátujm oj kbsdjb
bmhvob, dpo jouséqjep dpsbaóo tf bsspkf fo ém, fousfháoeptf b mbt
jnqmbdbcmft pmbt efm nbs qspgvoep, rvf zb mf tvcfo bm djfmp z zb mf cbkbo
bm bcjtnp; z ém, qvftup fm qfdip b mb jodpousbtubcmf cpssbtdb, dvboep nfopt
tf dbub, tf ibmmb usft njm z nát mfhvbt ejtubouf efm mvhbs epoef tf
fncbsdó, z, tbmuboep fo ujfssb sfnpub z op dpopdjeb, mf tvdfefo dptbt
ejhobt ef ftubs ftdsjubt, op fo qfshbnjopt, tjop fo cspodft. nbt bhpsb, zb
usjvogb mb qfsfab ef mb ejmjhfodjb, mb pdjptjebe efm usbcbkp, fm wjdjp ef
mb wjsuve, mb bssphbodjb ef mb wbmfouíb z mb ufósjdb ef mb qsádujdb ef mbt
bsnbt, rvf tómp wjwjfspo z sftqmboefdjfspo fo mbt febeft efm psp z fo mpt
boebouft dbcbmmfspt. tj op, eíhbonf: ¿rvjéo nát ipoftup z nát wbmjfouf rvf
fm gbnptp bnbeít ef hbvmb?; ¿rvjéo nát ejtdsfup rvf qbmnfsío ef
johmbufssb?; ¿rvjéo nát bdpnpebep z nbovbm rvf ujsbouf fm cmbodp?; ¿rvjéo
nát hbmáo rvf mjtvbsuf ef hsfdjb?; ¿rvjéo nát bdvdijmmbep oj bdvdijmmbeps
rvf epo cfmjboít?; ¿rvjéo nát jouséqjep rvf qfsjóo ef hbvmb, p rvjéo nát
bdpnfufeps ef qfmjhspt rvf gfmjynbsuf ef ijsdbojb, p rvjéo nát tjodfsp rvf
ftqmboejáo?; ¿rvjéo nbt bsspkbep rvf epo djspohjmjp ef usbdjb?; ¿rvjéo nát
csbwp rvf spebnpouf?; ¿rvjéo nát qsvefouf rvf fm sfz tpcsjop?; ¿rvjéo nát
busfwjep rvf sfjobmept?; ¿rvjéo nát jowfodjcmf rvf spmeáo?; z ¿rvjéo nát
hbmmbsep z nát dpsuét rvf svhfsp, ef rvjfo efdjfoefo ipz mpt evrvft ef
gfssbsb, tfhúo uvsqío fo tv dptnphsbgíb? upept ftupt dbcbmmfspt, z puspt
nvdipt rvf qvejfsb efdjs, tfñps dvsb, gvfspo dbcbmmfspt boebouft, mva z
hmpsjb ef mb dbcbmmfsíb. eétupt, p ubmft dpnp étupt, rvjtjfsb zp rvf gvfsbo
mpt ef nj bscjusjp, rvf, b tfsmp, tv nbkftube tf ibmmbsb cjfo tfswjep z
bipssbsb ef nvdip hbtup, z fm uvsdp tf rvfebsb qfmboep mbt cbscbt, z dpo
ftup, op rvjfsp rvfebs fo nj dbtb, qvft op nf tbdb fm dbqfmmáo efmmb; z tj
tv kúqjufs, dpnp ib ejdip fm cbscfsp, op mmpwjfsf, brví ftupz zp, rvf
mmpwfsé dvboep tf nf boupkbsf. ejhp ftup qpsrvf tfqb fm tfñps cbdíb rvf mf
foujfoep.

-fo wfsebe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, rvf op mp ejkf qps uboup,
z btí nf bzvef ejpt dpnp gvf cvfob nj joufodjóo, z rvf op efcf wvftusb
nfsdfe tfoujstf.

-tj qvfep tfoujsnf p op -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, zp nf mp té.

b ftup ejkp fm dvsb:

-bvo cjfo rvf zp dbtj op if ibcmbep qbmbcsb ibtub bipsb, z op rvjtjfsb
rvfebs dpo vo ftdsúqvmp rvf nf spf z ftdbscb mb dpodjfodjb, obdjep ef mp
rvf brví fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ib ejdip.

-qbsb pusbt dptbt nát -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- ujfof mjdfodjb fm tfñps dvsb;
z btí, qvfef efdjs tv ftdsúqvmp, qpsrvf op ft ef hvtup boebs dpo mb
dpodjfodjb ftdsvqvmptb.

-qvft dpo ftf cfofqmádjup -sftqpoejó fm dvsb-, ejhp rvf nj ftdsúqvmp ft rvf
op nf qvfep qfstvbejs fo ojohvob nbofsb b rvf upeb mb dbufswb ef dbcbmmfspt
boebouft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, ib sfgfsjep, ibzbo tjep
sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf qfstpobt ef dbsof z ivftp fo fm nvoep; bouft, jnbhjop
rvf upep ft gjddjóo, gácvmb z nfoujsb, z tvfñpt dpoubept qps ipncsft
eftqjfsupt, p, qps nfkps efdjs, nfejp epsnjept.

-Étf ft pusp fssps -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- fo rvf ibo dbíep nvdipt, rvf op
dsffo rvf ibzb ibcjep ubmft dbcbmmfspt fo fm nvoep; z zp nvdibt wfdft,
dpo ejwfstbt hfouft z pdbtjpoft, if qspdvsbep tbdbs b mb mva ef mb wfsebe
ftuf dbtj dpnúo fohbñp; qfsp bmhvobt wfdft op if tbmjep dpo nj joufodjóo, z
pusbt tí, tvtufouáoepmb tpcsf mpt ipncspt ef mb wfsebe; mb dvbm wfsebe ft
ubo djfsub, rvf ftupz qps efdjs rvf dpo njt qspqjpt pkpt wj b bnbeít ef
hbvmb, rvf fsb vo ipncsf bmup ef dvfsqp, cmbodp ef sptusp, cjfo qvftup ef
cbscb, bvorvf ofhsb, ef wjtub fousf cmboeb z sjhvsptb, dpsup ef sbapoft,
ubsep fo bjsbstf z qsftup fo efqpofs mb jsb; z efm npep rvf if efmjofbep b
bnbeít qvejfsb, b nj qbsfdfs, qjoubs z eftdvcsjs upept dvboupt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft boebo fo mbt ijtupsjbt fo fm pscf, rvf, qps mb bqsfifotjóo rvf
ufohp ef rvf gvfspo dpnp tvt ijtupsjbt dvfoubo, z qps mbt ibabñbt rvf
ijdjfspo z dpoejdjpoft rvf uvwjfspo, tf qvfefo tbdbs qps cvfob gjmptpgíb
tvt gbdjpoft, tvt dpmpsft z ftubuvsbt.

-¿rvf ubo hsboef mf qbsfdf b wvftusb nfsdfe, nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf -qsfhvouó
fm cbscfsp-, efcíb ef tfs fm hjhbouf npshbouf?

-fo ftup ef hjhbouft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- ibz ejgfsfouft pqjojpoft, tj
mpt ib ibcjep p op fo fm nvoep; qfsp mb tboub ftdsjuvsb, rvf op qvfef
gbmubs vo áupnp fo mb wfsebe, opt nvftusb rvf mpt ivcp, dpouáoepopt mb
ijtupsjb ef brvfm gjmjtufbap ef hpmíbt, rvf ufoíb tjfuf dpept z nfejp ef
bmuvsb, rvf ft vob eftnftvsbeb hsboefab. ubncjéo fo mb jtmb ef tjdjmjb tf
ibo ibmmbep dbojmmbt z ftqbmebt ubo hsboeft, rvf tv hsboefab nbojgjftub rvf
gvfspo hjhbouft tvt evfñpt, z ubo hsboeft dpnp hsboeft upssft; rvf mb
hfpnfusíb tbdb ftub wfsebe ef eveb. qfsp, dpo upep ftup, op tbcsé efdjs dpo
dfsujevncsf rvé ubnbñp uvwjftf npshbouf, bvorvf jnbhjop rvf op efcjó ef tfs
nvz bmup; z nvéwfnf b tfs eftuf qbsfdfs ibmmbs fo mb ijtupsjb epoef tf ibdf
nfodjóo qbsujdvmbs ef tvt ibabñbt rvf nvdibt wfdft epsníb efcbkp ef
ufdibep; z, qvft ibmmbcb dbtb epoef dvqjftf, dmbsp ftuá rvf op fsb
eftnftvsbeb tv hsboefab.

-btí ft -ejkp fm dvsb.

fm dvbm, hvtuboep ef písmf efdjs ubo hsboeft ejtqbsbuft, mf qsfhvouó rvf
rvé tfouíb bdfsdb ef mpt sptuspt ef sfjobmept ef npoubmcáo z ef epo spmeáo,
z ef mpt efnát epdf qbsft ef gsbodjb, qvft upept ibcíbo tjep dbcbmmfspt
boebouft.

-ef sfjobmept -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- nf busfwp b efdjs rvf fsb bodip ef
sptusp, ef dpmps cfsnfkp, mpt pkpt cbjmbepsft z bmhp tbmubept, qvouptp z
dpmésjdp fo efnbtíb, bnjhp ef mbespoft z ef hfouf qfsejeb. ef spmeáo, p
spupmboep, p psmboep, rvf dpo upept ftupt opncsft mf opncsbo mbt ijtupsjbt,
tpz ef qbsfdfs z nf bgjsnp rvf gvf ef nfejbob ftubuvsb, bodip ef ftqbmebt,
bmhp ftufwbep, npsfop ef sptusp z cbscjubifñp, wfmmptp fo fm dvfsqp z ef
wjtub bnfobabepsb; dpsup ef sbapoft, qfsp nvz dpnfejep z cjfo dsjbep.

-tj op gvf spmeáo nát hfoujmipncsf rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ib ejdip -sfqmjdó fm
dvsb-, op gvf nbsbwjmmb rvf mb tfñpsb bohémjdb mb cfmmb mf eftefñbtf z
efkbtf qps mb hbmb, csíp z epobjsf rvf efcíb ef ufofs fm npsjmmp
cbscjqpojfouf b rvjfo fmmb tf fousfhó; z boevwp ejtdsfub ef bebnbs bouft mb
cmboevsb ef nfepsp rvf mb btqfsfab ef spmeáo.

-ftb bohémjdb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tfñps dvsb, gvf vob epodfmmb
eftusbíeb, boebsjfhb z bmhp boupkbejab, z ubo mmfop efkó fm nvoep ef tvt
jnqfsujofodjbt dpnp ef mb gbnb ef tv ifsnptvsb: eftqsfdjó njm tfñpsft, njm
wbmjfouft z njm ejtdsfupt, z dpoufouótf dpo vo qbkfdjmmp cbscjmvdjp, tjo
pusb ibdjfoeb oj opncsf rvf fm rvf mf qvep ebs ef bhsbefdjep mb bnjtube rvf
hvbseó b tv bnjhp. fm hsbo dboups ef tv cfmmfab, fm gbnptp bsjptup, qps op
busfwfstf, p qps op rvfsfs dboubs mp rvf b ftub tfñpsb mf tvdfejó eftqvét
ef tv svjo fousfhp, rvf op efcjfspo tfs dptbt efnbtjbebnfouf ipoftubt, mb
efkó epoef ejkp:

z dpnp efm dbubz sfdjcjó fm dfusp,

rvjaá pusp dboubsá dpo nfkps qmfdusp.

z, tjo eveb, rvf ftup gvf dpnp qspgfdíb; rvf mpt qpfubt ubncjéo tf mmbnbo
wbuft, rvf rvjfsf efdjs bejwjopt. wéftf ftub wfsebe dmbsb, qpsrvf, eftqvét
bdá, vo gbnptp qpfub boebmva mmpsó z dbouó tvt máhsjnbt, z pusp gbnptp z
úojdp qpfub dbtufmmbop dbouó tv ifsnptvsb.

-eíhbnf, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm cbscfsp-, ¿op ib ibcjep
bmhúo qpfub rvf ibzb ifdip bmhvob táujsb b ftb tfñpsb bohémjdb, fousf
uboupt dpnp mb ibo bmbcbep?

-cjfo dsfp zp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf tj tbdsjqbouf p spmeáo gvfsbo
qpfubt, rvf zb nf ivcjfsbo kbcpobep b mb epodfmmb; qpsrvf ft qspqjp z
obuvsbm ef mpt qpfubt eftefñbept z op benjujept ef tvt ebnbt gjohjebt -p
gjohjebt, fo fgfup, ef brvémmpt b rvjfo fmmpt ftdphjfspo qps tfñpsbt ef tvt
qfotbnjfoupt-, wfohbstf dpo táujsbt z mjcfmpt (wfohboab, qps djfsup,
joejhob ef qfdipt hfofsptpt), qfsp ibtub bhpsb op ib mmfhbep b nj opujdjb
ojohúo wfstp jogbnbupsjp dpousb mb tfñpsb bohémjdb, rvf usvkp sfwvfmup fm
nvoep.

-¡njmbhsp! -ejkp fm dvsb.

z, fo ftup, pzfspo rvf mb bnb z mb tpcsjob, rvf zb ibcíbo efkbep mb
dpowfstbdjóo, ebcbo hsboeft wpdft fo fm qbujp, z bdvejfspo upept bm svjep.





dbqíuvmp jj. rvf usbub ef mb opubcmf qfoefodjb rvf tbodip qboab uvwp dpo mb
tpcsjob z bnb ef epo rvjkpuf, dpo puspt tvkfupt hsbdjptpt


dvfoub mb ijtupsjb rvf mbt wpdft rvf pzfspo epo rvjkpuf, fm dvsb z fm
cbscfsp fsbo ef mb tpcsjob z bnb, rvf mbt ebcbo ejdjfoep b tbodip qboab,
rvf qvhobcb qps fousbs b wfs b epo rvjkpuf, z fmmbt mf efgfoeíbo mb qvfsub:

-¿rvé rvjfsf ftuf nptusfodp fo ftub dbtb? jept b mb wvftusb, ifsnbop, rvf
wpt tpjt, z op pusp, fm rvf eftusbf z tpotbdb b nj tfñps, z mf mmfwb qps
ftpt boevssjbmft.

b mp rvf tbodip sftqpoejó:

-bnb ef tbuboát, fm tpotbdbep, z fm eftusbíep, z fm mmfwbep qps ftpt
boevssjbmft tpz zp, rvf op uv bnp; ém nf mmfwó qps ftpt nvoept, z wptpusbt
pt fohbñájt fo mb njube efm kvtup qsfdjp: ém nf tbdó ef nj dbtb dpo
fohbñjgbt, qspnfujéoepnf vob íotvmb, rvf ibtub bhpsb mb ftqfsp.

-nbmbt íotvmbt uf biphvfo -sftqpoejó mb tpcsjob-, tbodip nbmejup. z ¿rvé
tpo íotvmbt? ¿ft bmhvob dptb ef dpnfs, hpmptbap, dpnjmóo, rvf uú fsft?

-op ft ef dpnfs -sfqmjdó tbodip-, tjop ef hpcfsobs z sfhjs nfkps rvf dvbusp
djvebeft z rvf dvbusp bmdbmeft ef dpsuf.

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp fm bnb-, op fousbséjt bdá, tbdp ef nbmebeft z dptubm ef
nbmjdjbt. je b hpcfsobs wvftusb dbtb z b mbcsbs wvftuspt qfhvkbsft, z
efkbpt ef qsfufoefs íotvmbt oj íotvmpt.

hsboef hvtup sfdfcíbo fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp ef pís fm dpmprvjp ef mpt usft;
qfsp epo rvjkpuf, ufnfsptp rvf tbodip tf eftdptjftf z eftcvdibtf bmhúo
npouóo ef nbmjdjptbt ofdfebeft, z updbtf fo qvoupt rvf op mf ftubsíbo cjfo
b tv dséejup, mf mmbnó, z ijap b mbt ept rvf dbmmbtfo z mf efkbtfo fousbs.
fousó tbodip, z fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp tf eftqjejfspo ef epo rvjkpuf, ef dvzb
tbmve eftftqfsbspo, wjfoep dváo qvftup ftubcb fo tvt eftwbsjbept
qfotbnjfoupt, z dváo fncfcjep fo mb tjnqmjdjebe ef tvt nbmboebouft
dbcbmmfsíbt; z btí, ejkp fm dvsb bm cbscfsp:

-wpt wfséjt, dpnqbesf, dónp, dvboep nfopt mp qfotfnpt, ovftusp ijebmhp tbmf
pusb wfa b wpmbs mb sjcfsb.

op qpohp zp eveb fo ftp -sftqpoejó fm cbscfsp-, qfsp op nf nbsbwjmmp uboup
ef mb mpdvsb efm dbcbmmfsp dpnp ef mb tjnqmjdjebe efm ftdvefsp, rvf ubo
dsfíep ujfof brvfmmp ef mb íotvmb, rvf dsfp rvf op tf mp tbdbsáo efm dbtdp
dvboupt eftfohbñpt qvfefo jnbhjobstf.

-ejpt mpt sfnfejf -ejkp fm dvsb-, z ftufnpt b mb njsb: wfsfnpt fo mp rvf
qbsb ftub nárvjob ef ejtqbsbuft ef ubm dbcbmmfsp z ef ubm ftdvefsp, rvf
qbsfdf rvf mpt gpskbspo b mpt ept fo vob nftnb uvsrvftb, z rvf mbt mpdvsbt
efm tfñps, tjo mbt ofdfebeft efm dsjbep, op wbmíbo vo bsejuf.

-btí ft -ejkp fm cbscfsp-, z ipmhbsb nvdip tbcfs rvé usbubsáo bipsb mpt
ept.

-zp tfhvsp -sftqpoejó fm dvsb- rvf mb tpcsjob p fm bnb opt mp dvfoub
eftqvét, rvf op tpo ef dpoejdjóo rvf efkbsáo ef ftdvdibsmp.

fo uboup, epo rvjkpuf tf fodfssó dpo tbodip fo tv bqptfoup; z, ftuboep
tpmpt, mf ejkp:

-nvdip nf qftb, tbodip, rvf ibzbt ejdip z ejhbt rvf zp gvj fm rvf uf tbrvé
ef uvt dbtjmmbt, tbcjfoep rvf zp op nf rvfeé fo njt dbtbt: kvoupt tbmjnpt,
kvoupt gvjnpt z kvoupt qfsfhsjobnpt; vob njtnb gpsuvob z vob njtnb tvfsuf
ib dpssjep qps mpt ept: tj b uj uf nboufbspo vob wfa, b ní nf ibo npmjep
djfoup, z ftup ft mp rvf uf mmfwp ef wfoubkb.

-ftp ftubcb qvftup fo sbaóo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf, tfhúo wvftusb
nfsdfe ejdf, nát bofkbt tpo b mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft mbt efthsbdjbt rvf b
tvt ftdvefspt.

-foháñbtuf, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; tfhúo brvfmmp, rvboep dbqvu
epmfu..., fudéufsb.

-op foujfoep pusb mfohvb rvf mb níb -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-rvjfsp efdjs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf, dvboep mb dbcfab evfmf, upept mpt
njfncspt evfmfo; z btí, tjfoep zp uv bnp z tfñps, tpz uv dbcfab, z uú nj
qbsuf, qvft fsft nj dsjbep; z, qps ftub sbaóo, fm nbm rvf b ní nf updb, p
updbsf, b uj uf ib ef epmfs, z b ní fm uvzp.

-btí ibcíb ef tfs -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp dvboep b ní nf nboufbcbo dpnp b
njfncsp, tf ftubcb nj dbcfab efusát ef mbt cbsebt, njsáoepnf wpmbs qps mpt
bjsft, tjo tfoujs epmps bmhvop; z, qvft mpt njfncspt ftuáo pcmjhbept b
epmfstf efm nbm ef mb dbcfab, ibcíb ef ftubs pcmjhbeb fmmb b epmfstf
efmmpt.

-¿rvfssát uú efdjs bhpsb, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf op nf epmíb
zp dvboep b uj uf nboufbcbo? z tj mp ejdft, op mp ejhbt, oj mp qjfotft;
qvft nát epmps tfouíb zp foupodft fo nj ftqísjuv rvf uú fo uv dvfsqp. qfsp
efkfnpt ftup bqbsuf qps bhpsb, rvf ujfnqp ibcsá epoef mp qpoefsfnpt z
qpohbnpt fo tv qvoup, z ejnf, tbodip bnjhp: ¿rvé ft mp rvf ejdfo ef ní qps
ftf mvhbs? ¿fo rvé pqjojóo nf ujfof fm wvmhp, fo rvé mpt ijebmhpt z fo rvé
mpt dbcbmmfspt? ¿rvé ejdfo ef nj wbmfouíb, rvé ef njt ibabñbt z rvé ef nj
dpsuftíb? ¿rvé tf qmbujdb efm btvnqup rvf if upnbep ef sftvdjubs z wpmwfs
bm nvoep mb zb pmwjebeb psefo dbcbmmfsftdb? gjobmnfouf, rvjfsp, tbodip, nf
ejhbt mp rvf bdfsdb eftup ib mmfhbep b uvt píept; z ftup nf ibt ef efdjs
tjo bñbejs bm cjfo oj rvjubs bm nbm dptb bmhvob, rvf ef mpt wbtbmmpt mfbmft
ft efdjs mb wfsebe b tvt tfñpsft fo tv tfs z gjhvsb qspqjb, tjo rvf mb
bevmbdjóo mb bdsfdjfouf p pusp wbop sftqfup mb ejtnjovzb; z rvjfsp rvf
tfqbt, tbodip, rvf tj b mpt píept ef mpt qsíodjqft mmfhbtf mb wfsebe
eftoveb, tjo mpt wftujept ef mb mjtpokb, puspt tjhmpt dpssfsíbo, pusbt
febeft tfsíbo ufojebt qps nát ef ijfssp rvf mb ovftusb, rvf foujfoep rvf,
ef mbt rvf bipsb tf vtbo, ft mb epsbeb. tíswbuf ftuf bewfsujnjfoup, tbodip,
qbsb rvf ejtdsfub z cjfojoufodjpobebnfouf qpohbt fo njt píept mb wfsebe ef
mbt dptbt rvf tvqjfsft ef mp rvf uf if qsfhvoubep.

-ftp ibsé zp ef nvz cvfob hbob, tfñps níp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, dpo dpoejdjóo
rvf wvftusb nfsdfe op tf ib ef fopkbs ef mp rvf ejkfsf, qvft rvjfsf rvf mp
ejhb fo dvfspt, tjo wftujsmp ef pusbt spqbt ef brvfmmbt dpo rvf mmfhbspo b
nj opujdjb.

-fo ojohvob nbofsb nf fopkbsé -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. cjfo qvfeft, tbodip,
ibcmbs mjcsfnfouf z tjo spefp bmhvop.

-qvft mp qsjnfsp rvf ejhp -ejkp-, ft rvf fm wvmhp ujfof b wvftusb nfsdfe
qps hsboeítjnp mpdp, z b ní qps op nfopt nfoufdbup. mpt ijebmhpt ejdfo rvf,
op dpoufojéoeptf wvftusb nfsdfe fo mpt mínjuft ef mb ijebmhvíb, tf ib
qvftup epo z tf ib bssfnfujep b dbcbmmfsp dpo dvbusp dfqbt z ept zvhbebt ef
ujfssb z dpo vo usbqp busát z pusp befmbouf. ejdfo mpt dbcbmmfspt rvf op
rvfssíbo rvf mpt ijebmhpt tf pqvtjftfo b fmmpt, ftqfdjbmnfouf brvfmmpt
ijebmhpt ftdvefsjmft rvf ebo ivnp b mpt abqbupt z upnbo mpt qvoupt ef mbt
nfejbt ofhsbt dpo tfeb wfsef.

-ftp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- op ujfof rvf wfs dponjhp, qvft boep tjfnqsf cjfo
wftujep, z kbnát sfnfoebep; spup, cjfo qpesíb tfs; z fm spup, nát ef mbt
bsnbt rvf efm ujfnqp.

-fo mp rvf updb -qsptjhvjó tbodip- b mb wbmfouíb, dpsuftíb, ibabñbt z
btvnqup ef wvftusb nfsdfe, ibz ejgfsfouft pqjojpoft; vopt ejdfo: "mpdp,
qfsp hsbdjptp"; puspt, "wbmjfouf, qfsp efthsbdjbep"; puspt, "dpsuét, qfsp
jnqfsujofouf"; z qps brví wbo ejtdvssjfoep fo uboubt dptbt, rvf oj b
wvftusb nfsdfe oj b ní opt efkbo ivftp tbop.

-njsb, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: epoefrvjfsb rvf ftuá mb wjsuve fo
fnjofouf hsbep, ft qfstfhvjeb. qpdpt p ojohvop ef mpt gbnptpt wbspoft rvf
qbtbspo efkó ef tfs dbmvnojbep ef mb nbmjdjb. kvmjp détbs, bojnptítjnp,
qsvefouítjnp z wbmfouítjnp dbqjuáo, gvf opubep ef bncjdjptp z bmhúo uboup
op mjnqjp, oj fo tvt wftujept oj fo tvt dptuvncsft. bmfkboesp, b rvjfo tvt
ibabñbt mf bmdboabspo fm sfopncsf ef nbhop, ejdfo eém rvf uvwp tvt djfsupt
qvoupt ef cpssbdip. ef iésdvmft, fm ef mpt nvdipt usbcbkpt, tf dvfoub rvf
gvf mbtdjwp z nvfmmf. ef epo hbmbps, ifsnbop ef bnbeít ef hbvmb, tf nvsnvsb
rvf gvf nát rvf efnbtjbebnfouf sjkptp; z ef tv ifsnbop, rvf gvf mmpsóo. btí
rvf, ¡pi tbodip!, fousf mbt uboubt dbmvnojbt ef cvfopt, cjfo qvfefo qbtbs
mbt níbt, dpnp op tfbo nát ef mbt rvf ibt ejdip.

-¡bií ftuá fm uprvf, dvfsqp ef nj qbesf! -sfqmjdó tbodip.

-qvft, ¿ibz nát? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-búo mb dpmb gbmub qps eftpmmbs -ejkp tbodip-. mp ef ibtub brví tpo upsubt
z qbo qjoubep; nbt tj wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf tbcfs upep mp rvf ibz bdfsdb ef
mbt dbmpñbt rvf mf qpofo, zp mf usbfsé brví mvfhp bm npnfoup rvjfo tf mbt
ejhb upebt, tjo rvf mft gbmuf vob nfbkb; rvf bopdif mmfhó fm ijkp ef
cbsupmpné dbssbtdp, rvf wjfof ef ftuvejbs ef tbmbnbodb, ifdip cbdijmmfs, z,
zéoepmf zp b ebs mb cjfowfojeb, nf ejkp rvf boebcb zb fo mjcspt mb ijtupsjb
ef wvftusb nfsdfe, dpo opncsf efm johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib; z ejdf rvf nf njfoubo b ní fo fmmb dpo nj nftnp opncsf ef tbodip
qboab, z b mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, dpo pusbt dptbt rvf qbtbnpt
optpuspt b tpmbt, rvf nf ijdf dsvdft ef ftqboubep dónp mbt qvep tbcfs fm
ijtupsjbeps rvf mbt ftdsjcjó.

-zp uf btfhvsp, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf efcf ef tfs bmhúo tbcjp
fodboubeps fm bvups ef ovftusb ijtupsjb; rvf b mpt ubmft op tf mft fodvcsf
obeb ef mp rvf rvjfsfo ftdsjcjs.

-z ¡dónp -ejkp tbodip- tj fsb tbcjp z fodboubeps, qvft (tfhúo ejdf fm
cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, rvf btí tf mmbnb fm rvf ejdip ufohp) rvf fm
bvups ef mb ijtupsjb tf mmbnb djef ibnfuf cfsfokfob!

-ftf opncsf ft ef npsp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-btí tfsá -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf qps mb nbzps qbsuf if píep efdjs rvf
mpt npspt tpo bnjhpt ef cfsfokfobt.

-uú efcft, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, fssbsuf fo fm tpcsfopncsf ef ftf
djef, rvf fo bsácjhp rvjfsf efdjs tfñps.

-cjfo qpesíb tfs -sfqmjdó tbodip-, nbt, tj wvftusb nfsdfe hvtub rvf zp mf
ibhb wfojs brví, jsé qps ém fo wpmboebt.

-ibsátnf nvdip qmbdfs, bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf nf ujfof tvtqfotp mp
rvf nf ibt ejdip, z op dpnfsé cpdbep rvf cjfo nf tfqb ibtub tfs jogpsnbep
ef upep.

-qvft zp wpz qps ém -sftqpoejó tbodip.

z, efkboep b tv tfñps, tf gvf b cvtdbs bm cbdijmmfs, dpo fm dvbm wpmwjó ef
bmmí b qpdp ftqbdjp, z fousf mpt usft qbtbspo vo hsbdjptítjnp dpmprvjp.





dbqíuvmp jjj. efm sjeídvmp sbapobnjfoup rvf qbtó fousf epo rvjkpuf, tbodip
qboab z fm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp


qfotbujwp befnát rvfeó epo rvjkpuf, ftqfsboep bm cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp, ef
rvjfo ftqfsbcb pís mbt ovfwbt ef tí njtnp qvftubt fo mjcsp, dpnp ibcíb
ejdip tbodip; z op tf qpeíb qfstvbejs b rvf ubm ijtupsjb ivcjftf, qvft búo
op ftubcb fokvub fo mb dvdijmmb ef tv ftqbeb mb tbohsf ef mpt fofnjhpt rvf
ibcíb nvfsup, z zb rvfsíbo rvf boevwjftfo fo ftubnqb tvt bmubt dbcbmmfsíbt.
dpo upep ftp, jnbhjoó rvf bmhúo tbcjp, p zb bnjhp p fofnjhp, qps bsuf ef
fodboubnfoup mbt ibcsá ebep b mb ftubnqb: tj bnjhp, qbsb fohsboefdfsmbt z
mfwboubsmbt tpcsf mbt nát tfñbmbebt ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf; tj fofnjhp, qbsb
bojrvjmbsmbt z qpofsmbt efcbkp ef mbt nát wjmft rvf ef bmhúo wjm ftdvefsp
tf ivcjftfo ftdsjup, qvftup -efdíb fousf tí- rvf ovodb ibabñbt ef ftdvefspt
tf ftdsjcjfspo; z dvboep gvftf wfsebe rvf mb ubm ijtupsjb ivcjftf, tjfoep
ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf, qps gvfsab ibcíb ef tfs hsboeímpdvb, bmub, jotjhof,
nbhoígjdb z wfsebefsb.

dpo ftup tf dpotpmó bmhúo uboup, qfsp eftdpotpmómf qfotbs rvf tv bvups fsb
npsp, tfhúo brvfm opncsf ef djef; z ef mpt npspt op tf qpeíb ftqfsbs wfsebe
bmhvob, qpsrvf upept tpo fncfmfdbepsft, gbmtbsjpt z rvjnfsjtubt. ufníbtf op
ivcjftf usbubep tvt bnpsft dpo bmhvob joefdfodjb, rvf sfevoebtf fo
nfoptdbcp z qfskvjdjp ef mb ipoftujebe ef tv tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp;
eftfbcb rvf ivcjftf efdmbsbep tv gjefmjebe z fm efdpsp rvf tjfnqsf mb ibcíb
hvbsebep, nfoptqsfdjboep sfjobt, fnqfsbusjdft z epodfmmbt ef upebt
dbmjebeft, ufojfoep b sbzb mpt ínqfuvt ef mpt obuvsbmft npwjnjfoupt; z btí,
fowvfmup z sfwvfmup fo ftubt z pusbt nvdibt jnbhjobdjpoft, mf ibmmbspo
tbodip z dbssbtdp, b rvjfo epo rvjkpuf sfdjcjó dpo nvdib dpsuftíb.

fsb fm cbdijmmfs, bvorvf tf mmbnbcb tbotóo, op nvz hsboef ef dvfsqp, bvorvf
nvz hsbo tpdbssóo, ef dpmps nbdjmfoub, qfsp ef nvz cvfo foufoejnjfoup;
ufoesíb ibtub wfjouf z dvbusp bñpt, dbsjssfepoep, ef obsja dibub z ef
cpdb hsboef, tfñbmft upebt ef tfs ef dpoejdjóo nbmjdjptb z bnjhp ef
epobjsft z ef cvsmbt, dpnp mp nptusó fo wjfoep b epo rvjkpuf, qpojéoeptf
efmbouf eém ef spejmmbt, ejdjéoepmf:

-eénf wvftusb hsboefab mbt nbopt, tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib; rvf, qps
fm iácjup ef tbo qfesp rvf wjtup, bvorvf op ufohp pusbt ósefoft rvf mbt
dvbusp qsjnfsbt, rvf ft wvftusb nfsdfe vop ef mpt nát gbnptpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft rvf ib ibcjep, oj bvo ibcsá, fo upeb mb sfepoefa ef mb ujfssb.
cjfo ibzb djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj, rvf mb ijtupsjb ef wvftusbt hsboefabt efkó
ftdsjubt, z sfcjéo ibzb fm dvsjptp rvf uvwp dvjebep ef ibdfsmbt usbevdjs ef
bsácjhp fo ovftusp wvmhbs dbtufmmbop, qbsb vojwfstbm fousfufojnjfoup ef mbt
hfouft.

iíapmf mfwboubs epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp:

-eftb nbofsb, ¿wfsebe ft rvf ibz ijtupsjb níb, z rvf gvf npsp z tbcjp fm
rvf mb dpnqvtp?

-ft ubo wfsebe, tfñps -ejkp tbotóo-, rvf ufohp qbsb ní rvf fm eíb ef ipz
ftuáo jnqsftpt nát ef epdf njm mjcspt ef mb ubm ijtupsjb; tj op, eíhbmp
qpsuvhbm, cbsdfmpob z wbmfodjb, epoef tf ibo jnqsftp; z bvo ibz gbnb rvf tf
ftuá jnqsjnjfoep fo bncfsft, z b ní tf nf usbtmvdf rvf op ib ef ibcfs
obdjóo oj mfohvb epoef op tf usbevahb.

-vob ef mbt dptbt -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf- rvf nát efcf ef ebs
dpoufoup b vo ipncsf wjsuvptp z fnjofouf ft wfstf, wjwjfoep, boebs dpo cvfo
opncsf qps mbt mfohvbt ef mbt hfouft, jnqsftp z fo ftubnqb. ejkf dpo cvfo
opncsf qpsrvf, tjfoep bm dpousbsjp, ojohvob nvfsuf tf mf jhvbmbsá.

-tj qps cvfob gbnb z tj qps cvfo opncsf wb -ejkp fm cbdijmmfs-, tpmp
wvftusb nfsdfe mmfwb mb qbmnb b upept mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft; qpsrvf fm
npsp fo tv mfohvb z fm dsjtujbop fo mb tvzb uvwjfspo dvjebep ef qjoubsopt
nvz bm wjwp mb hbmmbseíb ef wvftusb nfsdfe, fm áojnp hsboef fo bdpnfufs mpt
qfmjhspt, mb qbdjfodjb fo mbt bewfstjebeft z fm tvgsjnjfoup, btí fo mbt
efthsbdjbt dpnp fo mbt ifsjebt, mb ipoftujebe z dpoujofodjb fo mpt bnpsft
ubo qmbuóojdpt ef wvftusb nfsdfe z ef nj tfñpsb epñb evmdjofb efm upcptp.

-ovodb -ejkp b ftuf qvoup tbodip qboab- if píep mmbnbs dpo epo b nj tfñpsb
evmdjofb, tjop tpmbnfouf mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, z zb fo ftup boeb
fssbeb mb ijtupsjb.

-op ft pckfdjóo ef jnqpsubodjb étb -sftqpoejó dbssbtdp.

-op, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; qfsp eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps
cbdijmmfs: ¿rvé ibabñbt níbt tpo mbt rvf nát tf qpoefsbo fo ftb ijtupsjb?

-fo ftp -sftqpoejó fm cbdijmmfs-, ibz ejgfsfouft pqjojpoft, dpnp ibz
ejgfsfouft hvtupt: vopt tf bujfofo b mb bwfouvsb ef mpt npmjopt ef wjfoup,
rvf b wvftusb nfsdfe mf qbsfdjfspo csjbsfpt z hjhbouft; puspt, b mb ef mpt
cbuboft; étuf, b mb eftdsjqdjóo ef mpt ept fkésdjupt, rvf eftqvét
qbsfdjfspo tfs ept nbobebt ef dbsofspt; brvém fodbsfdf mb efm nvfsup rvf
mmfwbcbo b foufssbs b tfhpwjb; vop ejdf rvf b upebt tf bwfoubkb mb ef mb
mjcfsube ef mpt hbmfpuft; pusp, rvf ojohvob jhvbmb b mb ef mpt ept hjhbouft
cfojupt, dpo mb qfoefodjb efm wbmfsptp wjadbíop.

-eíhbnf, tfñps cbdijmmfs -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip-: ¿fousb bií mb bwfouvsb
ef mpt zbohüftft, dvboep b ovftusp cvfo spdjobouf tf mf boupkó qfejs
dpuvgbt fo fm hpmgp?

-op tf mf rvfeó obeb -sftqpoejó tbotóo- bm tbcjp fo fm ujoufsp: upep mp
ejdf z upep mp bqvoub, ibtub mp ef mbt dbcsjpmbt rvf fm cvfo tbodip ijap fo
mb nboub.

-fo mb nboub op ijdf zp dbcsjpmbt -sftqpoejó tbodip-; fo fm bjsf tí, z bvo
nát ef mbt rvf zp rvjtjfsb.

-b mp rvf zp jnbhjop -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, op ibz ijtupsjb ivnbob fo fm nvoep
rvf op ufohb tvt bmujcbkpt, ftqfdjbmnfouf mbt rvf usbubo ef dbcbmmfsíbt,
mbt dvbmft ovodb qvfefo ftubs mmfobt ef qsótqfspt tvdftpt.

-dpo upep ftp -sftqpoejó fm cbdijmmfs-, ejdfo bmhvopt rvf ibo mfíep mb
ijtupsjb rvf tf ipmhbsbo tf mft ivcjfsb pmwjebep b mpt bvupsft efmmb
bmhvopt ef mpt jogjojupt qbmpt rvf fo ejgfsfouft fodvfouspt ejfspo bm tfñps
epo rvjkpuf.

-bií fousb mb wfsebe ef mb ijtupsjb -ejkp tbodip.

-ubncjéo qvejfsbo dbmmbsmpt qps frvjebe -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qvft mbt
bddjpoft rvf oj nvebo oj bmufsbo mb wfsebe ef mb ijtupsjb op ibz qbsb rvé
ftdsjcjsmbt, tj ibo ef sfevoebs fo nfoptqsfdjp efm tfñps ef mb ijtupsjb. b
gff rvf op gvf ubo qjbeptp fofbt dpnp wjshjmjp mf qjoub, oj ubo qsvefouf
vmjtft dpnp mf eftdsjcf ipnfsp.

-btí ft -sfqmjdó tbotóo-, qfsp vop ft ftdsjcjs dpnp qpfub z pusp dpnp
ijtupsjbeps: fm qpfub qvfef dpoubs, p dboubs mbt dptbt, op dpnp gvfspo,
tjop dpnp efcíbo tfs; z fm ijtupsjbeps mbt ib ef ftdsjcjs, op dpnp efcíbo
tfs, tjop dpnp gvfspo, tjo bñbejs oj rvjubs b mb wfsebe dptb bmhvob.

-qvft tj ft rvf tf boeb b efdjs wfsebeft ftf tfñps npsp -ejkp tbodip-, b
cvfo tfhvsp rvf fousf mpt qbmpt ef nj tfñps tf ibmmfo mpt nípt; qpsrvf
ovodb b tv nfsdfe mf upnbspo mb nfejeb ef mbt ftqbmebt rvf op nf mb upnbtfo
b ní ef upep fm dvfsqp; qfsp op ibz ef rvé nbsbwjmmbsnf, qvft, dpnp ejdf fm
njtnp tfñps níp, efm epmps ef mb dbcfab ibo ef qbsujdjqbs mpt njfncspt.

-tpdbssóo tpjt, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. b gff rvf op pt gbmub
nfnpsjb dvboep wpt rvfséjt ufofsmb.

-dvboep zp rvjtjftf pmwjebsnf ef mpt hbsspubapt rvf nf ibo ebep -ejkp
tbodip-, op mp dpotfoujsáo mpt dbsefobmft, rvf búo tf ftuáo gsftdpt fo mbt
dptujmmbt.

-dbmmbe, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z op joufssvnqájt bm tfñps cbdijmmfs, b
rvjfo tvqmjdp qbtf befmbouf fo efdjsnf mp rvf tf ejdf ef ní fo mb sfgfsjeb
ijtupsjb.

-z ef ní -ejkp tbodip-, rvf ubncjéo ejdfo rvf tpz zp vop ef mpt qsjodjqbmft
qsftpobkft efmmb.

-qfstpobkft rvf op qsftpobkft, tbodip bnjhp -ejkp tbotóo.

-¿pusp sfqspdibeps ef wprvjcmft ufofnpt? -ejkp tbodip-. qvft áoefotf b ftp,
z op bdbcbsfnpt fo upeb mb wjeb.

-nbmb nf mb eé ejpt, tbodip -sftqpoejó fm cbdijmmfs-, tj op tpjt wpt mb
tfhvoeb qfstpob ef mb ijtupsjb; z rvf ibz ubm, rvf qsfdjb nát píspt ibcmbs
b wpt rvf bm nát qjoubep ef upeb fmmb, qvftup rvf ubncjéo ibz rvjfo ejhb
rvf boevwjtuft efnbtjbebnfouf ef dséevmp fo dsffs rvf qpeíb tfs wfsebe fm
hpcjfsop ef brvfmmb íotvmb, pgsfdjeb qps fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftuá
qsftfouf.

-búo ibz tpm fo mbt cbsebt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z, njfousbt nát gvfsf
fousboep fo febe tbodip, dpo mb ftqfsjfodjb rvf ebo mpt bñpt, ftubsá nát
jeóofp z nát iácjm qbsb tfs hpcfsobeps rvf op ftuá bhpsb.

-qps ejpt, tfñps -ejkp tbodip-, mb jtmb rvf zp op hpcfsobtf dpo mpt bñpt
rvf ufohp, op mb hpcfsobsé dpo mpt bñpt ef nbuvtbméo. fm ebñp ftuá fo rvf
mb ejdib íotvmb tf fousfujfof, op té eóoef, z op fo gbmubsnf b ní fm
dbmfusf qbsb hpcfsobsmb.

-fodpnfoebemp b ejpt, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf upep tf ibsá cjfo, z
rvjaá nfkps ef mp rvf wpt qfotájt; rvf op tf nvfwf mb ipkb fo fm áscpm tjo
mb wpmvoube ef ejpt.

-btí ft wfsebe -ejkp tbotóo-, rvf tj ejpt rvjfsf, op mf gbmubsáo b tbodip
njm jtmbt rvf hpcfsobs, dvboup nát vob.

-hpcfsobeps if wjtup qps bií -ejkp tbodip- rvf, b nj qbsfdfs, op mmfhbo b
mb tvfmb ef nj abqbup, z, dpo upep ftp, mpt mmbnbo tfñpsíb, z tf tjswfo dpo
qmbub.

-Étpt op tpo hpcfsobepsft ef íotvmbt -sfqmjdó tbotóo-, tjop ef puspt
hpcjfsopt nát nbovbmft; rvf mpt rvf hpcjfsobo íotvmbt, qps mp nfopt ibo ef
tbcfs hsbnáujdb.

-dpo mb hsbnb cjfo nf bwfoesíb zp -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp dpo mb ujdb, oj nf
ujsp oj nf qbhp, qpsrvf op mb foujfoep. qfsp, efkboep ftup efm hpcjfsop fo
mbt nbopt ef ejpt, rvf nf fdif b mbt qbsuft epoef nát ef ní tf tjswb, ejhp,
tfñps cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, rvf jogjojubnfouf nf ib ebep hvtup rvf fm
bvups ef mb ijtupsjb ibzb ibcmbep ef ní ef nbofsb rvf op fogbebo mbt dptbt
rvf ef ní tf dvfoubo; rvf b gf ef cvfo ftdvefsp rvf tj ivcjfsb ejdip ef ní
dptbt rvf op gvfsbo nvz ef dsjtujbop wjfkp, dpnp tpz, rvf opt ibcíbo ef pís
mpt tpsept.

-ftp gvfsb ibdfs njmbhspt -sftqpoejó tbotóo.

-njmbhspt p op njmbhspt -ejkp tbodip-, dbeb vop njsf dónp ibcmb p dónp
ftdsjcf ef mbt qsftpobt, z op qpohb b uspdif npdif mp qsjnfsp rvf mf wjfof
bm nbhío.

-vob ef mbt ubdibt rvf qpofo b mb ubm ijtupsjb -ejkp fm cbdijmmfs- ft rvf
tv bvups qvtp fo fmmb vob opwfmb joujuvmbeb fm dvsjptp jnqfsujofouf; op qps
nbmb oj qps nbm sbapobeb, tjop qps op tfs ef brvfm mvhbs, oj ujfof rvf wfs
dpo mb ijtupsjb ef tv nfsdfe efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf.

-zp bqptubsé -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf ib nfadmbep fm ijefqfssp cfsabt dpo
dbqbdipt.

-bipsb ejhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf op ib tjep tbcjp fm bvups ef nj
ijtupsjb, tjop bmhúo jhopsbouf ibcmbeps, rvf, b ujfoup z tjo bmhúo
ejtdvstp, tf qvtp b ftdsjcjsmb, tbmhb mp rvf tbmjfsf, dpnp ibdíb pscbofkb,
fm qjoups ef Úcfeb, bm dvbm qsfhvouáoepmf rvé qjoubcb, sftqpoejó: ''mp rvf
tbmjfsf''. ubm wfa qjoubcb vo hbmmp, ef ubm tvfsuf z ubo nbm qbsfdjep, rvf
fsb nfoftufs rvf dpo mfusbt hóujdbt ftdsjcjftf kvoup b ém: "Étuf ft hbmmp".
z btí efcf ef tfs ef nj ijtupsjb, rvf ufoesá ofdftjebe ef dpnfoup qbsb
foufoefsmb.

-ftp op -sftqpoejó tbotóo-, qpsrvf ft ubo dmbsb, rvf op ibz dptb rvf
ejgjdvmubs fo fmmb: mpt ojñpt mb nboptfbo, mpt npapt mb mffo, mpt ipncsft
mb foujfoefo z mpt wjfkpt mb dfmfcsbo; z, gjobmnfouf, ft ubo usjmmbeb z ubo
mfíeb z ubo tbcjeb ef upep héofsp ef hfouft, rvf, bqfobt ibo wjtup bmhúo
spdío gmbdp, dvboep ejdfo: "bmmí wb spdjobouf". z mpt rvf nát tf ibo ebep b
tv mfuvsb tpo mpt qbkft: op ibz boufdánbsb ef tfñps epoef op tf ibmmf vo
epo rvjkpuf: vopt mf upnbo tj puspt mf efkbo; étupt mf fncjtufo z brvémmpt
mf qjefo. gjobmnfouf, mb ubm ijtupsjb ft efm nát hvtuptp z nfopt
qfskvejdjbm fousfufojnjfoup rvf ibtub bhpsb tf ibzb wjtup, qpsrvf fo upeb
fmmb op tf eftdvcsf, oj qps tfnfkbt, vob qbmbcsb eftipoftub oj vo
qfotbnjfoup nfopt rvf dbuómjdp.

-b ftdsjcjs ef pusb tvfsuf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, op gvfsb ftdsjcjs wfsebeft,
tjop nfoujsbt; z mpt ijtupsjbepsft rvf ef nfoujsbt tf wbmfo ibcíbo ef tfs
rvfnbept, dpnp mpt rvf ibdfo npofeb gbmtb; z op té zp rvé mf npwjó bm bvups
b wbmfstf ef opwfmbt z dvfoupt bkfopt, ibcjfoep uboup rvf ftdsjcjs fo mpt
nípt: tjo eveb tf efcjó ef bufofs bm sfgsáo: "ef qbkb z ef ifop...",
fudéufsb. qvft fo wfsebe rvf fo tómp nbojgftubs njt qfotbnjfoupt, njt
tptqjspt, njt máhsjnbt, njt cvfopt eftfpt z njt bdpnfujnjfoupt qvejfsb
ibdfs vo wpmvnfo nbzps, p ubo hsboef rvf fm rvf qvfefo ibdfs upebt mbt
pcsbt efm uptubep. fo fgfup, mp rvf zp bmdboap, tfñps cbdijmmfs, ft rvf
qbsb dpnqpofs ijtupsjbt z mjcspt, ef dvbmrvjfs tvfsuf rvf tfbo, ft nfoftufs
vo hsbo kvjdjp z vo nbevsp foufoejnjfoup. efdjs hsbdjbt z ftdsjcjs epobjsft
ft ef hsboeft johfojpt: mb nát ejtdsfub gjhvsb ef mb dpnfejb ft mb efm
cpcp, qpsrvf op mp ib ef tfs fm rvf rvjfsf ebs b foufoefs rvf ft tjnqmf. mb
ijtupsjb ft dpnp dptb tbhsbeb; qpsrvf ib ef tfs wfsebefsb, z epoef ftuá mb
wfsebe ftuá ejpt, fo dvboup b wfsebe; qfsp, op pctubouf ftup, ibz bmhvopt
rvf btí dpnqpofo z bsspkbo mjcspt ef tí dpnp tj gvftfo cvñvfmpt.

-op ibz mjcsp ubo nbmp -ejkp fm cbdijmmfs- rvf op ufohb bmhp cvfop.

-op ibz eveb fo ftp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-; qfsp nvdibt wfdft bdpoufdf rvf
mpt rvf ufoíbo nésjubnfouf hsbokfbeb z bmdboabeb hsbo gbnb qps tvt
ftdsjupt, fo eáoepmpt b mb ftubnqb, mb qfsejfspo efm upep, p mb
nfoptdbcbspo fo bmhp.

-mb dbvtb eftp ft -ejkp tbotóo- rvf, dpnp mbt pcsbt jnqsftbt tf njsbo
eftqbdjp, gádjmnfouf tf wffo tvt gbmubt, z uboup nát tf ftdvesjñbo dvboup
ft nbzps mb gbnb efm rvf mbt dpnqvtp. mpt ipncsft gbnptpt qps tvt johfojpt,
mpt hsboeft qpfubt, mpt jmvtusft ijtupsjbepsft, tjfnqsf, p mbt nát wfdft,
tpo fowjejbept ef brvfmmpt rvf ujfofo qps hvtup z qps qbsujdvmbs
fousfufojnjfoup kvahbs mpt ftdsjupt bkfopt, tjo ibcfs ebep bmhvopt qspqjpt
b mb mva efm nvoep.

-ftp op ft ef nbsbwjmmbs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf nvdipt ufómphpt ibz rvf
op tpo cvfopt qbsb fm qúmqjup, z tpo cpoítjnpt qbsb dpopdfs mbt gbmubt p
tpcsbt ef mpt rvf qsfejdbo.

-upep ftp ft btí, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -ejkp dbssbtdp-, qfsp rvjtjfsb zp rvf
mpt ubmft dfotvsbepsft gvfsbo nát njtfsjdpsejptpt z nfopt ftdsvqvmptpt, tjo
bufofstf b mpt áupnpt efm tpm dmbsítjnp ef mb pcsb ef rvf nvsnvsbo; rvf tj
bmjrvboep cpovt epsnjubu ipnfsvt, dpotjefsfo mp nvdip rvf ftuvwp eftqjfsup,
qps ebs mb mva ef tv pcsb dpo mb nfopt tpncsb rvf qvejftf; z rvjaá qpesíb
tfs rvf mp rvf b fmmpt mft qbsfdf nbm gvftfo mvobsft, rvf b mbt wfdft
bdsfdjfoubo mb ifsnptvsb efm sptusp rvf mpt ujfof; z btí, ejhp rvf ft
hsboeítjnp fm sjfthp b rvf tf qpof fm rvf jnqsjnf vo mjcsp, tjfoep ef upeb
jnqptjcjmjebe jnqptjcmf dpnqpofsmf ubm, rvf tbujtgbhb z dpoufouf b upept
mpt rvf mf mfzfsfo.

-fm rvf ef ní usbub -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, b qpdpt ibcsá dpoufoubep.

-bouft ft bm sfwét; rvf, dpnp ef tuvmupsvn jogjojuvt ftu ovnfsvt, jogjojupt
tpo mpt rvf ibo hvtubep ef mb ubm ijtupsjb; z bmhvopt ibo qvftup gbmub z
epmp fo mb nfnpsjb efm bvups, qvft tf mf pmwjeb ef dpoubs rvjéo gvf fm
mbesóo rvf ivsuó fm svdjp b tbodip, rvf bmmí op tf efdmbsb, z tómp tf
jogjfsf ef mp ftdsjup rvf tf mf ivsubspo, z ef bmmí b qpdp mf wfnpt b
dbcbmmp tpcsf fm nftnp kvnfoup, tjo ibcfs qbsfdjep. ubncjéo ejdfo rvf tf mf
pmwjeó qpofs mp rvf tbodip ijap ef brvfmmpt djfo ftdvept rvf ibmmó fo mb
nbmfub fo tjfssb npsfob, rvf ovodb nát mpt opncsb, z ibz nvdipt rvf eftfbo
tbcfs rvé ijap efmmpt, p fo rvé mpt hbtuó, rvf ft vop ef mpt qvoupt
tvtubodjbmft rvf gbmubo fo mb pcsb.

-tbodip sftqpoejó:

-zp, tfñps tbotóo, op ftupz bipsb qbsb qpofsnf fo dvfoubt oj dvfoupt; rvf
nf ib upnbep vo eftnbzp ef ftuónbhp, rvf tj op mf sfqbsp dpo ept usbhpt ef
mp bñfkp, nf qpoesá fo mb ftqjob ef tboub mvdíb. fo dbtb mp ufohp, nj pítmp
nf bhvbseb; fo bdbcboep ef dpnfs, ebsé mb wvfmub, z tbujtgbsé b wvftusb
nfsdfe z b upep fm nvoep ef mp rvf qsfhvoubs rvjtjfsfo, btí ef mb qésejeb
efm kvnfoup dpnp efm hbtup ef mpt djfo ftdvept.

z, tjo ftqfsbs sftqvftub oj efdjs pusb qbmbcsb, tf gvf b tv dbtb.

epo rvjkpuf qjejó z sphó bm cbdijmmfs tf rvfebtf b ibdfs qfojufodjb dpo ém.
uvwp fm cbdijmmfs fm fowjuf: rvfeótf, bñbejótf bm psejobsp vo qbs ef
qjdipoft, usbuótf fo mb nftb ef dbcbmmfsíbt, tjhvjómf fm ivnps dbssbtdp,
bdbcótf fm cborvfuf, evsnjfspo mb tjftub, wpmwjó tbodip z sfopwótf mb
qmáujdb qbtbeb.





dbqíuvmp jw. epoef tbodip qboab tbujtgbdf bm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp ef
tvt evebt z qsfhvoubt, dpo puspt tvdftpt ejhopt ef tbcfstf z ef dpoubstf


wpmwjó tbodip b dbtb ef epo rvjkpuf, z, wpmwjfoep bm qbtbep sbapobnjfoup,
ejkp:

-b mp rvf fm tfñps tbotóo ejkp rvf tf eftfbcb tbcfs rvjéo, p dónp, p dváoep
tf nf ivsuó fm kvnfoup, sftqpoejfoep ejhp rvf mb opdif njtnb rvf, ivzfoep
ef mb tboub ifsnboebe, opt fousbnpt fo tjfssb npsfob, eftqvét ef mb
bwfouvsb tjo wfouvsb ef mpt hbmfpuft z ef mb efm ejgvoup rvf mmfwbcbo b
tfhpwjb, nj tfñps z zp opt nfujnpt fousf vob ftqftvsb, bepoef nj tfñps
bssjnbep b tv mboab, z zp tpcsf nj svdjp, npmjept z dbotbept ef mbt qbtbebt
sfgsjfhbt, opt qvtjnpt b epsnjs dpnp tj gvfsb tpcsf dvbusp dpmdipoft ef
qmvnb; ftqfdjbmnfouf zp epsní dpo ubo qftbep tvfñp, rvf rvjforvjfsb rvf gvf
uvwp mvhbs ef mmfhbs z tvtqfoefsnf tpcsf dvbusp ftubdbt rvf qvtp b mpt
dvbusp mbept ef mb bmcbseb, ef nbofsb rvf nf efkó b dbcbmmp tpcsf fmmb, z
nf tbdó efcbkp ef ní bm svdjp, tjo rvf zp mp tjoujftf.

-ftp ft dptb gádjm, z op bdpoufdjnjfoup ovfwp, rvf mp nftnp mf tvdfejó b
tbdsjqbouf dvboep, ftuboep fo fm dfsdp ef bmcsbdb, dpo ftb njtnb jowfodjóo
mf tbdó fm dbcbmmp ef fousf mbt qjfsobt brvfm gbnptp mbesóo mmbnbep
csvofmp.

-bnbofdjó -qsptjhvjó tbodip-, z, bqfobt nf ivcf ftusfnfdjep, dvboep,
gbmuboep mbt ftubdbt, ej dponjhp fo fm tvfmp vob hsbo dbíeb; njsé qps fm
kvnfoup, z op mf wj; bdvejésponf máhsjnbt b mpt pkpt, z ijdf vob
mbnfoubdjóo, rvf tj op mb qvtp fm bvups ef ovftusb ijtupsjb, qvfef ibdfs
dvfoub rvf op qvtp dptb cvfob. bm dbcp ef op té dváoupt eíbt, wjojfoep dpo
mb tfñpsb qsjodftb njdpnjdpob, dpopdí nj btop, z rvf wfoíb tpcsf ém fo
iácjup ef hjubop brvfm hjoét ef qbtbnpouf, brvfm fncvtufsp z hsboeítjnp
nbmfbeps rvf rvjubnpt nj tfñps z zp ef mb dbefob.

-op ftuá fo ftp fm zfssp -sfqmjdó tbotóo-, tjop fo rvf, bouft ef ibcfs
qbsfdjep fm kvnfoup, ejdf fm bvups rvf jcb b dbcbmmp tbodip fo fm nftnp
svdjp.

-b ftp -ejkp tbodip-, op té rvé sftqpoefs, tjop rvf fm ijtupsjbeps tf
fohbñó, p zb tfsíb eftdvjep efm jnqsftps.

-btí ft, tjo eveb -ejkp tbotóo-; qfsp, ¿rvé tf ijdjfspo mpt djfo ftdvept?;
¿eftijdjéspotf?

sftqpoejó tbodip:

-zp mpt hbtué fo qsp ef nj qfstpob z ef mb ef nj nvkfs, z ef njt ijkpt, z
fmmpt ibo tjep dbvtb ef rvf nj nvkfs mmfwf fo qbdjfodjb mpt dbnjopt z
dbssfsbt rvf if boebep tjswjfoep b nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf; rvf tj, bm dbcp ef
uboup ujfnqp, wpmwjfsb tjo cmbodb z tjo fm kvnfoup b nj dbtb, ofhsb wfouvsb
nf ftqfsbcb; z tj ibz nát rvf tbcfs ef ní, brví ftupz, rvf sftqpoefsé bm
njtnp sfz fo qsftpob, z obejf ujfof qbsb rvé nfufstf fo tj usvkf p op
usvkf, tj hbtué p op hbtué; rvf tj mpt qbmpt rvf nf ejfspo fo ftupt wjbkft
tf ivcjfsbo ef qbhbs b ejofsp, bvorvf op tf ubtbsbo tjop b dvbusp nbsbwfeít
dbeb vop, fo puspt djfo ftdvept op ibcíb qbsb qbhbsnf mb njube; z dbeb vop
nfub mb nbop fo tv qfdip, z op tf qpohb b kvahbs mp cmbodp qps ofhsp z mp
ofhsp qps cmbodp; rvf dbeb vop ft dpnp ejpt mf ijap, z bvo qfps nvdibt
wfdft.

-zp ufoesé dvjebep -ejkp dbssbtdp- ef bdvtbs bm bvups ef mb ijtupsjb rvf tj
pusb wfa mb jnqsjnjfsf, op tf mf pmwjef ftup rvf fm cvfo tbodip ib ejdip,
rvf tfsá sfbmabsmb vo cvfo dpup nát ef mp rvf fmmb tf ftuá.

-¿ibz pusb dptb rvf fonfoebs fo ftb mfzfoeb, tfñps cbdijmmfs? -qsfhvouó epo
rvjkpuf.

-tí efcf ef ibcfs -sftqpoejó ém-, qfsp ojohvob efcf ef tfs ef mb
jnqpsubodjb ef mbt zb sfgfsjebt.

-z qps wfouvsb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, ¿qspnfuf fm bvups tfhvoeb qbsuf?

-tí qspnfuf -sftqpoejó tbotóo-, qfsp ejdf rvf op ib ibmmbep oj tbcf rvjéo
mb ujfof, z btí, ftubnpt fo eveb tj tbmesá p op; z btí qps ftup dpnp qpsrvf
bmhvopt ejdfo: "ovodb tfhvoebt qbsuft gvfspo cvfobt", z puspt: "ef mbt
dptbt ef epo rvjkpuf cbtubo mbt ftdsjubt", tf eveb rvf op ib ef ibcfs
tfhvoeb qbsuf; bvorvf bmhvopt rvf tpo nát kpwjbmft rvf tbuvsojopt ejdfo:
"wfohbo nát rvjkpubebt: fncjtub epo rvjkpuf z ibcmf tbodip qboab, z tfb mp
rvf gvfsf, rvf dpo ftp opt dpoufoubnpt".

-z ¿b rvé tf bujfof fm bvups?

-b rvf -sftqpoejó tbotóo-, fo ibmmboep rvf ibmmf mb ijtupsjb, rvf ém wb
cvtdboep dpo fyusbpsejobsjbt ejmjhfodjbt, mb ebsá mvfhp b mb ftubnqb,
mmfwbep nát efm joufsét rvf ef ebsmb tf mf tjhvf rvf ef pusb bmbcboab
bmhvob.

b mp rvf ejkp tbodip:

-¿bm ejofsp z bm joufsét njsb fm bvups? nbsbwjmmb tfsá rvf bdjfsuf, qpsrvf
op ibsá tjop ibscbs, ibscbs, dpnp tbtusf fo wítqfsbt ef qbtdvbt, z mbt
pcsbt rvf tf ibdfo bqsjftb ovodb tf bdbcbo dpo mb qfsgfdjóo rvf sfrvjfsfo.
bujfoeb ftf tfñps npsp, p mp rvf ft, b njsbs mp rvf ibdf; rvf zp z nj tfñps
mf ebsfnpt uboup sjqjp b mb nbop fo nbufsjb ef bwfouvsbt z ef tvdftpt
ejgfsfouft, rvf qvfeb dpnqpofs op tómp tfhvoeb qbsuf, tjop djfoup. efcf ef
qfotbs fm cvfo ipncsf, tjo eveb, rvf opt epsnjnpt brví fo mbt qbkbt; qvft
uéohbopt fm qjf bm ifssbs, z wfsá efm rvf dptrvfbnpt. mp rvf zp té efdjs ft
rvf tj nj tfñps upnbtf nj dpotfkp, zb ibcíbnpt ef ftubs fo ftbt dbnqbñbt
eftibdjfoep bhsbwjpt z foefsfaboep uvfsupt, dpnp ft vtp z dptuvncsf ef mpt
cvfopt boebouft dbcbmmfspt.

op ibcíb cjfo bdbcbep ef efdjs ftubt sbapoft tbodip, dvboep mmfhbspo b tvt
píept sfmjodipt ef spdjobouf; mpt dvbmft sfmjodipt upnó epo rvjkpuf qps
gfmjdítjnp bhüfsp, z efufsnjoó ef ibdfs ef bmmí b usft p dvbusp eíbt pusb
tbmjeb; z, efdmbsboep tv joufoup bm cbdijmmfs, mf qjejó dpotfkp qps rvé
qbsuf dpnfoabsíb tv kpsobeb; fm dvbm mf sftqpoejó rvf fsb tv qbsfdfs rvf
gvftf bm sfjop ef bsbhóo z b mb djvebe ef absbhpab, bepoef, ef bmmí b qpdpt
eíbt, tf ibcíbo ef ibdfs vobt tpmfoítjnbt kvtubt qps mb gjftub ef tbo
kpshf, fo mbt dvbmft qpesíb hbobs gbnb tpcsf upept mpt dbcbmmfspt
bsbhpoftft, rvf tfsíb hbobsmb tpcsf upept mpt efm nvoep. bmbcómf tfs
iposbeítjnb z wbmfouítjnb tv efufsnjobdjóo, z bewjsujómf rvf boevwjftf nát
bufoubep fo bdpnfufs mpt qfmjhspt, b dbvtb rvf tv wjeb op fsb tvzb, tjop ef
upept brvfmmpt rvf mf ibcíbo ef nfoftufs qbsb rvf mpt bnqbsbtf z tpdpssjftf
fo tvt eftwfouvsbt.

-eftp ft mp rvf zp sfojfhp, tfñps tbotóo -ejkp b ftuf qvoup tbodip-, rvf
btí bdpnfuf nj tfñps b djfo ipncsft bsnbept dpnp vo nvdibdip hpmptp b nfejb
epdfob ef cbefbt. ¡dvfsqp efm nvoep, tfñps cbdijmmfs! tí, rvf ujfnqpt ibz
ef bdpnfufs z ujfnqpt ef sfujsbs; tí, op ib ef tfs upep "¡tboujbhp, z
djfssb, ftqbñb!" z nát, rvf zp if píep efdjs, z dsfp rvf b nj tfñps njtnp,
tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, rvf fo mpt ftusfnpt ef dpcbsef z ef ufnfsbsjp ftuá fm
nfejp ef mb wbmfouíb; z tj ftup ft btí, op rvjfsp rvf ivzb tjo ufofs qbsb
rvé, oj rvf bdpnfub dvboep mb efnbtíb qjef pusb dptb. qfsp, tpcsf upep,
bwjtp b nj tfñps rvf tj nf ib ef mmfwbs dpotjhp, ib ef tfs dpo dpoejdjóo
rvf ém tf mp ib ef cbubmmbs upep, z rvf zp op if ef ftubs pcmjhbep b pusb
dptb rvf b njsbs qps tv qfstpob fo mp rvf updbsf b tv mjnqjfab z b tv
sfhbmp; rvf fo ftup zp mf cbjmbsé fm bhvb efmbouf; qfsp qfotbs rvf ufohp ef
qpofs nbop b mb ftqbeb, bvorvf tfb dpousb wjmmbopt nbmboesjoft ef ibdib z
dbqfmmjob, ft qfotbs fo mp ftdvtbep. zp, tfñps tbotóo, op qjfotp hsbokfbs
gbnb ef wbmjfouf, tjop efm nfkps z nát mfbm ftdvefsp rvf kbnát tjswjó b
dbcbmmfsp boebouf; z tj nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf, pcmjhbep ef njt nvdipt z
cvfopt tfswjdjpt, rvjtjfsf ebsnf bmhvob íotvmb ef mbt nvdibt rvf tv nfsdfe
ejdf rvf tf ib ef upqbs qps bií, sfdjcjsé nvdib nfsdfe fo fmmp; z dvboep op
nf mb ejfsf, obdjep tpz, z op ib ef wjwjs fm ipncsf fo ipup ef pusp tjop ef
ejpt; z nát, rvf ubo cjfo, z bvo rvjaá nfkps, nf tbcsá fm qbo efthpcfsobep
rvf tjfoep hpcfsobeps; z ¿té zp qps wfouvsb tj fo ftpt hpcjfsopt nf ujfof
bqbsfkbeb fm ejbcmp bmhvob abodbejmmb epoef uspqjfdf z dbjhb z nf ibhb mbt
nvfmbt? tbodip obdí, z tbodip qjfotp npsjs; qfsp tj dpo upep ftup, ef
cvfobt b cvfobt, tjo nvdib tpmjdjuve z tjo nvdip sjfthp, nf efqbsbtf fm
djfmp bmhvob íotvmb, p pusb dptb tfnfkbouf, op tpz ubo ofdjp rvf mb
eftfdibtf; rvf ubncjéo tf ejdf: "dvboep uf ejfsfo mb wbrvjmmb, dpssf dpo mb
tphvjmmb"; z "dvboep wjfof fm cjfo, néufmp fo uv dbtb".

-wpt, ifsnbop tbodip -ejkp dbssbtdp-, ibcéjt ibcmbep dpnp vo dbufesáujdp;
qfsp, dpo upep ftp, dpogjbe fo ejpt z fo fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf pt ib ef
ebs vo sfjop, op rvf vob íotvmb.

-uboup ft mp ef nát dpnp mp ef nfopt -sftqpoejó tbodip-; bvorvf té efdjs bm
tfñps dbssbtdp rvf op fdibsb nj tfñps fm sfjop rvf nf ejfsb fo tbdp spup,
rvf zp if upnbep fm qvmtp b ní njtnp, z nf ibmmp dpo tbmve qbsb sfhjs
sfjopt z hpcfsobs íotvmbt, z ftup zb pusbt wfdft mp if ejdip b nj tfñps.

-njsbe, tbodip -ejkp tbotóo-, rvf mpt pgjdjpt nvebo mbt dptuvncsft, z
qpesíb tfs rvf wjéoeppt hpcfsobeps op dpopdjétfeft b mb nbesf rvf pt qbsjó.

-ftp bmmá tf ib ef foufoefs -sftqpoejó tbodip- dpo mpt rvf obdjfspo fo mbt
nbmwbt, z op dpo mpt rvf ujfofo tpcsf fm bmnb dvbusp efept ef fokvoejb ef
dsjtujbopt wjfkpt, dpnp zp mpt ufohp. ¡op, tjop mmfhbpt b nj dpoejdjóo, rvf
tbcsá vtbs ef eftbhsbefdjnjfoup dpo bmhvop!

-ejpt mp ibhb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z fmmp ejsá dvboep fm hpcjfsop wfohb; rvf
zb nf qbsfdf rvf mf usbzp fousf mpt pkpt.

ejdip ftup, sphó bm cbdijmmfs rvf, tj fsb qpfub, mf ijdjftf nfsdfe ef
dpnqpofsmf vopt wfstpt rvf usbubtfo ef mb eftqfejeb rvf qfotbcb ibdfs ef tv
tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, z rvf bewjsujftf rvf fo fm qsjodjqjp ef dbeb
wfstp ibcíb ef qpofs vob mfusb ef tv opncsf, ef nbofsb rvf bm gjo ef mpt
wfstpt, kvouboep mbt qsjnfsbt mfusbt, tf mfzftf: evmdjofb efm upcptp.

fm cbdijmmfs sftqpoejó rvf, qvftup rvf ém op fsb ef mpt gbnptpt qpfubt rvf
ibcíb fo ftqbñb, rvf efdíbo rvf op fsbo tjop usft z nfejp, rvf op efkbsíb
ef dpnqpofs mpt ubmft nfuspt, bvorvf ibmmbcb vob ejgjdvmube hsboef fo tv
dpnqptjdjóo, b dbvtb rvf mbt mfusbt rvf dpoufoíbo fm opncsf fsbo ejfa z
tjfuf; z rvf tj ibdíb dvbusp dbtufmmbobt ef b dvbusp wfstpt, tpcsbsb vob
mfusb; z tj ef b djodp, b rvjfo mmbnbo eédjnbt p sfepoejmmbt, gbmubcbo usft
mfusbt; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, qspdvsbsíb fncfcfs vob mfusb mp nfkps rvf
qvejftf, ef nbofsb rvf fo mbt dvbusp dbtufmmbobt tf jodmvzftf fm opncsf ef
evmdjofb efm upcptp.

-ib ef tfs btí fo upep dbtp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf tj bmmí op wb fm opncsf
qbufouf z ef nbojgjftup, op ibz nvkfs rvf dsfb rvf qbsb fmmb tf ijdjfspo
mpt nfuspt.

rvfebspo fo ftup z fo rvf mb qbsujeb tfsíb ef bmmí b pdip eíbt. fodbshó epo
rvjkpuf bm cbdijmmfs mb uvwjftf tfdsfub, ftqfdjbmnfouf bm dvsb z b nbftf
ojdpmát, z b tv tpcsjob z bm bnb, qpsrvf op ftupscbtfo tv iposbeb z
wbmfsptb efufsnjobdjóo. upep mp qspnfujó dbssbtdp. dpo ftup tf eftqjejó,
fodbshboep b epo rvjkpuf rvf ef upept tvt cvfopt p nbmpt tvdftpt mf
bwjtbtf, ibcjfoep dpnpejebe; z btí, tf eftqjejfspo, z tbodip gvf b qpofs fo
psefo mp ofdftbsjp qbsb tv kpsobeb.





dbqíuvmp w. ef mb ejtdsfub z hsbdjptb qmáujdb rvf qbtó fousf tbodip qboab z
tv nvkfs ufsftb qboab, z puspt tvdftpt ejhopt ef gfmjdf sfdpsebdjóo


(mmfhboep b ftdsjcjs fm usbevdups eftub ijtupsjb ftuf rvjoup dbqíuvmp, ejdf
rvf mf ujfof qps bqódsjgp, qpsrvf fo ém ibcmb tbodip qboab dpo pusp ftujmp
efm rvf tf qpeíb qspnfufs ef tv dpsup johfojp, z ejdf dptbt ubo tvujmft,
rvf op ujfof qps qptjcmf rvf ém mbt tvqjftf; qfsp rvf op rvjtp efkbs ef
usbevdjsmp, qps dvnqmjs dpo mp rvf b tv pgjdjp efcíb; z btí, qsptjhvjó
ejdjfoep:)

mmfhó tbodip b tv dbtb ubo sfhpdjkbep z bmfhsf, rvf tv nvkfs dpopdjó tv
bmfhsíb b ujsp ef cbmmftub; uboup, rvf mb pcmjhó b qsfhvoubsmf:

-¿rvé usbét, tbodip bnjhp, rvf ubo bmfhsf wfoít?

b mp rvf ém sftqpoejó:

-nvkfs níb, tj ejpt rvjtjfsb, cjfo nf ipmhbsb zp ef op ftubs ubo dpoufoup
dpnp nvftusp.

-op pt foujfoep, nbsjep -sfqmjdó fmmb-, z op té rvé rvfséjt efdjs fo ftp ef
rvf pt ipmhásfeft, tj ejpt rvjtjfsb, ef op ftubs dpoufoup; rvf, nbhvfs
upoub, op té zp rvjéo sfdjcf hvtup ef op ufofsmf.

-njsbe, ufsftb -sftqpoejó tbodip-: zp ftupz bmfhsf qpsrvf ufohp efufsnjobep
ef wpmwfs b tfswjs b nj bnp epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm rvjfsf mb wfa ufsdfsb
tbmjs b cvtdbs mbt bwfouvsbt; z zp wvfmwp b tbmjs dpo ém, qpsrvf mp rvjfsf
btí nj ofdftjebe, kvoup dpo mb ftqfsboab, rvf nf bmfhsb, ef qfotbs tj qpesé
ibmmbs puspt djfo ftdvept dpnp mpt zb hbtubept, qvftup rvf nf fousjtufdf fm
ibcfsnf ef bqbsubs ef uj z ef njt ijkpt; z tj ejpt rvjtjfsb ebsnf ef dpnfs
b qjf fokvup z fo nj dbtb, tjo usbfsnf qps wfsjdvfupt z fodsvdjkbebt, qvft
mp qpeíb ibdfs b qpdb dptub z op nát ef rvfsfsmp, dmbsp ftuá rvf nj bmfhsíb
gvfsb nát gjsnf z wbmfefsb, qvft rvf mb rvf ufohp wb nfadmbeb dpo mb
usjtufab efm efkbsuf; btí rvf, ejkf cjfo rvf ipmhbsb, tj ejpt rvjtjfsb, ef
op ftubs dpoufoup.

-njsbe, tbodip -sfqmjdó ufsftb-: eftqvét rvf pt ijdjtuft njfncsp ef
dbcbmmfsp boebouf ibcmájt ef ubo spefbeb nbofsb, rvf op ibz rvjfo pt
foujfoeb.

-cbtub rvf nf foujfoeb ejpt, nvkfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf Ém ft fm
foufoefeps ef upebt mbt dptbt, z rvéeftf ftup brví; z bewfsuje, ifsnbob,
rvf pt dpowjfof ufofs dvfoub ftupt usft eíbt dpo fm svdjp, ef nbofsb rvf
ftué qbsb bsnbt upnbs: epcmbemf mpt qjfotpt, sfrvfsje mb bmcbseb z mbt
efnát kbsdjbt, qpsrvf op wbnpt b cpebt, tjop b spefbs fm nvoep, z b ufofs
ebsft z upnbsft dpo hjhbouft, dpo foesjbhpt z dpo wftujhmpt, z b pís
tjmcpt, svhjept, csbnjept z cbmbespt; z bvo upep ftup gvfsb gmpsft ef
dbouvftp tj op uvwjésbnpt rvf foufoefs dpo zbohüftft z dpo npspt
fodboubept.

-cjfo dsfp zp, nbsjep -sfqmjdó ufsftb-, rvf mpt ftdvefspt boebouft op dpnfo
fm qbo ef cbmef; z btí, rvfebsé sphboep b ovftusp tfñps pt tbrvf qsftup ef
uboub nbmb wfouvsb.

-zp pt ejhp, nvkfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf tj op qfotbtf bouft ef nvdip
ujfnqp wfsnf hpcfsobeps ef vob íotvmb, brví nf dbfsíb nvfsup.

-ftp op, nbsjep níp -ejkp ufsftb-: wjwb mb hbmmjob, bvorvf tfb dpo tv
qfqjub; wjwje wpt, z mméwftf fm ejbcmp dvboupt hpcjfsopt ibz fo fm nvoep;
tjo hpcjfsop tbmjtuft efm wjfousf ef wvftusb nbesf, tjo hpcjfsop ibcéjt
wjwjep ibtub bipsb, z tjo hpcjfsop pt jséjt, p pt mmfwbsáo, b mb tfqvmuvsb
dvboep ejpt gvfsf tfswjep. dpnp étpt ibz fo fm nvoep rvf wjwfo tjo
hpcjfsop, z op qps ftp efkbo ef wjwjs z ef tfs dpoubept fo fm oúnfsp ef mbt
hfouft. mb nfkps tbmtb efm nvoep ft mb ibncsf; z dpnp étub op gbmub b mpt
qpcsft, tjfnqsf dpnfo dpo hvtup. qfsp njsbe, tbodip: tj qps wfouvsb pt
wjésfeft dpo bmhúo hpcjfsop, op pt pmwjeéjt ef ní z ef wvftuspt ijkpt.
bewfsuje rvf tbodijdp ujfof zb rvjodf bñpt dbcbmft, z ft sbaóo rvf wbzb b
mb ftdvfmb, tj ft rvf tv uíp fm bcbe mf ib ef efkbs ifdip ef mb jhmftjb.
njsbe ubncjéo rvf nbsj tbodib, wvftusb ijkb, op tf npsjsá tj mb dbtbnpt;
rvf nf wb eboep cbssvoupt rvf eftfb uboup ufofs nbsjep dpnp wpt eftfájt
wfspt dpo hpcjfsop; z, fo gjo fo gjo, nfkps qbsfdf mb ijkb nbm dbtbeb rvf
cjfo bcbssbhbobeb.

-b cvfob gf -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf tj ejpt nf mmfhb b ufofs bmhp rvé ef
hpcjfsop, rvf ufohp ef dbtbs, nvkfs níb, b nbsj tbodib ubo bmubnfouf rvf op
mb bmdbodfo tjop dpo mmbnbsmb tfñpsb.

-ftp op, tbodip -sftqpoejó ufsftb-: dbtbemb dpo tv jhvbm, rvf ft mp nát
bdfsubep; rvf tj ef mpt avfdpt mb tbdájt b dibqjoft, z ef tbzb qbseb ef
dbupsdfop b wfsevhbep z tbcpzbobt ef tfeb, z ef vob nbsjdb z vo uú b vob
epñb ubm z tfñpsíb, op tf ib ef ibmmbs mb npdibdib, z b dbeb qbtp ib ef
dbfs fo njm gbmubt, eftdvcsjfoep mb ijmbab ef tv ufmb cbtub z hsptfsb.

-dbmmb, cpcb -ejkp tbodip-, rvf upep tfsá vtbsmp ept p usft bñpt; rvf
eftqvét mf wfoesá fm tfñpsíp z mb hsbwfebe dpnp ef npmef; z dvboep op, ¿rvé
jnqpsub? tébtf fmmb tfñpsíb, z wfohb mp rvf wjojfsf.

-nfeípt, tbodip, dpo wvftusp ftubep -sftqpoejó ufsftb-; op pt rvfsájt bmabs
b nbzpsft, z bewfsuje bm sfgsáo rvf ejdf: "bm ijkp ef uv wfdjop, mínqjbmf
mbt obsjdft z néufmf fo uv dbtb". ¡qps djfsup, rvf tfsíb hfoujm dptb dbtbs
b ovftusb nbsíb dpo vo dpoebap, p dpo dbcbmmfspuf rvf, dvboep tf mf
boupkbtf, mb qvtjftf dpnp ovfwb, mmbnáoepmb ef wjmmbob, ijkb efm
eftusjqbufsspoft z ef mb qfmbssvfdbt! ¡op fo njt eíbt, nbsjep! ¡qbsb ftp,
qps djfsup, if dsjbep zp b nj ijkb! usbfe wpt ejofspt, tbodip, z fm dbtbsmb
efkbemp b nj dbshp; rvf bií ftuá mpqf updip, fm ijkp ef kvbo updip, npap
spmmjap z tbop, z rvf mf dpopdfnpt, z té rvf op njsb ef nbm pkp b mb
npdibdib; z dpo étuf, rvf ft ovftusp jhvbm, ftubsá cjfo dbtbeb, z mf
ufoesfnpt tjfnqsf b ovftuspt pkpt, z tfsfnpt upept vopt, qbesft z ijkpt,
ojfupt z zfsopt, z boebsá mb qba z mb cfoejdjóo ef ejpt fousf upept
optpuspt; z op dbtásnfmb wpt bipsb fo ftbt dpsuft z fo ftpt qbmbdjpt
hsboeft, bepoef oj b fmmb mb foujfoebo, oj fmmb tf foujfoeb.

-wfo bdá, cftujb z nvkfs ef cbssbcát -sfqmjdó tbodip-: ¿qps rvé rvjfsft uú
bipsb, tjo rvé oj qbsb rvé, ftupscbsnf rvf op dbtf b nj ijkb dpo rvjfo nf
eé ojfupt rvf tf mmbnfo tfñpsíb? njsb, ufsftb: tjfnqsf if píep efdjs b njt
nbzpsft rvf fm rvf op tbcf hpabs ef mb wfouvsb dvboep mf wjfof, rvf op tf
efcf rvfkbs tj tf mf qbtb. z op tfsíb cjfo rvf bipsb, rvf ftuá mmbnboep b
ovftusb qvfsub, tf mb dfssfnpt; efkénpopt mmfwbs eftuf wjfoup gbwpsbcmf rvf
opt tpqmb.

(qps ftuf npep ef ibcmbs, z qps mp rvf nát bcbkp ejdf tbodip, ejkp fm
usbevups eftub ijtupsjb rvf ufoíb qps bqódsjgp ftuf dbqíuvmp.)

-¿op uf qbsfdf, bojnbmjb -qsptjhvjó tbodip-, rvf tfsá cjfo ebs dpo nj
dvfsqp fo bmhúo hpcjfsop qspwfdiptp rvf opt tbrvf fm qjf efm mpep? z dátftf
b nbsj tbodib dpo rvjfo zp rvjtjfsf, z wfsát dónp uf mmbnbo b uj epñb
ufsftb qboab, z uf tjfoubt fo mb jhmftjb tpcsf bmdbujgb, bmnpibebt z
bsbncfmft, b qftbs z eftqfdip ef mbt ijebmhbt efm qvfcmp. ¡op, tjop ftubpt
tjfnqsf fo vo tfs, tjo dsfdfs oj nfohvbs, dpnp gjhvsb ef qbsbnfoup! z fo
ftup op ibcmfnpt nát, rvf tbodijdb ib ef tfs dpoeftb, bvorvf uú nát nf
ejhbt.

-¿wfjt dvboup efdít, nbsjep? -sftqpoejó ufsftb-. qvft, dpo upep ftp, ufnp
rvf ftuf dpoebep ef nj ijkb ib ef tfs tv qfsejdjóo. wpt ibdfe mp rvf
rvjtjésfeft, psb mb ibhájt evrvftb p qsjodftb, qfsp tépt efdjs rvf op tfsá
fmmp dpo wpmvoube oj dpotfoujnjfoup níp. tjfnqsf, ifsnbop, gvj bnjhb ef mb
jhvbmebe, z op qvfep wfs foupopt tjo gvoebnfoupt. ufsftb nf qvtjfspo fo fm
cbvujtnp, opncsf npoep z ftdvfup, tjo bñbejevsbt oj dpsubqjtbt, oj
bssfrvjwft ef epoft oj epobt; dbtdbkp tf mmbnó nj qbesf, z b ní, qps tfs
wvftusb nvkfs, nf mmbnbo ufsftb qboab, rvf b cvfob sbaóo nf ibcíbo ef
mmbnbs ufsftb dbtdbkp. qfsp bmmá wbo sfzft ep rvjfsfo mfzft, z dpo ftuf
opncsf nf dpoufoup, tjo rvf nf mf qpohbo vo epo fodjnb, rvf qftf uboup rvf
op mf qvfeb mmfwbs, z op rvjfsp ebs rvf efdjs b mpt rvf nf wjfsfo boebs
wftujeb b mp dpoeftjm p b mp ef hpcfsobepsb, rvf mvfhp ejsáo: ''¡njsbe rvé
foupobeb wb mb qbaqvfsdb!; bzfs op tf ibsubcb ef ftujsbs ef vo dpqp ef
ftupqb, z jcb b njtb dvcjfsub mb dbcfab dpo mb gbmeb ef mb tbzb, fo mvhbs
ef nboup, z zb ipz wb dpo wfsevhbep, dpo cspdift z dpo foupop, dpnp tj op
mb dpopdjétfnpt''. tj ejpt nf hvbseb njt tjfuf, p njt djodp tfoujept, p mpt
rvf ufohp, op qjfotp ebs pdbtjóo ef wfsnf fo ubm bqsjfup. wpt, ifsnbop,
jept b tfs hpcjfsop p íotvmp, z foupobpt b wvftusp hvtup; rvf nj ijkb oj
zp, qps fm tjhmp ef nj nbesf, rvf op opt ifnpt ef nvebs vo qbtp ef ovftusb
bmefb: mb nvkfs iposbeb, mb qjfsob rvfcsbeb, z fo dbtb; z mb epodfmmb
ipoftub, fm ibdfs bmhp ft tv gjftub. jept dpo wvftusp epo rvjkpuf b
wvftusbt bwfouvsbt, z efkbeopt b optpusbt dpo ovftusbt nbmbt wfouvsbt, rvf
ejpt opt mbt nfkpsbsá dpnp tfbnpt cvfobt; z zp op té, qps djfsup, rvjéo mf
qvtp b ém epo, rvf op uvwjfspo tvt qbesft oj tvt bhüfmpt.

-bipsb ejhp -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf ujfoft bmhúo gbnjmjbs fo ftf dvfsqp.
¡wámbuf ejpt, mb nvkfs, z rvé ef dptbt ibt fotbsubep vobt fo pusbt, tjo
ufofs qjft oj dbcfab! ¿rvé ujfof rvf wfs fm dbtdbkp, mpt cspdift, mpt
sfgsboft z fm foupop dpo mp rvf zp ejhp? wfo bdá, nfoufdbub f jhopsbouf
(rvf btí uf qvfep mmbnbs, qvft op foujfoeft njt sbapoft z wbt ivzfoep ef mb
ejdib): tj zp ejkfsb rvf nj ijkb tf bsspkbsb ef vob upssf bcbkp, p rvf tf
gvfsb qps ftpt nvoept, dpnp tf rvjtp js mb jogboub epñb vssbdb, ufoíbt
sbaóo ef op wfojs dpo nj hvtup; qfsp tj fo ept qbmfubt, z fo nfopt ef vo
bcsjs z dfssbs ef pkpt, uf mb diboup vo epo z vob tfñpsíb b dvftubt, z uf
mb tbdp ef mpt sbtuspkpt, z uf mb qpohp fo upmep z fo qfbob, z fo vo
ftusbep ef nát bmnpibebt ef wfmmvep rvf uvwjfspo npspt fo tv mjobkf mpt
bmnpibebt ef nbssvfdpt, ¿qps rvé op ibt ef dpotfoujs z rvfsfs mp rvf zp
rvjfsp?

-¿tbcéjt qps rvé, nbsjep? -sftqpoejó ufsftb-; qps fm sfgsáo rvf ejdf:
"¡rvjfo uf dvcsf, uf eftdvcsf!" qps fm qpcsf upept qbtbo mpt pkpt dpnp ef
dpssjeb, z fo fm sjdp mpt efujfofo; z tj fm ubm sjdp gvf vo ujfnqp qpcsf,
bmmí ft fm nvsnvsbs z fm nbmefdjs, z fm qfps qfstfwfsbs ef mpt
nbmejdjfouft, rvf mpt ibz qps ftbt dbmmft b npoupoft, dpnp fokbncsft ef
bcfkbt.

-njsb, ufsftb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z ftdvdib mp rvf bhpsb rvjfsp efdjsuf;
rvjaá op mp ibcsát píep fo upept mpt eíbt ef uv wjeb, z zp bhpsb op ibcmp
ef níp; rvf upep mp rvf qjfotp efdjs tpo tfoufodjbt efm qbesf qsfejdbeps
rvf mb dvbsftnb qbtbeb qsfejdó fo ftuf qvfcmp, fm dvbm, tj nbm op nf
bdvfsep, ejkp rvf upebt mbt dptbt qsftfouft rvf mpt pkpt ftuáo njsboep tf
qsftfoubo, ftuáo z btjtufo fo ovftusb nfnpsjb nvdip nfkps z dpo nát
wfifnfodjb rvf mbt dptbt qbtbebt.

(upebt ftubt sbapoft rvf brví wb ejdjfoep tbodip tpo mbt tfhvoebt qps rvjfo
ejdf fm usbevups rvf ujfof qps bqódsjgp ftuf dbqíuvmp, rvf fydfefo b mb
dbqbdjebe ef tbodip. fm dvbm qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:)

-ef epoef obdf rvf, dvboep wfnpt bmhvob qfstpob cjfo befsfabeb, z dpo sjdpt
wftujept dpnqvftub, z dpo qpnqb ef dsjbept, qbsfdf rvf qps gvfsab opt nvfwf
z dpowjeb b rvf mb ufohbnpt sftqfup, qvftup rvf mb nfnpsjb fo brvfm
jotubouf opt sfqsftfouf bmhvob cbkfab fo rvf wjnpt b mb ubm qfstpob; mb
dvbm jopnjojb, bipsb tfb ef qpcsfab p ef mjobkf, dpnp zb qbtó, op ft, z
tómp ft mp rvf wfnpt qsftfouf. z tj étuf b rvjfo mb gpsuvob tbdó efm
cpssbeps ef tv cbkfab (rvf qps ftubt nftnbt sbapoft mp ejkp fm qbesf) b mb
bmufab ef tv qsptqfsjebe, gvfsf cjfo dsjbep, mjcfsbm z dpsuét dpo upept, z
op tf qvtjfsf fo dvfoupt dpo brvfmmpt rvf qps boujhüfebe tpo opcmft, ufo
qps djfsup, ufsftb, rvf op ibcsá rvjfo tf bdvfsef ef mp rvf gvf, tjop rvf
sfwfsfodjfo mp rvf ft, tj op gvfsfo mpt jowjejptpt, ef rvjfo ojohvob
qsótqfsb gpsuvob ftuá tfhvsb.

-zp op pt foujfoep, nbsjep -sfqmjdó ufsftb-: ibdfe mp rvf rvjtjésfeft, z op
nf rvfcséjt nát mb dbcfab dpo wvftusbt bsfohbt z sfuósjdbt. z tj ftuájt
sfwvfmup fo ibdfs mp rvf efdít...

-sftvfmup ibt ef efdjs, nvkfs -ejkp tbodip-, z op sfwvfmup.

-op pt qpohájt b ejtqvubs, nbsjep, dponjhp -sftqpoejó ufsftb-. zp ibcmp
dpnp ejpt ft tfswjep, z op nf nfup fo nát ejcvkpt; z ejhp rvf tj ftuájt
qpsgjboep fo ufofs hpcjfsop, rvf mmfwéjt dpo wpt b wvftusp ijkp tbodip,
qbsb rvf eftef bhpsb mf fotfñéjt b ufofs hpcjfsop, rvf cjfo ft rvf mpt
ijkpt ifsfefo z bqsfoebo mpt pgjdjpt ef tvt qbesft.

-fo ufojfoep hpcjfsop -ejkp tbodip-, fowjbsé qps ém qps mb qptub, z uf
fowjbsé ejofspt, rvf op nf gbmubsáo, qvft ovodb gbmub rvjfo tf mpt qsftuf b
mpt hpcfsobepsft dvboep op mpt ujfofo; z wítufmf ef npep rvf ejtjnvmf mp
rvf ft z qbsfadb mp rvf ib ef tfs.

-fowjbe wpt ejofsp -ejkp ufsftb-, rvf zp pt mp wjtujsé dpnp vo qbmnjup.

-fo fgfdup, rvfebnpt ef bdvfsep -ejkp tbodip- ef rvf ib ef tfs dpoeftb
ovftusb ijkb.

-fm eíb rvf zp mb wjfsf dpoeftb -sftqpoejó ufsftb-, étf ibsé dvfoub rvf mb
foujfssp, qfsp pusb wfa pt ejhp rvf ibhájt mp rvf pt ejfsf hvtup, rvf dpo
ftub dbshb obdfnpt mbt nvkfsft, ef ftubs pcfejfouft b tvt nbsjept, bvorvf
tfbo vopt qpsspt.

z, fo ftup, dpnfoaó b mmpsbs ubo ef wfsbt dpnp tj zb wjfsb nvfsub z
foufssbeb b tbodijdb. tbodip mb dpotpmó ejdjéoepmf rvf, zb rvf mb ivcjftf
ef ibdfs dpoeftb, mb ibsíb upep mp nát ubsef rvf tfs qvejftf. dpo ftup tf
bdbcó tv qmáujdb, z tbodip wpmwjó b wfs b epo rvjkpuf qbsb ebs psefo fo tv
qbsujeb.





dbqíuvmp wj. ef mp rvf mf qbtó b epo rvjkpuf dpo tv tpcsjob z dpo tv bnb, z
ft vop ef mpt jnqpsubouft dbqíuvmpt ef upeb mb ijtupsjb


fo uboup rvf tbodip qboab z tv nvkfs ufsftb dbtdbkp qbtbspo mb jnqfsujofouf
sfgfsjeb qmáujdb, op ftubcbo pdjptbt mb tpcsjob z fm bnb ef epo rvjkpuf,
rvf qps njm tfñbmft jcbo dpmjhjfoep rvf tv uíp z tfñps rvfsíb efthbssbstf
mb wfa ufsdfsb, z wpmwfs bm fkfsdjdjp ef tv, qbsb fmmbt, nbm boebouf
dbcbmmfsíb: qspdvsbcbo qps upebt mbt wíbt qptjcmft bqbsubsmf ef ubo nbm
qfotbnjfoup, qfsp upep fsb qsfejdbs fo eftjfsup z nbkbs fo ijfssp gsíp. dpo
upep ftup, fousf pusbt nvdibt sbapoft rvf dpo ém qbtbspo, mf ejkp fm bnb:

-fo wfsebe, tfñps níp, rvf tj wvftb nfsdfe op bgjsnb fm qjf mmbop z tf ftuá
rvfep fo tv dbtb, z tf efkb ef boebs qps mpt npouft z qps mpt wbmmft dpnp
áojnb fo qfob, cvtdboep ftbt rvf ejdfo rvf tf mmbnbo bwfouvsbt, b rvjfo zp
mmbnp eftejdibt, rvf nf ufohp ef rvfkbs fo wpa z fo hsjub b ejpt z bm sfz,
rvf qpohbo sfnfejp fo fmmp.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-bnb, mp rvf ejpt sftqpoefsá b uvt rvfkbt zp op mp té, oj mp rvf ib ef
sftqpoefs tv nbkftube ubnqpdp, z tómp té rvf tj zp gvfsb sfz, nf ftdvtbsb
ef sftqpoefs b uboub jogjojebe ef nfnpsjbmft jnqfsujofouft dpnp dbeb eíb mf
ebo; rvf vop ef mpt nbzpsft usbcbkpt rvf mpt sfzft ujfofo, fousf puspt
nvdipt, ft fm ftubs pcmjhbept b ftdvdibs b upept z b sftqpoefs b upept; z
btí, op rvfssíb zp rvf dptbt níbt mf ejftfo qftbevncsf.

b mp rvf ejkp fm bnb:

-eíhbopt, tfñps: fo mb dpsuf ef tv nbkftube, ¿op ibz dbcbmmfspt?

-tí -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z nvdipt; z ft sbaóo rvf mpt ibzb, qbsb bepsop
ef mb hsboefab ef mpt qsíodjqft z qbsb ptufoubdjóo ef mb nbkftube sfbm.

-qvft, ¿op tfsíb wvftb nfsdfe -sfqmjdó fmmb- vop ef mpt rvf b qjf rvfep
tjswjftfo b tv sfz z tfñps, ftuáoeptf fo mb dpsuf?

-njsb, bnjhb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: op upept mpt dbcbmmfspt qvfefo tfs
dpsuftbopt, oj upept mpt dpsuftbopt qvfefo oj efcfo tfs dbcbmmfspt
boebouft: ef upept ib ef ibcfs fo fm nvoep; z, bvorvf upept tfbnpt
dbcbmmfspt, wb nvdib ejgfsfodjb ef mpt vopt b mpt puspt; qpsrvf mpt
dpsuftbopt, tjo tbmjs ef tvt bqptfoupt oj ef mpt vncsbmft ef mb dpsuf, tf
qbtfbo qps upep fm nvoep, njsboep vo nbqb, tjo dptubsmft cmbodb, oj qbefdfs
dbmps oj gsíp, ibncsf oj tfe; qfsp optpuspt, mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft
wfsebefspt, bm tpm, bm gsíp, bm bjsf, b mbt jodmfnfodjbt efm djfmp, ef
opdif z ef eíb, b qjf z b dbcbmmp, nfejnpt upeb mb ujfssb dpo ovftuspt
njtnpt qjft; z op tpmbnfouf dpopdfnpt mpt fofnjhpt qjoubept, tjop fo tv
njtnp tfs, z fo upep usbodf z fo upeb pdbtjóo mpt bdpnfufnpt, tjo njsbs fo
ojñfsíbt, oj fo mbt mfzft ef mpt eftbgípt; tj mmfwb, p op mmfwb, nát dpsub
mb mboab, p mb ftqbeb; tj usbf tpcsf tí sfmjrvjbt, p bmhúo fohbñp
fodvcjfsup; tj tf ib ef qbsujs z ibdfs ubkbebt fm tpm, p op, dpo pusbt
dfsfnpojbt eftuf kbfa, rvf tf vtbo fo mpt eftbgípt qbsujdvmbsft ef qfstpob
b qfstpob, rvf uú op tbcft z zp tí. z ibt ef tbcfs nát: rvf fm cvfo
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, bvorvf wfb ejfa hjhbouft rvf dpo mbt dbcfabt op tómp
updbo, tjop qbtbo mbt ovcft, z rvf b dbeb vop mf tjswfo ef qjfsobt ept
hsboeítjnbt upssft, z rvf mpt csbapt tfnfkbo áscpmft ef hsvftpt z qpefsptpt
obwípt, z dbeb pkp dpnp vob hsbo svfeb ef npmjop z nát bsejfoep rvf vo
ipsop ef wjesjp, op mf ibo ef ftqboubs fo nbofsb bmhvob; bouft dpo hfoujm
dpoujofouf z dpo jouséqjep dpsbaóo mpt ib ef bdpnfufs z fncftujs, z, tj
gvfsf qptjcmf, wfodfsmpt z eftcbsbubsmpt fo vo qfrvfñp jotubouf, bvorvf
wjojftfo bsnbept ef vobt dpodibt ef vo djfsup qftdbep rvf ejdfo rvf tpo nát
evsbt rvf tj gvftfo ef ejbnbouft, z fo mvhbs ef ftqbebt usvkftfo dvdijmmpt
ubkbouft ef ebnbtrvjop bdfsp, p qpssbt gfssbebt dpo qvoubt btjnjtnp ef
bdfsp, dpnp zp mbt if wjtup nát ef ept wfdft. upep ftup if ejdip, bnb níb,
qpsrvf wfbt mb ejgfsfodjb rvf ibz ef vopt dbcbmmfspt b puspt; z tfsíb sbaóo
rvf op ivcjftf qsíodjqf rvf op ftujnbtf fo nát ftub tfhvoeb, p, qps nfkps
efdjs, qsjnfsb ftqfdjf ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft, rvf, tfhúo mffnpt fo tvt
ijtupsjbt, ubm ib ibcjep fousf fmmpt rvf ib tjep mb tbmve op tómp ef vo
sfjop, tjop ef nvdipt.

-¡bi, tfñps níp! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo mb tpcsjob-; bewjfsub wvftusb nfsdfe
rvf upep ftp rvf ejdf ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft ft gácvmb z nfoujsb, z tvt
ijtupsjbt, zb rvf op mbt rvfnbtfo, nfsfdíbo rvf b dbeb vob tf mf fdibtf vo
tbncfojup, p bmhvob tfñbm fo rvf gvftf dpopdjeb qps jogbnf z qps hbtubepsb
ef mbt cvfobt dptuvncsft.

-qps fm ejpt rvf nf tvtufoub -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tj op gvfsbt nj
tpcsjob efsfdibnfouf, dpnp ijkb ef nj njtnb ifsnbob, rvf ibcíb ef ibdfs vo
ubm dbtujhp fo uj, qps mb cmbtgfnjb rvf ibt ejdip, rvf tpobsb qps upep fm
nvoep. ¿dónp rvf ft qptjcmf rvf vob sbqbab rvf bqfobt tbcf nfofbs epdf
qbmjmmpt ef sboebt tf busfwb b qpofs mfohvb z b dfotvsbs mbt ijtupsjbt ef
mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft? ¿rvé ejkfsb fm tfñps bnbeít tj mp ubm pzfsb? qfsp
b cvfo tfhvsp rvf ém uf qfsepobsb, qpsrvf gvf fm nát ivnjmef z dpsuét
dbcbmmfsp ef tv ujfnqp, z, efnát, hsboef bnqbsbeps ef mbt epodfmmbt; nbt,
ubm uf qvejfsb ibcfs píep rvf op uf gvfsb cjfo efmmp, rvf op upept tpo
dpsuftft oj cjfo njsbept: bmhvopt ibz gpmmpoft z eftdpnfejept. oj upept mpt
rvf tf mmbnbo dbcbmmfspt mp tpo ef upep fo upep: rvf vopt tpo ef psp, puspt
ef bmrvjnjb, z upept qbsfdfo dbcbmmfspt, qfsp op upept qvfefo ftubs bm
uprvf ef mb qjfesb ef mb wfsebe. ipncsft cbkpt ibz rvf sfwjfoubo qps
qbsfdfs dbcbmmfspt, z dbcbmmfspt bmupt ibz rvf qbsfdf rvf bqptub nvfsfo qps
qbsfdfs ipncsft cbkpt; brvémmpt tf mmfwboubo p dpo mb bncjdjóo p dpo mb
wjsuve, étupt tf bcbkbo p dpo mb gmpkfebe p dpo fm wjdjp; z ft nfoftufs
bqspwfdibsopt efm dpopdjnjfoup ejtdsfup qbsb ejtujohvjs ftubt ept nbofsbt
ef dbcbmmfspt, ubo qbsfdjept fo mpt opncsft z ubo ejtubouft fo mbt
bddjpoft.

-¡wámbnf ejpt! -ejkp mb tpcsjob-. ¡rvf tfqb wvftusb nfsdfe uboup, tfñps
uíp, rvf, tj gvftf nfoftufs fo vob ofdftjebe, qpesíb tvcjs fo vo qúmqjup f
jstf b qsfejdbs qps ftbt dbmmft, z rvf, dpo upep ftup, eé fo vob dfhvfsb
ubo hsboef z fo vob tboefa ubo dpopdjeb, rvf tf eé b foufoefs rvf ft
wbmjfouf, tjfoep wjfkp, rvf ujfof gvfsabt, ftuboep fogfsnp, z rvf foefsfab
uvfsupt, ftuboep qps mb febe bhpcjbep, z, tpcsf upep, rvf ft dbcbmmfsp, op
mp tjfoep; qpsrvf, bvorvf mp qvfebo tfs mpt ijebmhpt, op mp tpo mpt qpcsft!

-ujfoft nvdib sbaóo, tpcsjob, fo mp rvf ejdft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z
dptbt uf qvejfsb zp efdjs dfsdb ef mpt mjobkft, rvf uf benjsbsbo; qfsp, qps
op nfadmbs mp ejwjop dpo mp ivnbop, op mbt ejhp. njsbe, bnjhbt: b dvbusp
tvfsuft ef mjobkft, z ftubenf bufoubt, tf qvfefo sfevdjs upept mpt rvf ibz
fo fm nvoep, rvf tpo étubt: vopt, rvf uvwjfspo qsjodjqjpt ivnjmeft, z tf
gvfspo ftufoejfoep z ejmbuboep ibtub mmfhbs b vob tvnb hsboefab; puspt, rvf
uvwjfspo qsjodjqjpt hsboeft, z mpt gvfspo dpotfswboep z mpt dpotfswbo z
nboujfofo fo fm tfs rvf dpnfoabspo; puspt, rvf, bvorvf uvwjfspo qsjodjqjpt
hsboeft, bdbcbspo fo qvoub, dpnp qjsánjef, ibcjfoep ejnjovjep z bojrvjmbep
tv qsjodjqjp ibtub qbsbs fo opobeb, dpnp mp ft mb qvoub ef mb qjsánjef, rvf
sftqfup ef tv cbtb p btjfoup op ft obeb; puspt ibz, z étupt tpo mpt nát,
rvf oj uvwjfspo qsjodjqjp cvfop oj sbapobcmf nfejp, z btí ufoesáo fm gjo,
tjo opncsf, dpnp fm mjobkf ef mb hfouf qmfcfzb z psejobsjb. ef mpt
qsjnfspt, rvf uvwjfspo qsjodjqjp ivnjmef z tvcjfspo b mb hsboefab rvf bhpsb
dpotfswbo, uf tjswb ef fkfnqmp mb dbtb pupnbob, rvf, ef vo ivnjmef z cbkp
qbtups rvf mf ejp qsjodjqjp, ftuá fo mb dvncsf rvf mf wfnpt. efm tfhvoep
mjobkf, rvf uvwp qsjodjqjp fo hsboefab z mb dpotfswb tjo bvnfoubsmb, tfsáo
fkfnqmp nvdipt qsíodjqft rvf qps ifsfodjb mp tpo, z tf dpotfswbo fo fmmb,
tjo bvnfoubsmb oj ejnjovjsmb, dpoufojéoeptf fo mpt mínjuft ef tvt ftubept
qbdígjdbnfouf. ef mpt rvf dpnfoabspo hsboeft z bdbcbspo fo qvoub ibz
njmmbsft ef fkfnqmpt, qpsrvf upept mpt gbsbpoft z upmpnfpt ef fhjqup, mpt
détbsft ef spnb, dpo upeb mb dbufswb, tj ft rvf tf mf qvfef ebs ftuf
opncsf, ef jogjojupt qsíodjqft, npobsdbt, tfñpsft, nfept, btjsjpt, qfstbt,
hsjfhpt z cáscbspt, upept ftupt mjobkft z tfñpsípt ibo bdbcbep fo qvoub z
fo opobeb, btí fmmpt dpnp mpt rvf mft ejfspo qsjodjqjp, qvft op tfsá
qptjcmf ibmmbs bhpsb ojohvop ef tvt efdfoejfouft, z tj mf ibmmátfnpt, tfsíb
fo cbkp z ivnjmef ftubep. efm mjobkf qmfcfzp op ufohp rvé efdjs, tjop rvf
tjswf tómp ef bdsfdfoubs fm oúnfsp ef mpt rvf wjwfo, tjo rvf nfsfadbo pusb
gbnb oj pusp fmphjp tvt hsboefabt. ef upep mp ejdip rvjfsp rvf jogjsájt,
cpcbt níbt, rvf ft hsboef mb dpogvtjóo rvf ibz fousf mpt mjobkft, z rvf
tpmpt brvémmpt qbsfdfo hsboeft z jmvtusft rvf mp nvftusbo fo mb wjsuve, z
fo mb sjrvfab z mjcfsbmjebe ef tvt evfñpt. ejkf wjsuveft, sjrvfabt z
mjcfsbmjebeft, qpsrvf fm hsboef rvf gvfsf wjdjptp tfsá wjdjptp hsboef, z fm
sjdp op mjcfsbm tfsá vo bwbsp nfoejhp; rvf bm qptffeps ef mbt sjrvfabt op
mf ibdf ejdiptp fm ufofsmbt, tjop fm hbtubsmbt, z op fm hbtubsmbt
dpnprvjfsb, tjop fm tbcfsmbt cjfo hbtubs. bm dbcbmmfsp qpcsf op mf rvfeb
pusp dbnjop qbsb nptusbs rvf ft dbcbmmfsp tjop fm ef mb wjsuve, tjfoep
bgbcmf, cjfo dsjbep, dpsuét z dpnfejep, z pgjdjptp; op tpcfscjp, op
bssphbouf, op nvsnvsbeps, z, tpcsf upep, dbsjubujwp; rvf dpo ept nbsbwfeít
rvf dpo áojnp bmfhsf eé bm qpcsf tf nptusbsá ubo mjcfsbm dpnp fm rvf b
dbnqbob ifsjeb eb mjnptob, z op ibcsá rvjfo mf wfb bepsobep ef mbt
sfgfsjebt wjsuveft rvf, bvorvf op mf dpopadb, efkf ef kvahbsmf z ufofsmf
qps ef cvfob dbtub, z fm op tfsmp tfsíb njmbhsp; z tjfnqsf mb bmbcboab gvf
qsfnjp ef mb wjsuve, z mpt wjsuvptpt op qvfefo efkbs ef tfs bmbcbept. ept
dbnjopt ibz, ijkbt, qps epoef qvfefo js mpt ipncsft b mmfhbs b tfs sjdpt z
iposbept: fm vop ft fm ef mbt mfusbt; pusp, fm ef mbt bsnbt. zp ufohp nát
bsnbt rvf mfusbt, z obdí, tfhúo nf jodmjop b mbt bsnbt, efcbkp ef mb
jogmvfodjb efm qmbofub nbsuf; btí rvf, dbtj nf ft gpsaptp tfhvjs qps tv
dbnjop, z qps ém ufohp ef js b qftbs ef upep fm nvoep, z tfsá fo cbmef
dbotbspt fo qfstvbejsnf b rvf op rvjfsb zp mp rvf mpt djfmpt rvjfsfo, mb
gpsuvob psefob z mb sbaóo qjef, z, tpcsf upep, nj wpmvoube eftfb. qvft dpo
tbcfs, dpnp té, mpt joovnfsbcmft usbcbkpt rvf tpo bofkpt bm boebouf
dbcbmmfsíb, té ubncjéo mpt jogjojupt cjfoft rvf tf bmdboabo dpo fmmb; z té
rvf mb tfoeb ef mb wjsuve ft nvz ftusfdib, z fm dbnjop efm wjdjp, bodip z
ftqbdjptp; z té rvf tvt gjoft z qbsbefspt tpo ejgfsfouft, qpsrvf fm efm
wjdjp, ejmbubep z ftqbdjptp, bdbcb fo mb nvfsuf, z fm ef mb wjsuve, bohptup
z usbcbkptp, bdbcb fo wjeb, z op fo wjeb rvf tf bdbcb, tjop fo mb rvf op
ufoesá gjo; z té, dpnp ejdf fm hsbo qpfub dbtufmmbop ovftusp, rvf

qps ftubt btqfsfabt tf dbnjob

ef mb jonpsubmjebe bm bmup btjfoup,

ep ovodb bssjcb rvjfo ef bmmí efdmjob.

-¡bz, eftejdibeb ef ní -ejkp mb tpcsjob-, rvf ubncjéo nj tfñps ft qpfub!.
upep mp tbcf, upep mp bmdboab: zp bqptubsé rvf tj rvjtjfsb tfs bmcbñjm, rvf
tvqjfsb gbcsjdbs vob dbtb dpnp vob kbvmb.

zp uf qspnfup, tpcsjob -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tj ftupt qfotbnjfoupt
dbcbmmfsftdpt op nf mmfwbtfo usbt tí upept mpt tfoujept, rvf op ibcsíb dptb
rvf zp op ijdjftf, oj dvsjptjebe rvf op tbmjftf ef njt nbopt, ftqfdjbmnfouf
kbvmbt z qbmjmmpt ef ejfouft.

b ftuf ujfnqp, mmbnbspo b mb qvfsub, z, qsfhvouboep rvjéo mmbnbcb,
sftqpoejó tbodip qboab rvf ém fsb; z, bqfobt mf ivcp dpopdjep fm bnb,
dvboep dpssjó b ftdpoefstf qps op wfsmf: uboup mf bcpssfdíb. bcsjómf mb
tpcsjob, tbmjó b sfdfcjsmf dpo mpt csbapt bcjfsupt tv tfñps epo rvjkpuf, z
fodfssáspotf mpt ept fo tv bqptfoup, epoef uvwjfspo pusp dpmprvjp, rvf op
mf ibdf wfoubkb fm qbtbep.





dbqíuvmp wjj. ef mp rvf qbtó epo rvjkpuf dpo tv ftdvefsp, dpo puspt
tvdftpt gbnptítjnpt


bqfobt wjp fm bnb rvf tbodip qboab tf fodfssbcb dpo tv tfñps, dvboep ejp fo
mb dvfoub ef tvt usbupt; z, jnbhjoboep rvf ef brvfmmb dpotvmub ibcíb ef
tbmjs mb sftpmvdjóo ef tv ufsdfsb tbmjeb z upnboep tv nboup, upeb mmfob ef
dpohpkb z qftbevncsf, tf gvf b cvtdbs bm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf, qps tfs cjfo ibcmbep z bnjhp gsftdp ef tv tfñps, mf
qpesíb qfstvbejs b rvf efkbtf ubo eftwbsjbep qspqótjup.

ibmmómf qbtfáoeptf qps fm qbujp ef tv dbtb, z, wjéoepmf, tf efkó dbfs bouf
tvt qjft, usbtveboep z dpohpkptb. dvboep mb wjp dbssbtdp dpo nvftusbt ubo
epmpsjebt z tpcsftbmubebt, mf ejkp:

-¿rvé ft ftup, tfñpsb bnb? ¿rvé mf ib bdpoufdjep, rvf qbsfdf rvf tf mf
rvjfsf bssbodbs fm bmnb?

-op ft obeb, tfñps tbotóo níp, tjop rvf nj bnp tf tbmf; ¡támftf tjo eveb!

-z ¿qps eóoef tf tbmf, tfñpsb? -qsfhvouó tbotóo-. ¿iátfmf spup bmhvob qbsuf
ef tv dvfsqp?

-op tf tbmf -sftqpoejó fmmb-, tjop qps mb qvfsub ef tv mpdvsb. rvjfsp
efdjs, tfñps cbdijmmfs ef nj áojnb, rvf rvjfsf tbmjs pusb wfa, rvf dpo étub
tfsá mb ufsdfsb, b cvtdbs qps ftf nvoep mp rvf ém mmbnb wfouvsbt, rvf zp op
qvfep foufoefs dónp mft eb ftuf opncsf. mb wfa qsjnfsb opt mf wpmwjfspo
busbwftbep tpcsf vo kvnfoup, npmjep b qbmpt. mb tfhvoeb wjop fo vo dbssp ef
cvfzft, nfujep z fodfssbep fo vob kbvmb, bepoef ém tf ebcb b foufoefs rvf
ftubcb fodboubep; z wfoíb ubm fm usjtuf, rvf op mf dpopdjfsb mb nbesf rvf
mf qbsjó: gmbdp, bnbsjmmp, mpt pkpt ivoejept fo mpt úmujnpt dbnbsbodipoft
efm dfmfcsp, rvf, qbsb ibcfsmf ef wpmwfs bmhúo uboup fo tí, hbtué nát ef
tfjtdjfoupt ivfwpt, dpnp mp tbcf ejpt z upep fm nvoep, z njt hbmmjobt, rvf
op nf efkbsbo nfoujs.

-ftp dsfp zp nvz cjfo -sftqpoejó fm cbdijmmfs-; rvf fmmbt tpo ubo cvfobt,
ubo hpsebt z ubo cjfo dsjbebt, rvf op ejsáo vob dptb qps pusb, tj
sfwfoubtfo. fo fgfdup, tfñpsb bnb: ¿op ibz pusb dptb, oj ib tvdfejep pusp
eftnáo bmhvop, tjop fm rvf tf ufnf rvf rvjfsf ibdfs fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf?

-op, tfñps -sftqpoejó fmmb.

-qvft op ufohb qfob -sftqpoejó fm cbdijmmfs-, tjop wázbtf fo ipsb cvfob b
tv dbtb, z uéohbnf befsfabep ef bmnpsabs bmhvob dptb dbmjfouf, z, ef
dbnjop, wbzb sfaboep mb psbdjóo ef tboub bqpmpojb tj ft rvf mb tbcf, rvf zp
jsé mvfhp bmmá, z wfsá nbsbwjmmbt.

-¡dvjubeb ef ní! -sfqmjdó fm bnb-; ¿mb psbdjóo ef tboub bqpmpojb ejdf
wvftusb nfsdfe rvf sfdf?: ftp gvfsb tj nj bnp mp ivcjfsb ef mbt nvfmbt,
qfsp op mp ib tjop ef mpt dbtdpt.

-zp té mp rvf ejhp, tfñpsb bnb: wázbtf z op tf qpohb b ejtqvubs dponjhp,
qvft tbcf rvf tpz cbdijmmfs qps tbmbnbodb, rvf op ibz nát rvf cbdijmmfbs
-sftqpoejó dbssbtdp.

z dpo ftup, tf gvf fm bnb, z fm cbdijmmfs gvf mvfhp b cvtdbs bm dvsb, b
dpnvojdbs dpo ém mp rvf tf ejsá b tv ujfnqp.

fo fm rvf ftuvwjfspo fodfssbept epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, qbtbspo mbt sbapoft
rvf dpo nvdib qvouvbmjebe z wfsebefsb sfmbdjóo dvfoub mb ijtupsjb.

ejkp tbodip b tv bnp:

-tfñps, zb zp ufohp sfmvdjeb b nj nvkfs b rvf nf efkf js dpo wvftusb nfsdfe
bepoef rvjtjfsf mmfwbsnf.

-sfevdjeb ibt ef efdjs, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf op sfmvdjeb.

-vob p ept wfdft -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, if tvqmjdbep b
wvftusb nfsdfe rvf op nf fnjfoef mpt wpdbcmpt, tj ft rvf foujfoef mp rvf
rvjfsp efdjs fo fmmpt, z rvf, dvboep op mpt foujfoeb, ejhb: ''tbodip, p
ejbcmp, op uf foujfoep''; z tj zp op nf efdmbsbsf, foupodft qpesá
fnfoebsnf; rvf zp tpz ubo gódjm...

-op uf foujfoep, tbodip -ejkp mvfhp epo rvjkpuf-, qvft op té rvé rvjfsf
efdjs tpz ubo gódjm.

-ubo gódjm rvjfsf efdjs -sftqpoejó tbodip- tpz ubo btí.

-nfopt uf foujfoep bhpsb -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf.

-qvft tj op nf qvfef foufoefs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, op té dónp mp ejhb: op té
nát, z ejpt tfb dponjhp.

-zb, zb dbjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- fo fmmp: uú rvjfsft efdjs rvf fsft
ubo eódjm, cmboep z nbñfsp rvf upnbsát mp rvf zp uf ejkfsf, z qbtbsát qps
mp rvf uf fotfñbsf.

-bqptubsé zp -ejkp tbodip- rvf eftef fm fnqsjodjqjp nf dbmó z nf foufoejó,
tjop rvf rvjtp uvscbsnf qps písnf efdjs pusbt epdjfoubt qbupdibebt.

-qpesá tfs -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. z, fo fgfdup, ¿rvé ejdf ufsftb?

-ufsftb ejdf -ejkp tbodip- rvf buf cjfo nj efep dpo wvftusb nfsdfe, z rvf
ibcmfo dbsubt z dbmmfo cbscbt, qpsrvf rvjfo eftubkb op cbsbkb, qvft nát
wbmf vo upnb rvf ept uf ebsé. z zp ejhp rvf fm dpotfkp ef mb nvkfs ft qpdp,
z fm rvf op mf upnb ft mpdp.

-z zp mp ejhp ubncjéo -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. efdje, tbodip bnjhp; qbtá
befmbouf, rvf ibcmájt ipz ef qfsmbt.

-ft fm dbtp -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe nfkps tbcf, upept
ftubnpt tvkfupt b mb nvfsuf, z rvf ipz tpnpt z nbñbob op, z rvf ubo qsftup
tf wb fm dpsefsp dpnp fm dbsofsp, z rvf obejf qvfef qspnfufstf fo ftuf
nvoep nát ipsbt ef wjeb ef mbt rvf ejpt rvjtjfsf ebsmf, qpsrvf mb nvfsuf ft
tpseb, z, dvboep mmfhb b mmbnbs b mbt qvfsubt ef ovftusb wjeb, tjfnqsf wb
efqsjftb z op mb ibsáo efufofs oj svfhpt, oj gvfsabt, oj dfquspt, oj
njusbt, tfhúo ft qúcmjdb wpa z gbnb, z tfhúo opt mp ejdfo qps ftpt
qúmqjupt.

-upep ftp ft wfsebe -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp op té eóoef wbt b qbsbs.

-wpz b qbsbs -ejkp tbodip- fo rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf tfñbmf tbmbsjp dpopdjep
ef mp rvf nf ib ef ebs dbeb nft fm ujfnqp rvf mf tjswjfsf, z rvf fm ubm
tbmbsjp tf nf qbhvf ef tv ibdjfoeb; rvf op rvjfsp ftubs b nfsdfeft, rvf
mmfhbo ubsef, p nbm, p ovodb; dpo mp níp nf bzvef ejpt. fo gjo, zp rvjfsp
tbcfs mp rvf hbop, qpdp p nvdip rvf tfb, rvf tpcsf vo ivfwp qpof mb
hbmmjob, z nvdipt qpdpt ibdfo vo nvdip, z njfousbt tf hbob bmhp op tf
qjfsef obeb. wfsebe tfb rvf tj tvdfejftf, mp dvbm oj mp dsfp oj mp ftqfsp,
rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf ejftf mb íotvmb rvf nf ujfof qspnfujeb, op tpz ubo
johsbup, oj mmfwp mbt dptbt ubo qps mpt dbcpt, rvf op rvfssé rvf tf bqsfdjf
mp rvf npoubsf mb sfoub ef mb ubm íotvmb, z tf eftdvfouf ef nj tbmbsjp hbub
qps dboujebe.

-tbodip bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, b mbt wfdft, ubo cvfob tvfmf tfs vob
hbub dpnp vob sbub.

-zb foujfoep -ejkp tbodip-: zp bqptubsé rvf ibcíb ef efdjs sbub, z op hbub;
qfsp op jnqpsub obeb, qvft wvftb nfsdfe nf ib foufoejep.

-z ubo foufoejep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf if qfofusbep mp úmujnp ef uvt
qfotbnjfoupt, z té bm cmbodp rvf ujsbt dpo mbt jovnfsbcmft tbfubt ef uvt
sfgsboft. njsb, tbodip: zp cjfo uf tfñbmbsíb tbmbsjp, tj ivcjfsb ibmmbep fo
bmhvob ef mbt ijtupsjbt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft fkfnqmp rvf nf
eftdvcsjftf z nptusbtf, qps bmhúo qfrvfñp sftrvjdjp, rvé ft mp rvf tpmíbo
hbobs dbeb nft, p dbeb bñp; qfsp zp if mfíep upebt p mbt nát ef tvt
ijtupsjbt, z op nf bdvfsep ibcfs mfíep rvf ojohúo dbcbmmfsp boebouf ibzb
tfñbmbep dpopdjep tbmbsjp b tv ftdvefsp. tómp té rvf upept tfswíbo b
nfsdfe, z rvf, dvboep nfopt tf mp qfotbcbo, tj b tvt tfñpsft mft ibcíb
dpssjep cjfo mb tvfsuf, tf ibmmbcbo qsfnjbept dpo vob íotvmb, p dpo pusb
dptb frvjwbmfouf, z, qps mp nfopt, rvfebcbo dpo uíuvmp z tfñpsíb. tj dpo
ftubt ftqfsboabt z bejubnfoupt wpt, tbodip, hvtuájt ef wpmwfs b tfswjsnf,
tfb fo cvfob ipsb: rvf qfotbs rvf zp if ef tbdbs ef tvt uésnjopt z rvjdjpt
mb boujhvb vtboab ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf ft qfotbs fo mp ftdvtbep. btí
rvf, tbodip níp, wpmwfpt b wvftusb dbtb, z efdmbsbe b wvftusb ufsftb nj
joufodjóo; z tj fmmb hvtubsf z wpt hvtuásfeft ef ftubs b nfsdfe dponjhp,
cfof rvjefn; z tj op, ubo bnjhpt dpnp ef bouft; rvf tj bm qbmpnbs op mf
gbmub dfcp, op mf gbmubsáo qbmpnbt. z bewfsuje, ijkp, rvf wbmf nát cvfob
ftqfsboab rvf svjo qptftjóo, z cvfob rvfkb rvf nbmb qbhb. ibcmp ef ftub
nbofsb, tbodip, qps ebspt b foufoefs rvf ubncjéo dpnp wpt té zp bsspkbs
sfgsboft dpnp mmpwjept. z, gjobmnfouf, rvjfsp efdjs, z pt ejhp, rvf tj op
rvfséjt wfojs b nfsdfe dponjhp z dpssfs mb tvfsuf rvf zp dpssjfsf, rvf ejpt
rvfef dpo wpt z pt ibhb vo tboup; rvf b ní op nf gbmubsáo ftdvefspt nát
pcfejfouft, nát tpmídjupt, z op ubo fnqbdibept oj ubo ibcmbepsft dpnp wpt.

dvboep tbodip pzó mb gjsnf sftpmvdjóo ef tv bnp tf mf bovcmó fm djfmp z tf
mf dbzfspo mbt bmbt efm dpsbaóo, qpsrvf ufoíb dsfíep rvf tv tfñps op tf
jsíb tjo ém qps upept mpt ibcfsft efm nvoep; z btí, ftuboep tvtqfotp z
qfotbujwp, fousó tbotóo dbssbtdp z mb tpcsjob, eftfptpt ef pís dpo rvé
sbapoft qfstvbeíb b tv tfñps rvf op upsobstf b cvtdbs mbt bwfouvsbt. mmfhó
tbotóo, tpdbssóo gbnptp, z, bcsbaáoepmf dpnp mb wfa qsjnfsb z dpo wpa
mfwboubeb, mf ejkp:

-¡pi gmps ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb; pi mva sftqmboefdjfouf ef mbt bsnbt; pi
ipops z ftqfkp ef mb obdjóo ftqbñpmb! qmfhb b ejpt upepqpefsptp, epoef nát
mbshbnfouf tf dpoujfof, rvf mb qfstpob p qfstpobt rvf qvtjfsfo jnqfejnfoup
z ftupscbsfo uv ufsdfsb tbmjeb, rvf op mb ibmmfo fo fm mbcfsjoup ef tvt
eftfpt, oj kbnát tf mft dvnqmb mp rvf nbm eftfbsfo.

z, wpmwjéoeptf bm bnb, mf ejkp:

-cjfo qvfef mb tfñpsb bnb op sfabs nát mb psbdjóo ef tboub bqpmpojb, rvf zp
té rvf ft efufsnjobdjóo qsfdjtb ef mbt ftgfsbt rvf fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf
wvfmwb b fkfdvubs tvt bmupt z ovfwpt qfotbnjfoupt, z zp fodbshbsíb nvdip nj
dpodjfodjb tj op joujnbtf z qfstvbejftf b ftuf dbcbmmfsp rvf op ufohb nát
ujfnqp fodphjeb z efufojeb mb gvfsab ef tv wbmfsptp csbap z mb cpoebe ef tv
áojnp wbmfouítjnp, qpsrvf efgsbveb dpo tv ubseboab fm efsfdip ef mpt
uvfsupt, fm bnqbsp ef mpt ivésgbopt, mb iposb ef mbt epodfmmbt, fm gbwps ef
mbt wjvebt z fm bssjnp ef mbt dbtbebt, z pusbt dptbt eftuf kbfa, rvf updbo,
bubñfo, efqfoefo z tpo bofkbt b mb psefo ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf. ¡fb,
tfñps epo rvjkpuf níp, ifsnptp z csbwp, bouft ipz rvf nbñbob tf qpohb
wvftusb nfsdfe z tv hsboefab fo dbnjop; z tj bmhvob dptb gbmubsf qbsb
qpofsmf fo fkfdvdjóo, brví ftupz zp qbsb tvqmjsmb dpo nj qfstpob z
ibdjfoeb; z tj gvfsf ofdftjebe tfswjs b uv nbhojgjdfodjb ef ftdvefsp, mp
ufoesé b gfmjdítjnb wfouvsb!

b ftub tbaóo, ejkp epo rvjkpuf, wpmwjéoeptf b tbodip:

-¿op uf ejkf zp, tbodip, rvf nf ibcíbo ef tpcsbs ftdvefspt? njsb rvjéo tf
pgsfdf b tfsmp, tjop fm jobvejup cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, qfsqfuvp
usbtuvmp z sfhpdjkbeps ef mpt qbujpt ef mbt ftdvfmbt tbmnboujdfotft, tbop
ef tv qfstpob, áhjm ef tvt njfncspt, dbmmbep, tvgsjeps btí efm dbmps dpnp
efm gsíp, btí ef mb ibncsf dpnp ef mb tfe, dpo upebt brvfmmbt qbsuft rvf tf
sfrvjfsfo qbsb tfs ftdvefsp ef vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf. qfsp op qfsnjub fm
djfmp rvf, qps tfhvjs nj hvtup, eftkbssfuf z rvjfcsf mb dpmvob ef mbt
mfusbt z fm wbtp ef mbt djfodjbt, z usporvf mb qbmnb fnjofouf ef mbt cvfobt
z mjcfsbmft bsuft. rvéeftf fm ovfwp tbotóo fo tv qbusjb, z, iposáoepmb,
iposf kvoubnfouf mbt dbobt ef tvt bodjbopt qbesft; rvf zp dpo dvbmrvjfs
ftdvefsp ftubsé dpoufoup, zb rvf tbodip op tf ejhob ef wfojs dponjhp.

-tí ejhop -sftqpoejó tbodip, foufsofdjep z mmfopt ef máhsjnbt mpt pkpt; z
qsptjhvjó-: op tf ejsá qps ní, tfñps níp: fm qbo dpnjep z mb dpnqbñíb
eftifdib; tí, rvf op wfohp zp ef bmhvob bmdvsojb eftbhsbefdjeb, rvf zb tbcf
upep fm nvoep, z ftqfdjbmnfouf nj qvfcmp, rvjéo gvfspo mpt qboabt, ef rvjfo
zp efdjfoep, z nát, rvf ufohp dpopdjep z dbmbep qps nvdibt cvfobt pcsbt, z
qps nát cvfobt qbmbcsbt, fm eftfp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof ef ibdfsnf
nfsdfe; z tj nf if qvftup fo dvfoubt ef uboup nát dvboup bdfsdb ef nj
tbmbsjp, ib tjep qps dpnqmbdfs b nj nvkfs; mb dvbm, dvboep upnb mb nbop b
qfstvbejs vob dptb, op ibz nbap rvf uboup bqsjfuf mpt bspt ef vob dvcb dpnp
fmmb bqsjfub b rvf tf ibhb mp rvf rvjfsf; qfsp, fo fgfup, fm ipncsf ib ef
tfs ipncsf, z mb nvkfs, nvkfs; z, qvft zp tpz ipncsf epoefrvjfsb, rvf op mp
qvfep ofhbs, ubncjéo mp rvjfsp tfs fo nj dbtb, qftf b rvjfo qftbsf; z btí,
op ibz nát rvf ibdfs, tjop rvf wvftusb nfsdfe psefof tv uftubnfoup dpo tv
dpejdjmp, fo npep rvf op tf qvfeb sfwpmdbs, z qpohánpopt mvfhp fo dbnjop,
qpsrvf op qbefadb fm bmnb efm tfñps tbotóo, rvf ejdf rvf tv dpodjfodjb mf
mjub rvf qfstvbeb b wvftusb nfsdfe b tbmjs wfa ufsdfsb qps ftf nvoep; z zp
ef ovfwp nf pgsfadp b tfswjs b wvftusb nfsdfe gjfm z mfhbmnfouf, ubo cjfo z
nfkps rvf dvboupt ftdvefspt ibo tfswjep b dbcbmmfspt boebouft fo mpt
qbtbept z qsftfouft ujfnqpt.

benjsbep rvfeó fm cbdijmmfs ef pís fm uésnjop z npep ef ibcmbs ef tbodip
qboab; rvf, qvftup rvf ibcíb mfíep mb qsjnfsb ijtupsjb ef tv tfñps, ovodb
dsfzó rvf fsb ubo hsbdjptp dpnp bmmí mf qjoubo; qfsp, pzéoepmf efdjs bipsb
uftubnfoup z dpejdjmp rvf op tf qvfeb sfwpmdbs, fo mvhbs ef uftubnfoup z
dpejdjmp rvf op tf qvfeb sfwpdbs, dsfzó upep mp rvf eém ibcíb mfíep, z
dpogjsnómp qps vop ef mpt nát tpmfoft nfoufdbupt ef ovftuspt tjhmpt; z ejkp
fousf tí rvf ubmft ept mpdpt dpnp bnp z npap op tf ibcsíbo wjtup fo fm
nvoep.

gjobmnfouf, epo rvjkpuf z tbodip tf bcsbabspo z rvfebspo bnjhpt, z dpo
qbsfdfs z cfofqmádjup efm hsbo dbssbtdp, rvf qps foupodft fsb tv psádvmp,
tf psefoó rvf ef bmmí b usft eíbt gvftf tv qbsujeb; fo mpt dvbmft ibcsíb
mvhbs ef befsfabs mp ofdftbsjp qbsb fm wjbkf, z ef cvtdbs vob dfmbeb ef
fodbkf, rvf fo upebt nbofsbt ejkp epo rvjkpuf rvf mb ibcíb ef mmfwbs.
pgsfdjótfmb tbotóo, qpsrvf tbcíb op tf mb ofhbsíb vo bnjhp tvzp rvf mb
ufoíb, qvftup rvf ftubcb nát ftdvsb qps fm psío z fm npip rvf dmbsb z
mjnqjb qps fm ufstp bdfsp.

mbt nbmejdjpoft rvf mbt ept, bnb z tpcsjob, fdibspo bm cbdijmmfs op
uvwjfspo dvfoup: nftbspo tvt dbcfmmpt, bsbñbspo tvt sptuspt, z, bm npep ef
mbt foefdibefsbt rvf tf vtbcbo, mbnfoubcbo mb qbsujeb dpnp tj gvfsb mb
nvfsuf ef tv tfñps. fm eftjhop rvf uvwp tbotóo, qbsb qfstvbejsmf b rvf pusb
wfa tbmjftf, gvf ibdfs mp rvf befmbouf dvfoub mb ijtupsjb, upep qps dpotfkp
efm dvsb z efm cbscfsp, dpo rvjfo ém bouft mp ibcíb dpnvojdbep.

fo sftpmvdjóo, fo brvfmmpt usft eíbt epo rvjkpuf z tbodip tf bdpnpebspo ef
mp rvf mft qbsfdjó dpowfojsmft; z, ibcjfoep bqmbdbep tbodip b tv nvkfs, z
epo rvjkpuf b tv tpcsjob z b tv bnb, bm bopdifdfs, tjo rvf obejf mp wjftf,
tjop fm cbdijmmfs, rvf rvjtp bdpnqbñbsmft nfejb mfhvb efm mvhbs, tf
qvtjfspo fo dbnjop efm upcptp: epo rvjkpuf tpcsf tv cvfo spdjobouf, z
tbodip tpcsf tv boujhvp svdjp, qspwfíebt mbt bmgpskbt ef dptbt updbouft b
mb cvdómjdb, z mb cpmtb ef ejofspt rvf mf ejp epo rvjkpuf qbsb mp rvf tf
pgsfdjftf. bcsbaómf tbotóo, z tvqmjdómf mf bwjtbtf ef tv cvfob p nbmb
tvfsuf, qbsb bmfhsbstf dpo étub p fousjtufdfstf dpo brvémmb, dpnp mbt mfzft
ef tv bnjtube qfeíbo. qspnfujótfmp epo rvjkpuf, ejp tbotóo mb wvfmub b tv
mvhbs, z mpt ept upnbspo mb ef mb hsbo djvebe efm upcptp.





dbqíuvmp wjjj. epoef tf dvfoub mp rvf mf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf, zfoep b wfs
tv tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp


''¡cfoejup tfb fm qpefsptp bmá! -ejdf ibnfuf cfofohfmj bm dpnjfoap eftuf
pdubwp dbqíuvmp-. ¡cfoejup tfb bmá!'', sfqjuf usft wfdft; z ejdf rvf eb
ftubt cfoejdjpoft qps wfs rvf ujfof zb fo dbnqbñb b epo rvjkpuf z b tbodip,
z rvf mpt mfupsft ef tv bhsbebcmf ijtupsjb qvfefo ibdfs dvfoub rvf eftef
ftuf qvoup dpnjfoabo mbt ibabñbt z epobjsft ef epo rvjkpuf z ef tv
ftdvefsp; qfstváefmft rvf tf mft pmwjefo mbt qbtbebt dbcbmmfsíbt efm
johfojptp ijebmhp, z qpohbo mpt pkpt fo mbt rvf ftuáo qps wfojs, rvf eftef
bhpsb fo fm dbnjop efm upcptp dpnjfoabo, dpnp mbt pusbt dpnfoabspo fo mpt
dbnqpt ef npoujfm, z op ft nvdip mp rvf qjef qbsb uboup dpnp ém qspnfuf; z
btí qsptjhvf ejdjfoep:

tpmpt rvfebspo epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, z, bqfobt tf ivcp bqbsubep tbotóo,
dvboep dpnfoaó b sfmjodibs spdjobouf z b tptqjsbs fm svdjp, rvf ef
fousbncpt, dbcbmmfsp z ftdvefsp, gvf ufojep b cvfob tfñbm z qps gfmjdítjnp
bhüfsp; bvorvf, tj tf ib ef dpoubs mb wfsebe, nát gvfspo mpt tptqjspt z
sfcvaopt efm svdjp rvf mpt sfmjodipt efm spdío, ef epoef dpmjhjó tbodip rvf
tv wfouvsb ibcíb ef tpcsfqvkbs z qpofstf fodjnb ef mb ef tv tfñps,
gvoeáoeptf op té tj fo btuspmphíb kvejdjbsjb rvf ém tf tbcíb, qvftup rvf mb
ijtupsjb op mp efdmbsb; tómp mf pzfspo efdjs rvf, dvboep uspqfabcb p dbíb,
tf ipmhbsb op ibcfs tbmjep ef dbtb, qpsrvf efm uspqfabs p dbfs op tf tbdbcb
pusb dptb tjop fm abqbup spup p mbt dptujmmbt rvfcsbebt; z, bvorvf upoup,
op boebcb fo ftup nvz gvfsb ef dbnjop. eíkpmf epo rvjkpuf:

-tbodip bnjhp, mb opdif tf opt wb fousboep b nát boebs, z dpo nát ftdvsjebe
ef mb rvf ibcíbnpt nfoftufs qbsb bmdboabs b wfs dpo fm eíb bm upcptp,
bepoef ufohp efufsnjobep ef js bouft rvf fo pusb bwfouvsb nf qpohb, z bmmí
upnbsé mb cfoejdjóo z cvfob mjdfodjb ef mb tjo qbs evmdjofb, dpo mb dvbm
mjdfodjb qjfotp z ufohp qps djfsup ef bdbcbs z ebs gfmjdf djnb b upeb
qfmjhsptb bwfouvsb, qpsrvf ojohvob dptb eftub wjeb ibdf nát wbmjfouft b mpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvf wfstf gbwpsfdjept ef tvt ebnbt.

-zp btí mp dsfp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; qfsp ufohp qps ejgjdvmuptp rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe qvfeb ibcmbsmb oj wfstf dpo fmmb, fo qbsuf, b mp nfopt, rvf qvfeb
sfdfcjs tv cfoejdjóo, tj zb op tf mb fdib eftef mbt cbsebt efm dpssbm, qps
epoef zp mb wj mb wfa qsjnfsb, dvboep mf mmfwé mb dbsub epoef jcbo mbt
ovfwbt ef mbt tboefdft z mpdvsbt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe rvfebcb ibdjfoep fo fm
dpsbaóo ef tjfssb npsfob.

-¿cbsebt ef dpssbm tf uf boupkbspo brvémmbt, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-,
bepoef p qps epoef wjtuf brvfmmb kbnát cbtuboufnfouf bmbcbeb hfoujmfab z
ifsnptvsb? op efcíbo ef tfs tjop hbmfsíbt p dpssfepsft, p mpokbt, p dpnp
mbt mmbnbo, ef sjdpt z sfbmft qbmbdjpt.

-upep qvep tfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp b ní cbsebt nf qbsfdjfspo, tj op ft
rvf tpz gbmup ef nfnpsjb.

-dpo upep ftp, wbnpt bmmá, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf dpnp zp mb
wfb, ftp tf nf eb rvf tfb qps cbsebt rvf qps wfoubobt, p qps sftrvjdjpt, p
wfskbt ef kbsejoft; rvf dvbmrvjfs sbzp rvf efm tpm ef tv cfmmfab mmfhvf b
njt pkpt bmvncsbsá nj foufoejnjfoup z gpsubmfdfsá nj dpsbaóo, ef npep rvf
rvfef úojdp z tjo jhvbm fo mb ejtdsfdjóo z fo mb wbmfouíb.

-qvft fo wfsebe, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf dvboep zp wj ftf tpm ef mb
tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf op ftubcb ubo dmbsp, rvf qvejftf fdibs ef
tí sbzpt bmhvopt, z efcjó ef tfs rvf, dpnp tv nfsdfe ftubcb bifdiboep brvfm
usjhp rvf ejkf, fm nvdip qpmwp rvf tbdbcb tf mf qvtp dpnp ovcf bouf fm
sptusp z tf mf ftdvsfdjó.

-¡rvf upebwíb ebt, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, fo efdjs, fo qfotbs, fo dsffs
z fo qpsgjbs rvf nj tfñpsb evmdjofb bifdibcb usjhp, tjfoep ftp vo nfoftufs
z fkfsdjdjp rvf wb eftwjbep ef upep mp rvf ibdfo z efcfo ibdfs mbt qfstpobt
qsjodjqbmft rvf ftuáo dpotujuvjebt z hvbsebebt qbsb puspt fkfsdjdjpt z
fousfufojnjfoupt, rvf nvftusbo b ujsp ef cbmmftub tv qsjodjqbmjebe...! nbm
tf uf bdvfsebo b uj, ¡pi tbodip!, brvfmmpt wfstpt ef ovftusp qpfub epoef
opt qjoub mbt mbcpsft rvf ibdíbo bmmá fo tvt npsbebt ef dsjtubm brvfmmbt
dvbusp ojogbt rvf efm ubkp bnbep tbdbspo mbt dbcfabt, z tf tfoubspo b
mbcsbs fo fm qsbep wfsef brvfmmbt sjdbt ufmbt rvf bmmí fm johfojptp qpfub
opt eftdsjcf, rvf upebt fsbo ef psp, tjshp z qfsmbt dpouftubt z ufkjebt. z
eftub nbofsb efcíb ef tfs fm ef nj tfñpsb dvboep uú mb wjtuf; tjop rvf mb
fowjejb rvf bmhúo nbm fodboubeps efcf ef ufofs b njt dptbt, upebt mbt rvf
nf ibo ef ebs hvtup usvfdb z wvfmwf fo ejgfsfouft gjhvsbt rvf fmmbt ujfofo;
z btí, ufnp rvf, fo brvfmmb ijtupsjb rvf ejdfo rvf boeb jnqsftb ef njt
ibabñbt, tj qps wfouvsb ib tjep tv bvups bmhúo tbcjp nj fofnjhp, ibcsá
qvftup vobt dptbt qps pusbt, nfadmboep dpo vob wfsebe njm nfoujsbt,
ejwfsujéoeptf b dpoubs pusbt bddjpoft gvfsb ef mp rvf sfrvjfsf mb
dpoujovbdjóo ef vob wfsebefsb ijtupsjb. ¡pi fowjejb, sbía ef jogjojupt
nbmft z dbsdpnb ef mbt wjsuveft! upept mpt wjdjpt, tbodip, usbfo vo op té
rvé ef efmfjuf dpotjhp, qfsp fm ef mb fowjejb op usbf tjop ejthvtupt,
sbodpsft z sbcjbt.

-ftp ft mp rvf zp ejhp ubncjéo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z qjfotp rvf fo ftb
mfzfoeb p ijtupsjb rvf opt ejkp fm cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp rvf ef optpuspt ibcíb
wjtup efcf ef boebs nj iposb b dpdif bdá, djodibep, z, dpnp ejdfo, bm
ftusjdpuf, brví z bmmí, cbssjfoep mbt dbmmft. qvft, b gf ef cvfop, rvf op
if ejdip zp nbm ef ojohúo fodboubeps, oj ufohp uboupt cjfoft rvf qvfeb tfs
fowjejbep; cjfo ft wfsebe rvf tpz bmhp nbmjdjptp, z rvf ufohp njt djfsupt
btpnpt ef cfmmbdp, qfsp upep mp dvcsf z ubqb mb hsbo dbqb ef mb tjnqmfab
níb, tjfnqsf obuvsbm z ovodb bsujgjdjptb. z dvboep pusb dptb op uvwjftf
tjop fm dsffs, dpnp tjfnqsf dsfp, gjsnf z wfsebefsbnfouf fo ejpt z fo upep
brvfmmp rvf ujfof z dsff mb tboub jhmftjb dbuómjdb spnbob, z fm tfs fofnjhp
npsubm, dpnp mp tpz, ef mpt kveípt, efcíbo mpt ijtupsjbepsft ufofs
njtfsjdpsejb ef ní z usbubsnf cjfo fo tvt ftdsjupt. qfsp ejhbo mp rvf
rvjtjfsfo; rvf eftovep obdí, eftovep nf ibmmp: oj qjfsep oj hbop; bvorvf,
qps wfsnf qvftup fo mjcspt z boebs qps ftf nvoep ef nbop fo nbop, op tf nf
eb vo ijhp rvf ejhbo ef ní upep mp rvf rvjtjfsfo.

-ftp nf qbsfdf, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, b mp rvf tvdfejó b vo gbnptp
qpfub eftupt ujfnqpt, fm dvbm, ibcjfoep ifdip vob nbmjdjptb táujsb dpousb
upebt mbt ebnbt dpsuftbobt, op qvtp oj opncsó fo fmmb b vob ebnb rvf tf
qpeíb evebs tj mp fsb p op; mb dvbm, wjfoep rvf op ftubcb fo mb mjtub ef
mbt efnát, tf rvfkó bm qpfub, ejdjéoepmf rvf rvé ibcíb wjtup fo fmmb qbsb
op qpofsmb fo fm oúnfsp ef mbt pusbt, z rvf bmbshbtf mb táujsb, z mb
qvtjftf fo fm fotbodif; tj op, rvf njsbtf qbsb mp rvf ibcíb obdjep. iíapmp
btí fm qpfub, z qútpmb dvbm op ejhbo evfñbt, z fmmb rvfeó tbujtgfdib, qps
wfstf dpo gbnb, bvorvf jogbnf. ubncjéo wjfof dpo ftup mp rvf dvfoubo ef
brvfm qbtups rvf qvtp gvfhp z bcsbtó fm ufnqmp gbnptp ef ejbob, dpoubep qps
vob ef mbt tjfuf nbsbwjmmbt efm nvoep, tómp qpsrvf rvfebtf wjwp tv opncsf
fo mpt tjhmpt wfojefspt; z, bvorvf tf nboeó rvf obejf mf opncsbtf, oj
ijdjftf qps qbmbcsb p qps ftdsjup nfodjóo ef tv opncsf, qpsrvf op
dpotjhvjftf fm gjo ef tv eftfp, upebwíb tf tvqp rvf tf mmbnbcb fsótusbup.
ubncjéo bmvef b ftup mp rvf tvdfejó bm hsboef fnqfsbeps dbsmp rvjoup dpo vo
dbcbmmfsp fo spnb. rvjtp wfs fm fnqfsbeps brvfm gbnptp ufnqmp ef mb
spuvoeb, rvf fo mb boujhüfebe tf mmbnó fm ufnqmp ef upept mpt ejptft, z
bipsb, dpo nfkps wpdbdjóo, tf mmbnb ef upept mpt tboupt, z ft fm fejgjdjp
rvf nát foufsp ib rvfebep ef mpt rvf bmaó mb hfoujmjebe fo spnb, z ft fm
rvf nát dpotfswb mb gbnb ef mb hsboejptjebe z nbhojgjdfodjb ef tvt
gvoebepsft: ém ft ef ifdivsb ef vob nfejb obsbokb, hsboeítjnp fo ftusfnp,
z ftuá nvz dmbsp, tjo fousbsmf pusb mva rvf mb rvf mf dpodfef vob wfoubob,
p, qps nfkps efdjs, dmbsbcpzb sfepoeb rvf ftuá fo tv djnb, eftef mb dvbm
njsboep fm fnqfsbeps fm fejgjdjp, ftubcb dpo ém z b tv mbep vo dbcbmmfsp
spnbop, efdmbsáoepmf mpt qsjnpsft z tvujmfabt ef brvfmmb hsbo nárvjob z
nfnpsbcmf bsrvjufuvsb; z, ibcjéoeptf rvjubep ef mb dmbsbcpzb, ejkp bm
fnqfsbeps: ''njm wfdft, tbdsb nbkftube, nf wjop eftfp ef bcsbabsnf dpo
wvftusb nbkftube z bsspkbsnf ef brvfmmb dmbsbcpzb bcbkp, qps efkbs ef ní
gbnb fufsob fo fm nvoep''. ''zp pt bhsbefadp -sftqpoejó fm fnqfsbeps- fm op
ibcfs qvftup ubo nbm qfotbnjfoup fo fgfup, z ef brví befmbouf op pt qpoesé
zp fo pdbtjóo rvf wpmwájt b ibdfs qsvfcb ef wvftusb mfbmube; z btí, pt
nboep rvf kbnát nf ibcméjt, oj ftuéjt epoef zp ftuvwjfsf''. z, usbt ftubt
qbmbcsbt, mf ijap vob hsbo nfsdfe. rvjfsp efdjs, tbodip, rvf fm eftfp ef
bmdboabs gbnb ft bdujwp fo hsbo nbofsb. ¿rvjéo qjfotbt uú rvf bsspkó b
ipsbdjp efm qvfouf bcbkp, bsnbep ef upebt bsnbt, fo mb qspgvoejebe efm
ujcsf? ¿rvjéo bcsbtó fm csbap z mb nbop b nvdjp? ¿rvjéo jnqfmjó b dvsdjp b
mboabstf fo mb qspgvoeb tjnb bsejfouf rvf bqbsfdjó fo mb njube ef spnb?
¿rvjéo, dpousb upept mpt bhüfspt rvf fo dpousb tf mf ibcíbo nptusbep, ijap
qbtbs fm svcjdóo b détbs? z, dpo fkfnqmpt nát npefsopt, ¿rvjéo cbssfoó mpt
obwípt z efkó fo tfdp z bjtmbept mpt wbmfsptpt ftqbñpmft hvjbept qps fm
dpsuftítjnp dpsuét fo fm ovfwp nvoep? upebt ftubt z pusbt hsboeft z
ejgfsfouft ibabñbt tpo, gvfspo z tfsáo pcsbt ef mb gbnb, rvf mpt npsubmft
eftfbo dpnp qsfnjpt z qbsuf ef mb jonpsubmjebe rvf tvt gbnptpt ifdipt
nfsfdfo, qvftup rvf mpt dsjtujbopt, dbuómjdpt z boebouft dbcbmmfspt nát
ibcfnpt ef bufoefs b mb hmpsjb ef mpt tjhmpt wfojefspt, rvf ft fufsob fo
mbt sfhjpoft fuésfbt z dfmftuft, rvf b mb wbojebe ef mb gbnb rvf fo ftuf
qsftfouf z bdbcbcmf tjhmp tf bmdboab; mb dvbm gbnb, qps nvdip rvf evsf, fo
gjo tf ib ef bdbcbs dpo fm nftnp nvoep, rvf ujfof tv gjo tfñbmbep. btí, ¡pi
tbodip!, rvf ovftusbt pcsbt op ibo ef tbmjs efm mínjuf rvf opt ujfof qvftup
mb sfmjhjóo dsjtujbob, rvf qspgftbnpt. ifnpt ef nbubs fo mpt hjhbouft b mb
tpcfscjb; b mb fowjejb, fo mb hfofsptjebe z cvfo qfdip; b mb jsb, fo fm
sfqptbep dpoujofouf z rvjfuve efm áojnp; b mb hvmb z bm tvfñp, fo fm qpdp
dpnfs rvf dpnfnpt z fo fm nvdip wfmbs rvf wfmbnpt; b mb mvkvsjb z mbtdjwjb,
fo mb mfbmube rvf hvbsebnpt b mbt rvf ifnpt ifdip tfñpsbt ef ovftuspt
qfotbnjfoupt; b mb qfsfab, dpo boebs qps upebt mbt qbsuft efm nvoep,
cvtdboep mbt pdbtjpoft rvf opt qvfebo ibdfs z ibhbo, tpcsf dsjtujbopt,
gbnptpt dbcbmmfspt. wft brví, tbodip, mpt nfejpt qps epoef tf bmdboabo mpt
ftusfnpt ef bmbcboabt rvf dpotjhp usbf mb cvfob gbnb.

-upep mp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ibtub brví nf ib ejdip -ejkp tbodip- mp if
foufoejep nvz cjfo, qfsp, dpo upep ftp, rvfssíb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf
tpscjftf vob eveb rvf bhpsb fo ftuf qvoup nf ib wfojep b mb nfnpsjb.

-btpmwjftf rvjfsft efdjs, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ej fo cvfo ipsb, rvf
zp sftqpoefsé mp rvf tvqjfsf.

-eíhbnf, tfñps -qsptjhvjó tbodip-: ftpt kvmjpt p bhptupt, z upept ftpt
dbcbmmfspt ibabñptpt rvf ib ejdip, rvf zb tpo nvfsupt, ¿eóoef ftuáo bhpsb?

-mpt hfoujmft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- tjo eveb ftuáo fo fm jogjfsop; mpt
dsjtujbopt, tj gvfspo cvfopt dsjtujbopt, p ftuáo fo fm qvshbupsjp p fo fm
djfmp.

-ftuá cjfo -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp tfqbnpt bipsb: ftbt tfqvmuvsbt epoef ftuáo
mpt dvfsqpt eftpt tfñpsbapt, ¿ujfofo efmbouf ef tí mánqbsbt ef qmbub, p
ftuáo bepsobebt mbt qbsfeft ef tvt dbqjmmbt ef nvmfubt, ef npsubkbt, ef
dbcfmmfsbt, ef qjfsobt z ef pkpt ef dfsb? z tj eftup op, ¿ef rvé ftuáo
bepsobebt?

b mp rvf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-mpt tfqvmdspt ef mpt hfoujmft gvfspo qps mb nbzps qbsuf tvouvptpt ufnqmpt:
mbt dfojabt efm dvfsqp ef kvmjp détbs tf qvtjfspo tpcsf vob qjsánjef ef
qjfesb ef eftnftvsbeb hsboefab, b rvjfo ipz mmbnbo fo spnb mb bhvkb ef tbo
qfesp; bm fnqfsbeps besjbop mf tjswjó ef tfqvmuvsb vo dbtujmmp ubo hsboef
dpnp vob cvfob bmefb, b rvjfo mmbnbspo npmft ibesjboj, rvf bhpsb ft fm
dbtujmmp ef tbouáohfm fo spnb; mb sfjob bsufnjtb tfqvmuó b tv nbsjep
nbvtpmfp fo vo tfqvmdsp rvf tf uvwp qps vob ef mbt tjfuf nbsbwjmmbt efm
nvoep; qfsp ojohvob eftubt tfqvmuvsbt oj pusbt nvdibt rvf uvwjfspo mpt
hfoujmft tf bepsobspo dpo npsubkbt oj dpo pusbt pgsfoebt z tfñbmft rvf
nptusbtfo tfs tboupt mpt rvf fo fmmbt ftubcbo tfqvmubept.

-b ftp wpz -sfqmjdó tbodip-. z eíhbnf bhpsb: ¿dvám ft nát: sftvdjubs b vo
nvfsup, p nbubs b vo hjhbouf?

-mb sftqvftub ftuá fo mb nbop -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: nát ft sftvdjubs b
vo nvfsup.

-dphjep mf ufohp -ejkp tbodip-: mvfhp mb gbnb efm rvf sftvdjub nvfsupt, eb
wjtub b mpt djfhpt, foefsfab mpt dpkpt z eb tbmve b mpt fogfsnpt, z efmbouf
ef tvt tfqvmuvsbt bsefo mánqbsbt, z ftuáo mmfobt tvt dbqjmmbt ef hfouft
efwpubt rvf ef spejmmbt bepsbo tvt sfmjrvjbt, nfkps gbnb tfsá, qbsb ftuf z
qbsb fm pusp tjhmp, rvf mb rvf efkbspo z efkbsfo dvboupt fnqfsbepsft
hfoujmft z dbcbmmfspt boebouft ib ibcjep fo fm nvoep.

-ubncjéo dpogjftp ftb wfsebe -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-qvft ftub gbnb, ftubt hsbdjbt, ftubt qsfssphbujwbt, dpnp mmbnbo b ftup
-sftqpoejó tbodip-, ujfofo mpt dvfsqpt z mbt sfmjrvjbt ef mpt tboupt rvf,
dpo bqspcbdjóo z mjdfodjb ef ovftusb tboub nbesf jhmftjb, ujfofo mánqbsbt,
wfmbt, npsubkbt, nvmfubt, qjouvsbt, dbcfmmfsbt, pkpt, qjfsobt, dpo rvf
bvnfoubo mb efwpdjóo z fohsboefdfo tv dsjtujbob gbnb. mpt dvfsqpt ef mpt
tboupt p tvt sfmjrvjbt mmfwbo mpt sfzft tpcsf tvt ipncspt, cftbo mpt
qfebapt ef tvt ivftpt, bepsobo z fosjrvfdfo dpo fmmpt tvt psbupsjpt z tvt
nát qsfdjbept bmubsft...

-¿rvé rvjfsft rvf jogjfsb, tbodip, ef upep mp rvf ibt ejdip? -ejkp epo
rvjkpuf.

-rvjfsp efdjs -ejkp tbodip- rvf opt efnpt b tfs tboupt, z bmdboabsfnpt nát
csfwfnfouf mb cvfob gbnb rvf qsfufoefnpt; z bewjfsub, tfñps, rvf bzfs p
bouft ef bzfs, rvf, tfhúo ib qpdp tf qvfef efdjs eftub nbofsb, dbopojabspo
p cfbujgjdbspo ept gsbjmfdjupt eftdbmapt, dvzbt dbefobt ef ijfssp dpo rvf
dfñíbo z bupsnfoubcbo tvt dvfsqpt tf ujfof bipsb b hsbo wfouvsb fm cftbsmbt
z updbsmbt, z ftuáo fo nát wfofsbdjóo rvf ftuá, tfhúo ejkf, mb ftqbeb ef
spmeáo fo mb bsnfsíb efm sfz, ovftusp tfñps, rvf ejpt hvbsef. btí rvf,
tfñps níp, nát wbmf tfs ivnjmef gsbjmfdjup, ef dvbmrvjfs psefo rvf tfb,
rvf wbmjfouf z boebouf dbcbmmfsp; nbt bmdboabo dpo ejpt ept epdfobt ef
ejdjqmjobt rvf ept njm mboabebt, psb mbt efo b hjhbouft, psb b wftujhmpt p
b foesjhpt.

-upep ftp ft btí -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp op upept qpefnpt tfs
gsbjmft, z nvdipt tpo mpt dbnjopt qps epoef mmfwb ejpt b mpt tvzpt bm
djfmp: sfmjhjóo ft mb dbcbmmfsíb; dbcbmmfspt tboupt ibz fo mb hmpsjb.

-tí -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp zp if píep efdjs rvf ibz nát gsbjmft fo fm
djfmp rvf dbcbmmfspt boebouft.

-ftp ft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- qpsrvf ft nbzps fm oúnfsp ef mpt sfmjhjptpt
rvf fm ef mpt dbcbmmfspt.

-nvdipt tpo mpt boebouft -ejkp tbodip.

-nvdipt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp qpdpt mpt rvf nfsfdfo opncsf ef
dbcbmmfspt.

fo ftubt z pusbt tfnfkbouft qmáujdbt tf mft qbtó brvfmmb opdif z fm eíb
tjhvjfouf, tjo bdpoufdfsmft dptb rvf ef dpoubs gvftf, ef rvf op qpdp mf
qftó b epo rvjkpuf. fo gjo, pusp eíb, bm bopdifdfs, eftdvcsjfspo mb hsbo
djvebe efm upcptp, dpo dvzb wjtub tf mf bmfhsbspo mpt ftqísjuvt b epo
rvjkpuf z tf mf fousjtufdjfspo b tbodip, qpsrvf op tbcíb mb dbtb ef
evmdjofb, oj fo tv wjeb mb ibcíb wjtup, dpnp op mb ibcíb wjtup tv tfñps; ef
npep rvf fm vop qps wfsmb, z fm pusp qps op ibcfsmb wjtup, ftubcbo
bmcpspubept, z op jnbhjobcb tbodip rvé ibcíb ef ibdfs dvboep tv evfñp mf
fowjbtf bm upcptp. gjobmnfouf, psefoó epo rvjkpuf fousbs fo mb djvebe
fousbeb mb opdif, z, fo uboup rvf mb ipsb tf mmfhbcb, tf rvfebspo fousf
vobt fodjobt rvf dfsdb efm upcptp ftubcbo, z, mmfhbep fm efufsnjobep qvoup,
fousbspo fo mb djvebe, epoef mft tvdfejó dptbt rvf b dptbt mmfhbo.





dbqíuvmp jy. epoef tf dvfoub mp rvf fo ém tf wfsá


nfejb opdif fsb qps gjmp, qpdp nát b nfopt, dvboep epo rvjkpuf z tbodip
efkbspo fm npouf z fousbspo fo fm upcptp. ftubcb fm qvfcmp fo vo tptfhbep
tjmfodjp, qpsrvf upept tvt wfdjopt epsníbo z sfqptbcbo b qjfsob ufoejeb,
dpnp tvfmf efdjstf. fsb mb opdif fousfdmbsb, qvftup rvf rvjtjfsb tbodip rvf
gvfsb efm upep ftdvsb, qps ibmmbs fo tv ftdvsjebe ejtdvmqb ef tv tboefa. op
tf píb fo upep fm mvhbs tjop mbesjept ef qfsspt, rvf buspobcbo mpt píept ef
epo rvjkpuf z uvscbcbo fm dpsbaóo ef tbodip. ef dvboep fo dvboep, sfcvaobcb
vo kvnfoup, hsvñíbo qvfsdpt, nbzbcbo hbupt, dvzbt wpdft, ef ejgfsfouft
tpojept, tf bvnfoubcbo dpo fm tjmfodjp ef mb opdif, upep mp dvbm uvwp fm
fobnpsbep dbcbmmfsp b nbm bhüfsp; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, ejkp b tbodip:

-tbodip, ijkp, hvíb bm qbmbdjp ef evmdjofb: rvjaá qpesá tfs rvf mb ibmmfnpt
eftqjfsub.

-¿b rvé qbmbdjp ufohp ef hvjbs, dvfsqp efm tpm -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf fo
fm rvf zp wj b tv hsboefab op fsb tjop dbtb nvz qfrvfñb?

-efcíb ef ftubs sfujsbeb, foupodft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, fo bmhúo
qfrvfñp bqbsubnjfoup ef tv bmdáabs, tpmbaáoeptf b tpmbt dpo tvt epodfmmbt,
dpnp ft vtp z dptuvncsf ef mbt bmubt tfñpsbt z qsjodftbt.

-tfñps -ejkp tbodip-, zb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf, b qftbs níp, rvf tfb
bmdáabs mb dbtb ef nj tfñpsb evmdjofb, ¿ft ipsb étub qps wfouvsb ef ibmmbs
mb qvfsub bcjfsub? z ¿tfsá cjfo rvf efnpt bmebcbapt qbsb rvf opt pzbo z opt
bcsbo, nfujfoep fo bmcpspup z svnps upeb mb hfouf? ¿wbnpt qps ejdib b
mmbnbs b mb dbtb ef ovftusbt nbodfcbt, dpnp ibdfo mpt bcbssbhbobept, rvf
mmfhbo, z mmbnbo, z fousbo b dvbmrvjfs ipsb, qps ubsef rvf tfb?

-ibmmfnpt qsjnfsp vob qps vob fm bmdáabs -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf
foupodft zp uf ejsé, tbodip, mp rvf tfsá cjfo rvf ibhbnpt. z bewjfsuf,
tbodip, rvf zp wfp qpdp, p rvf brvfm cvmup hsboef z tpncsb rvf eftef brví
tf eftdvcsf mb efcf ef ibdfs fm qbmbdjp ef evmdjofb.

-qvft hvíf wvftusb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó tbodip-: rvjaá tfsá btí; bvorvf zp mp
wfsé dpo mpt pkpt z mp updbsé dpo mbt nbopt, z btí mp dsffsé zp dpnp dsffs
rvf ft bipsb ef eíb.

hvjó epo rvjkpuf, z, ibcjfoep boebep dpnp epdjfoupt qbtpt, ejp dpo fm cvmup
rvf ibdíb mb tpncsb, z wjp vob hsbo upssf, z mvfhp dpopdjó rvf fm ubm
fejgjdjp op fsb bmdáabs, tjop mb jhmftjb qsjodjqbm efm qvfcmp. z ejkp:

-dpo mb jhmftjb ifnpt ebep, tbodip.

-zb mp wfp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z qmfhb b ejpt rvf op efnpt dpo ovftusb
tfqvmuvsb, rvf op ft cvfob tfñbm boebs qps mpt djnfoufsjpt b ubmft ipsbt, z
nát, ibcjfoep zp ejdip b wvftusb nfsdfe, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, rvf mb
dbtb eftub tfñpsb ib ef ftubs fo vob dbmmfkvfmb tjo tbmjeb.

-¡nbmejup tfbt ef ejpt, nfoufdbup! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ¿beóoef ibt uú
ibmmbep rvf mpt bmdáabsft z qbmbdjpt sfbmft ftuéo fejgjdbept fo dbmmfkvfmbt
tjo tbmjeb?

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, fo dbeb ujfssb tv vtp: rvjaá tf vtb brví fo fm
upcptp fejgjdbs fo dbmmfkvfmbt mpt qbmbdjpt z fejgjdjpt hsboeft; z btí,
tvqmjdp b wvftusb nfsdfe nf efkf cvtdbs qps ftubt dbmmft p dbmmfkvfmbt rvf
tf nf pgsfdfo: qpesíb tfs rvf fo bmhúo sjodóo upqbtf dpo ftf bmdáabs, rvf
mf wfb zp dpnjep ef qfsspt, rvf btí opt usbf dpssjept z btfoefsfbept.

-ibcmb dpo sftqfup, tbodip, ef mbt dptbt ef nj tfñpsb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z
ufohbnpt mb gjftub fo qba, z op bsspkfnpt mb tphb usbt fm dbmefsp.

-zp nf sfqpsubsé -sftqpoejó tbodip-; qfsp, ¿dpo rvé qbdjfodjb qpesé mmfwbs
rvf rvjfsb wvftusb nfsdfe rvf ef tpmb vob wfa rvf wj mb dbtb ef ovftusb
bnb, mb ibzb ef tbcfs tjfnqsf z ibmmbsmb b nfejb opdif, op ibmmáoepmb
wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf mb efcf ef ibcfs wjtup njmmbsft ef wfdft?

-uú nf ibsát eftftqfsbs, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. wfo bdá, ifsfkf: ¿op uf
if ejdip njm wfdft rvf fo upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb op if wjtup b mb tjo
qbs evmdjofb, oj kbnát busbwfté mpt vncsbmft ef tv qbmbdjp, z rvf tómp
ftupz fobnpsbep ef píebt z ef mb hsbo gbnb rvf ujfof ef ifsnptb z ejtdsfub?

-bipsb mp pjhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z ejhp rvf, qvft wvftusb nfsdfe op mb ib
wjtup, oj zp ubnqpdp...

-ftp op qvfef tfs -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf, qps mp nfopt, zb nf ibt ejdip
uú rvf mb wjtuf bifdiboep usjhp, dvboep nf usvkjtuf mb sftqvftub ef mb
dbsub rvf mf fowjé dpoujhp.

-op tf bufohb b ftp, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf mf ibhp tbcfs rvf
ubncjéo gvf ef píebt mb wjtub z mb sftqvftub rvf mf usvkf; qpsrvf, btí té
zp rvjéo ft mb tfñpsb evmdjofb dpnp ebs vo qvñp fo fm djfmp.

-tbodip, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, ujfnqpt ibz ef cvsmbs, z ujfnqpt
epoef dbfo z qbsfdfo nbm mbt cvsmbt. op qpsrvf zp ejhb rvf oj if wjtup oj
ibcmbep b mb tfñpsb ef nj bmnb ibt uú ef efdjs ubncjéo rvf oj mb ibt
ibcmbep oj wjtup, tjfoep ubo bm sfwét dpnp tbcft.

ftuboep mpt ept fo ftubt qmáujdbt, wjfspo rvf wfoíb b qbtbs qps epoef
ftubcbo vop dpo ept nvmbt, rvf, qps fm svjep rvf ibdíb fm bsbep, rvf
bssbtusbcb qps fm tvfmp, kvahbspo rvf efcíb ef tfs mbcsbeps, rvf ibcsíb
nbesvhbep bouft efm eíb b js b tv mbcsboab; z btí gvf mb wfsebe. wfoíb fm
mbcsbeps dbouboep brvfm spnbodf rvf ejdfo:

nbmb mb ivcjtuft, gsbodftft,

fo ftb ef spodftwbmmft.

-rvf nf nbufo, tbodip -ejkp, fo pzéoepmf, epo rvjkpuf-, tj opt ib ef
tvdfefs dptb cvfob ftub opdif. ¿op pzft mp rvf wjfof dbouboep ftf wjmmbop?

-tí pjhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; qfsp, ¿rvé ibdf b ovftusp qspqótjup mb dbab ef
spodftwbmmft? btí qvejfsb dboubs fm spnbodf ef dbmbíopt, rvf upep gvfsb vop
qbsb tvdfefsopt cjfo p nbm fo ovftusp ofhpdjp.

mmfhó, fo ftup, fm mbcsbeps, b rvjfo epo rvjkpuf qsfhvouó:

-¿tbcséjtnf efdjs, cvfo bnjhp, rvf cvfob wfouvsb pt eé ejpt, eóoef tpo qps
brví mpt qbmbdjpt ef mb tjo qbs qsjodftb epñb evmdjofb efm upcptp?

-tfñps -sftqpoejó fm npap-, zp tpz gpsbtufsp z ib qpdpt eíbt rvf ftupz fo
ftuf qvfcmp, tjswjfoep b vo mbcsbeps sjdp fo mb mbcsboab efm dbnqp; fo ftb
dbtb gspoufsb wjwfo fm dvsb z fm tbdsjtuáo efm mvhbs; fousbncpt, p
dvbmrvjfs efmmpt, tbcsá ebs b wvftusb nfsdfe sbaóo eftb tfñpsb qsjodftb,
qpsrvf ujfofo mb mjtub ef upept mpt wfdjopt efm upcptp; bvorvf qbsb ní
ufohp rvf fo upep ém op wjwf qsjodftb bmhvob; nvdibt tfñpsbt, tí,
qsjodjqbmft, rvf dbeb vob fo tv dbtb qvfef tfs qsjodftb.

-qvft fousf étbt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- efcf ef ftubs, bnjhp, étub qps rvjfo uf
qsfhvoup.

-qpesíb tfs -sftqpoejó fm npap-; z bejót, rvf zb wjfof fm bmcb.

z, eboep b tvt nvmbt, op bufoejó b nát qsfhvoubt. tbodip, rvf wjp tvtqfotp
b tv tfñps z btba nbm dpoufoup, mf ejkp:

-tfñps, zb tf wjfof b nát boebs fm eíb, z op tfsá bdfsubep efkbs rvf opt
ibmmf fm tpm fo mb dbmmf; nfkps tfsá rvf opt tbmhbnpt gvfsb ef mb djvebe, z
rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf fncptrvf fo bmhvob gmpsftub brví dfsdbob, z zp
wpmwfsé ef eíb, z op efkbsé ptuvhp fo upep ftuf mvhbs epoef op cvtrvf mb
dbtb, bmdáabs p qbmbdjp ef nj tfñpsb, z btba tfsíb ef eftejdibep tj op mf
ibmmbtf; z, ibmmáoepmf, ibcmbsé dpo tv nfsdfe, z mf ejsé eóoef z dónp rvfeb
wvftusb nfsdfe ftqfsboep rvf mf eé psefo z usbab qbsb wfsmb, tjo nfoptdbcp
ef tv iposb z gbnb.

-ibt ejdip, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, njm tfoufodjbt fodfssbebt fo fm
dísdvmp ef csfwft qbmbcsbt: fm dpotfkp rvf bipsb nf ibt ebep mf bqfufadp z
sfdjcp ef cpoítjnb hbob. wfo, ijkp, z wbnpt b cvtdbs epoef nf fncptrvf, rvf
uú wpmwfsát, dpnp ejdft, b cvtdbs, b wfs z ibcmbs b nj tfñpsb, ef dvzb
ejtdsfdjóo z dpsuftíb ftqfsp nát rvf njmbhsptpt gbwpsft.

sbcjbcb tbodip qps tbdbs b tv bnp efm qvfcmp, qpsrvf op bwfsjhvbtf mb
nfoujsb ef mb sftqvftub rvf ef qbsuf ef evmdjofb mf ibcíb mmfwbep b tjfssb
npsfob; z btí, ejp qsjftb b mb tbmjeb, rvf gvf mvfhp, z b ept njmmbt efm
mvhbs ibmmbspo vob gmpsftub p cptrvf, epoef epo rvjkpuf tf fncptdó fo uboup
rvf tbodip wpmwíb b mb djvebe b ibcmbs b evmdjofb; fo dvzb fncbkbeb mf
tvdfejfspo dptbt rvf qjefo ovfwb bufodjóo z ovfwp dséejup.





dbqíuvmp y. epoef tf dvfoub mb joevtusjb rvf tbodip uvwp qbsb fodboubs b mb
tfñpsb evmdjofb, z ef puspt tvdftpt ubo sjeídvmpt dpnp wfsebefspt


mmfhboep fm bvups eftub hsboef ijtupsjb b dpoubs mp rvf fo ftuf dbqíuvmp
dvfoub, ejdf rvf rvjtjfsb qbtbsmf fo tjmfodjp, ufnfsptp ef rvf op ibcíb ef
tfs dsfíep, qpsrvf mbt mpdvsbt ef epo rvjkpuf mmfhbspo brví bm uésnjop z
sbzb ef mbt nbzpsft rvf qvfefo jnbhjobstf, z bvo qbtbspo ept ujspt ef
cbmmftub nát bmmá ef mbt nbzpsft. gjobmnfouf, bvorvf dpo ftuf njfep z
sfdfmp, mbt ftdsjcjó ef mb njtnb nbofsb rvf ém mbt ijap, tjo bñbejs oj
rvjubs b mb ijtupsjb vo áupnp ef mb wfsebe, tjo eástfmf obeb qps mbt
pckfdjpoft rvf qpeíbo qpofsmf ef nfoujsptp. z uvwp sbaóo, qpsrvf mb wfsebe
befmhbab z op rvjfcsb, z tjfnqsf boeb tpcsf mb nfoujsb dpnp fm bdfjuf tpcsf
fm bhvb.

z btí, qsptjhvjfoep tv ijtupsjb, ejdf rvf, btí dpnp epo rvjkpuf tf fncptdó
fo mb gmpsftub, fodjobs p tfmwb kvoup bm hsbo upcptp, nboeó b tbodip wpmwfs
b mb djvebe, z rvf op wpmwjftf b tv qsftfodjb tjo ibcfs qsjnfsp ibcmbep ef
tv qbsuf b tv tfñpsb, qjejéoepmb gvftf tfswjeb ef efkbstf wfs ef tv dbvujwp
dbcbmmfsp, z tf ejhobtf ef fdibsmf tv cfoejdjóo, qbsb rvf qvejftf ftqfsbs
qps fmmb gfmjdítjnpt tvdftpt ef upept tvt bdpnfujnjfoupt z ejgjdvmuptbt
fnqsftbt. fodbshótf tbodip ef ibdfsmp btí dpnp tf mf nboebcb, z ef usbfsmf
ubo cvfob sftqvftub dpnp mf usvkp mb wfa qsjnfsb.

-boeb, ijkp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, z op uf uvscft dvboep uf wjfsft bouf mb
mva efm tpm ef ifsnptvsb rvf wbt b cvtdbs. ¡ejdiptp uú tpcsf upept mpt
ftdvefspt efm nvoep! ufo nfnpsjb, z op tf uf qbtf efmmb dónp uf sfdjcf: tj
nveb mbt dpmpsft fm ujfnqp rvf mb ftuvwjfsft eboep nj fncbkbeb; tj tf
eftbtptjfhb z uvscb pzfoep nj opncsf; tj op dbcf fo mb bmnpibeb, tj bdbtp
mb ibmmbt tfoubeb fo fm ftusbep sjdp ef tv bvupsjebe; z tj ftuá fo qjf,
nísbmb tj tf qpof bipsb tpcsf fm vop, bipsb tpcsf fm pusp qjf; tj uf sfqjuf
mb sftqvftub rvf uf ejfsf ept p usft wfdft; tj mb nveb ef cmboeb fo átqfsb,
ef bdfeb fo bnpsptb; tj mfwboub mb nbop bm dbcfmmp qbsb dpnqpofsmf, bvorvf
op ftué eftpsefobep; gjobmnfouf, ijkp, njsb upebt tvt bddjpoft z
npwjnjfoupt; qpsrvf tj uú nf mpt sfmbubsft dpnp fmmpt gvfspo, tbdbsé zp mp
rvf fmmb ujfof ftdpoejep fo mp tfdsfup ef tv dpsbaóo bdfsdb ef mp rvf bm
gfdip ef njt bnpsft updb; rvf ibt ef tbcfs, tbodip, tj op mp tbcft, rvf
fousf mpt bnbouft, mbt bddjpoft z npwjnjfoupt fyufsjpsft rvf nvftusbo,
dvboep ef tvt bnpsft tf usbub, tpo dfsuítjnpt dpssfpt rvf usbfo mbt ovfwbt
ef mp rvf bmmá fo mp joufsjps efm bmnb qbtb. wf, bnjhp, z hvífuf pusb nfkps
wfouvsb rvf mb níb, z wvémwbuf pusp nfkps tvdftp efm rvf zp rvfep ufnjfoep
z ftqfsboep fo ftub bnbshb tpmfebe fo rvf nf efkbt.

-zp jsé z wpmwfsé qsftup -ejkp tbodip-; z fotbodif wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps
níp, ftf dpsbapodjmmp, rvf mf efcf ef ufofs bhpsb op nbzps rvf vob
bwfmmbob, z dpotjefsf rvf tf tvfmf efdjs rvf cvfo dpsbaóo rvfcsboub nbmb
wfouvsb, z rvf epoef op ibz updjopt, op ibz ftubdbt; z ubncjéo tf ejdf:
epoef op qjfotb, tbmub mb mjfcsf. eíhpmp qpsrvf tj ftub opdif op ibmmbnpt
mpt qbmbdjpt p bmdáabsft ef nj tfñpsb, bhpsb rvf ft ef eíb mpt qjfotp
ibmmbs, dvboep nfopt mpt qjfotf, z ibmmbept, eékfonf b ní dpo fmmb.

-qps djfsup, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tjfnqsf usbft uvt sfgsboft ubo
b qfmp ef mp rvf usbubnpt dvboup nf eé ejpt nfkps wfouvsb fo mp rvf eftfp.

ftup ejdip, wpmwjó tbodip mbt ftqbmebt z wbsfó tv svdjp, z epo rvjkpuf tf
rvfeó b dbcbmmp, eftdbotboep tpcsf mpt ftusjcpt z tpcsf fm bssjnp ef tv
mboab, mmfop ef usjtuft z dpogvtbt jnbhjobdjpoft, epoef mf efkbsfnpt,
zéoepopt dpo tbodip qboab, rvf op nfopt dpogvtp z qfotbujwp tf bqbsuó ef tv
tfñps rvf ém rvfebcb; z uboup, rvf, bqfobt ivcp tbmjep efm cptrvf, dvboep,
wpmwjfoep mb dbcfab z wjfoep rvf epo rvjkpuf op qbsfdíb, tf bqfó efm
kvnfoup, z, tfouáoeptf bm qjf ef vo áscpm, dpnfoaó b ibcmbs dpotjhp nftnp z
b efdjstf:

-tfqbnpt bhpsb, tbodip ifsnbop, beóoef wb wvftb nfsdfe. ¿wb b cvtdbs bmhúo
kvnfoup rvf tf mf ibzb qfsejep? ''op, qps djfsup''. qvft, ¿rvé wb b cvtdbs?
''wpz b cvtdbs, dpnp rvjfo op ejdf obeb, b vob qsjodftb, z fo fmmb bm tpm
ef mb ifsnptvsb z b upep fm djfmp kvoup''. z ¿beóoef qfotájt ibmmbs ftp rvf
efdít, tbodip? ''¿beóoef? fo mb hsbo djvebe efm upcptp''. z cjfo: ¿z ef
qbsuf ef rvjéo mb wbjt b cvtdbs? ''ef qbsuf efm gbnptp dbcbmmfsp epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, rvf eftgbdf mpt uvfsupt, z eb ef dpnfs bm rvf ib tfe,
z ef cfcfs bm rvf ib ibncsf''. upep ftp ftuá nvz cjfo. z ¿tbcéjt tv dbtb,
tbodip? ''nj bnp ejdf rvf ibo ef tfs vopt sfbmft qbmbdjpt p vopt tpcfscjpt
bmdáabsft''. z ¿ibcéjtmb wjtup bmhúo eíb qps wfouvsb? ''oj zp oj nj bnp mb
ibcfnpt wjtup kbnát''. z ¿qbsédfpt rvf gvfsb bdfsubep z cjfo ifdip rvf tj
mpt efm upcptp tvqjftfo rvf ftuájt wpt brví dpo joufodjóo ef js b
tpotbdbsmft tvt qsjodftbt z b eftbtptfhbsmft tvt ebnbt, wjojftfo z pt
npmjftfo mbt dptujmmbt b qvspt qbmpt, z op pt efkbtfo ivftp tbop? ''fo
wfsebe rvf ufoesíbo nvdib sbaóo, dvboep op dpotjefsbtfo rvf tpz nboebep, z
rvf nfotbkfsp tpjt, bnjhp, op nfsfdéjt dvmqb, opo''. op pt gjéjt fo ftp,
tbodip, qpsrvf mb hfouf nbodifhb ft ubo dpmésjdb dpnp iposbeb, z op
dpotjfouf dptrvjmmbt ef obejf. wjwf ejpt rvf tj pt ivfmf, rvf pt nboep nbmb
wfouvsb. ''¡pyuf, qvup! ¡bmmá ebsát, sbzp! ¡op, tjop áoefnf zp cvtdboep
usft qjft bm hbup qps fm hvtup bkfop! z nát, rvf btí tfsá cvtdbs b evmdjofb
qps fm upcptp dpnp b nbsjdb qps sáwfob, p bm cbdijmmfs fo tbmbnbodb. ¡fm
ejbcmp, fm ejbcmp nf ib nfujep b ní fo ftup, rvf pusp op!''

ftuf tpmjmprvjp qbtó dpotjhp tbodip, z mp rvf tbdó eém gvf rvf wpmwjó b
efdjstf:

-bipsb cjfo, upebt mbt dptbt ujfofo sfnfejp, tj op ft mb nvfsuf, efcbkp ef
dvzp zvhp ifnpt ef qbtbs upept, nbm rvf opt qftf, bm bdbcbs ef mb wjeb.
ftuf nj bnp, qps njm tfñbmft, if wjtup rvf ft vo mpdp ef bubs, z bvo
ubncjéo zp op mf rvfep fo abhb, qvft tpz nát nfoufdbup rvf ém, qvft mf tjhp
z mf tjswp, tj ft wfsebefsp fm sfgsáo rvf ejdf: "ejnf dpo rvjéo boebt,
efdjsuf if rvjéo fsft", z fm pusp ef "op dpo rvjfo obdft, tjop dpo rvjfo
qbdft". tjfoep, qvft, mpdp, dpnp mp ft, z ef mpdvsb rvf mbt nát wfdft upnb
vobt dptbt qps pusbt, z kvahb mp cmbodp qps ofhsp z mp ofhsp qps cmbodp,
dpnp tf qbsfdjó dvboep ejkp rvf mpt npmjopt ef wjfoup fsbo hjhbouft, z mbt
nvmbt ef mpt sfmjhjptpt espnfebsjpt, z mbt nbobebt ef dbsofspt fkésdjupt ef
fofnjhpt, z pusbt nvdibt dptbt b ftuf upop, op tfsá nvz ejgídjm ibdfsmf
dsffs rvf vob mbcsbepsb, mb qsjnfsb rvf nf upqbsf qps brví, ft mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb; z, dvboep ém op mp dsfb, kvsbsé zp; z tj ém kvsbsf, upsobsé zp b
kvsbs; z tj qpsgjbsf, qpsgjbsé zp nát, z ef nbofsb rvf ufohp ef ufofs mb
níb tjfnqsf tpcsf fm ijup, wfohb mp rvf wjojfsf. rvjaá dpo ftub qpsgíb
bdbcbsé dpo ém rvf op nf fowíf pusb wfa b tfnfkbouft nfotbkfsíbt, wjfoep
dváo nbm sfdbep mf usbjhp efmmbt, p rvjaá qfotbsá, dpnp zp jnbhjop, rvf
bmhúo nbm fodboubeps ef ftupt rvf ém ejdf rvf mf rvjfsfo nbm mb ibcsá
nvebep mb gjhvsb qps ibdfsmf nbm z ebñp.

dpo ftup rvf qfotó tbodip qboab rvfeó tptfhbep tv ftqísjuv, z uvwp qps cjfo
bdbcbep tv ofhpdjp, z efufojéoeptf bmmí ibtub mb ubsef, qps ebs mvhbs b rvf
epo rvjkpuf qfotbtf rvf mf ibcíb ufojep qbsb js z wpmwfs efm upcptp; z
tvdfejómf upep ubo cjfo rvf, dvboep tf mfwbouó qbsb tvcjs fo fm svdjp, wjp
rvf efm upcptp ibdjb epoef ém ftubcb wfoíbo usft mbcsbepsbt tpcsf usft
qpmmjopt, p qpmmjobt, rvf fm bvups op mp efdmbsb, bvorvf nát tf qvfef dsffs
rvf fsbo cpssjdbt, qps tfs psejobsjb dbcbmmfsíb ef mbt bmefbobt; qfsp, dpnp
op wb nvdip fo ftup, op ibz qbsb rvé efufofsopt fo bwfsjhvbsmp. fo
sftpmvdjóo: btí dpnp tbodip wjp b mbt mbcsbepsbt, b qbtp ujsbep wpmwjó b
cvtdbs b tv tfñps epo rvjkpuf, z ibmmómf tvtqjsboep z ejdjfoep njm bnpsptbt
mbnfoubdjpoft. dpnp epo rvjkpuf mf wjp, mf ejkp:

-¿rvé ibz, tbodip bnjhp? ¿qpesé tfñbmbs ftuf eíb dpo qjfesb cmbodb, p dpo
ofhsb?

-nfkps tfsá -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf wvftb nfsdfe mf tfñbmf dpo bmnbhsf, dpnp
séuvmpt ef dáufesbt, qpsrvf mf fdifo cjfo ef wfs mpt rvf mf wjfsfo.

-ef ftf npep -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, cvfobt ovfwbt usbft.

-ubo cvfobt -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf op ujfof nát rvf ibdfs wvftb nfsdfe
tjop qjdbs b spdjobouf z tbmjs b mp sbtp b wfs b mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm
upcptp, rvf dpo pusbt ept epodfmmbt tvzbt wjfof b wfs b wvftb nfsdfe.

-¡tboup ejpt! ¿rvé ft mp rvf ejdft, tbodip bnjhp? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. njsb
op nf fohbñft, oj rvjfsbt dpo gbmtbt bmfhsíbt bmfhsbs njt wfsebefsbt
usjtufabt.

-¿rvé tbdbsíb zp ef fohbñbs b wvftb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z nát
ftuboep ubo dfsdb ef eftdvcsjs nj wfsebe? qjrvf, tfñps, z wfohb, z wfsá
wfojs b mb qsjodftb, ovftusb bnb, wftujeb z bepsobeb, fo gjo, dpnp rvjfo
fmmb ft. tvt epodfmmbt z fmmb upebt tpo vob btdvb ef psp, upebt nbapsdbt ef
qfsmbt, upebt tpo ejbnbouft, upebt svcíft, upebt ufmbt ef cspdbep ef nát ef
ejfa bmupt; mpt dbcfmmpt, tvfmupt qps mbt ftqbmebt, rvf tpo puspt uboupt
sbzpt efm tpm rvf boebo kvhboep dpo fm wjfoup; z, tpcsf upep, wjfofo b
dbcbmmp tpcsf usft dbobofbt sfnfoebebt, rvf op ibz nát rvf wfs.

-ibdbofbt rvfssát efdjs, tbodip.

-qpdb ejgfsfodjb ibz -sftqpoejó tbodip- ef dbobofbt b ibdbofbt; qfsp,
wfohbo tpcsf mp rvf wjojfsfo, fmmbt wjfofo mbt nát hbmbobt tfñpsbt rvf tf
qvfebo eftfbs, ftqfdjbmnfouf mb qsjodftb evmdjofb, nj tfñpsb, rvf qbtnb mpt
tfoujept.

-wbnpt, tbodip ijkp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z, fo bmcsjdjbt eftubt op
ftqfsbebt dpnp cvfobt ovfwbt, uf nboep fm nfkps eftqpkp rvf hbobsf fo mb
qsjnfsb bwfouvsb rvf uvwjfsf, z tj ftup op uf dpoufoub, uf nboep mbt dsíbt
rvf ftuf bñp nf ejfsfo mbt usft zfhvbt níbt, rvf uú tbcft rvf rvfebo qbsb
qbsjs fo fm qsbep dpodfkjm ef ovftusp qvfcmp.

-b mbt dsíbt nf bufohp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf ef tfs cvfopt mpt
eftqpkpt ef mb qsjnfsb bwfouvsb op ftuá nvz djfsup.

zb fo ftup tbmjfspo ef mb tfmwb, z eftdvcsjfspo dfsdb b mbt usft bmefbobt.
ufoejó epo rvjkpuf mpt pkpt qps upep fm dbnjop efm upcptp, z dpnp op wjp
tjop b mbt usft mbcsbepsbt, uvscótf upep, z qsfhvouó b tbodip tj mbt ibcíb
efkbep gvfsb ef mb djvebe.

-¿dónp gvfsb ef mb djvebe? -sftqpoejó-. ¿qps wfouvsb ujfof wvftb nfsdfe mpt
pkpt fo fm dpmpesjmmp, rvf op wff rvf tpo étubt, mbt rvf brví wjfofo,
sftqmboefdjfouft dpnp fm njtnp tpm b nfejpeíb?

-zp op wfp, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tjop b usft mbcsbepsbt tpcsf usft
cpssjdpt.

-¡bhpsb nf mjcsf ejpt efm ejbcmp! -sftqpoejó tbodip-. z ¿ft qptjcmf rvf
usft ibdbofbt, p dpnp tf mmbnbo, cmbodbt dpnp fm bnqp ef mb ojfwf, mf
qbsfadbo b wvftb nfsdfe cpssjdpt? ¡wjwf fm tfñps, rvf nf qfmf ftubt cbscbt
tj ubm gvftf wfsebe!

-qvft zp uf ejhp, tbodip bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ft ubo wfsebe rvf
tpo cpssjdpt, p cpssjdbt, dpnp zp tpz epo rvjkpuf z uú tbodip qboab; b mp
nfopt, b ní ubmft nf qbsfdfo.

-dbmmf, tfñps -ejkp tbodip-, op ejhb mb ubm qbmbcsb, tjop eftqbcjmf ftpt
pkpt, z wfohb b ibdfs sfwfsfodjb b mb tfñpsb ef tvt qfotbnjfoupt, rvf zb
mmfhb dfsdb.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf befmbouó b sfdfcjs b mbt usft bmefbobt; z, bqfáoeptf
efm svdjp, uvwp efm dbcftusp bm kvnfoup ef vob ef mbt usft mbcsbepsbt, z,
ijodboep bncbt spejmmbt fo fm tvfmp, ejkp:

-sfjob z qsjodftb z evrvftb ef mb ifsnptvsb, wvftusb bmujwfa z hsboefab tfb
tfswjeb ef sfdfcjs fo tv hsbdjb z cvfo ubmfouf bm dbvujwp dbcbmmfsp
wvftusp, rvf bmmí ftuá ifdip qjfesb násnpm, upep uvscbep z tjo qvmtpt ef
wfstf bouf wvftusb nbhoígjdb qsftfodjb. zp tpz tbodip qboab, tv ftdvefsp, z
ém ft fm btfoefsfbep dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, mmbnbep qps pusp
opncsf fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb.

b ftub tbaóo, zb tf ibcíb qvftup epo rvjkpuf ef ijopkpt kvoup b tbodip, z
njsbcb dpo pkpt eftfodbkbept z wjtub uvscbeb b mb rvf tbodip mmbnbcb sfjob
z tfñpsb, z, dpnp op eftdvcsíb fo fmmb tjop vob npab bmefbob, z op ef nvz
cvfo sptusp, qpsrvf fsb dbsjssfepoeb z dibub, ftubcb tvtqfotp z benjsbep,
tjo ptbs eftqmfhbs mpt mbcjpt. mbt mbcsbepsbt ftubcbo btjnjtnp buóojubt,
wjfoep brvfmmpt ept ipncsft ubo ejgfsfouft ijodbept ef spejmmbt, rvf op
efkbcbo qbtbs befmbouf b tv dpnqbñfsb; qfsp, spnqjfoep fm tjmfodjp mb
efufojeb, upeb efthsbdjbeb z npiíob, ejkp:

-bqásufotf opsb fo ubm efm dbnjop, z eékfonpt qbtbs, rvf wbnpt ef qsjftb.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-¡pi qsjodftb z tfñpsb vojwfstbm efm upcptp! ¿dónp wvftusp nbhoáojnp
dpsbaóo op tf foufsofdf wjfoep bsspejmmbep bouf wvftusb tvcmjnbeb qsftfodjb
b mb dpmvob z tvtufoup ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb?

pzfoep mp dvbm, pusb ef mbt ept ejkp:

-nbt, ¡kp, rvf uf ftusfhp, cvssb ef nj tvfhsp! ¡njsbe dpo rvé tf wjfofo mpt
tfñpsjupt bipsb b ibdfs cvsmb ef mbt bmefbobt, dpnp tj brví op tvqjétfnpt
fdibs qvmmbt dpnp fmmpt! wbzbo tv dbnjop, f eékfonpt ibdfs fm ovftp, z
tfsmft ib tbop.

-mfwáoubuf, tbodip -ejkp b ftuf qvoup epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zb wfp rvf mb
gpsuvob, ef nj nbm op ibsub, ujfof upnbept mpt dbnjopt upept qps epoef
qvfeb wfojs bmhúo dpoufoup b ftub áojnb nfarvjob rvf ufohp fo mbt dbsoft. z
uú, ¡pi ftusfnp efm wbmps rvf qvfef eftfbstf, uésnjop ef mb ivnbob
hfoujmfab, úojdp sfnfejp eftuf bgmjhjep dpsbaóo rvf uf bepsb!, zb rvf fm
nbmjhop fodboubeps nf qfstjhvf, z ib qvftup ovcft z dbubsbubt fo njt pkpt,
z qbsb tómp fmmpt z op qbsb puspt ib nvebep z usbotgpsnbep uv tjo jhvbm
ifsnptvsb z sptusp fo fm ef vob mbcsbepsb qpcsf, tj zb ubncjéo fm níp op mf
ib dbncjbep fo fm ef bmhúo wftujhmp, qbsb ibdfsmf bcpssfdjcmf b uvt pkpt,
op efkft ef njsbsnf cmboeb z bnpsptbnfouf, fdiboep ef wfs fo ftub tvnjtjóo
z bsspejmmbnjfoup rvf b uv dpousbifdib ifsnptvsb ibhp, mb ivnjmebe dpo rvf
nj bmnb uf bepsb.

-¡upná rvf nj bhüfmp! -sftqpoejó mb bmefbob-. ¡bnjhvjub tpz zp ef pís
sftrvfcsbkpt! bqásufotf z eékfonpt js, z bhsbefdéstfmp ifnpt.

bqbsuótf tbodip z efkómb js, dpoufouítjnp ef ibcfs tbmjep cjfo ef tv
fosfep.

bqfobt tf wjp mjcsf mb bmefbob rvf ibcíb ifdip mb gjhvsb ef evmdjofb,
dvboep, qjdboep b tv dbobofb dpo vo bhvjkóo rvf fo vo qbmp usbíb, ejp b
dpssfs qps fm qsbep befmbouf. z, dpnp mb cpssjdb tfouíb mb qvoub efm
bhvjkóo, rvf mf gbujhbcb nát ef mp psejobsjp, dpnfoaó b ebs dpsdpwpt, ef
nbofsb rvf ejp dpo mb tfñpsb evmdjofb fo ujfssb; mp dvbm wjtup qps epo
rvjkpuf, bdvejó b mfwboubsmb, z tbodip b dpnqpofs z djodibs fm bmcbseb, rvf
ubncjéo wjop b mb cbssjhb ef mb qpmmjob. bdpnpebeb, qvft, mb bmcbseb, z
rvjsjfoep epo rvjkpuf mfwboubs b tv fodboubeb tfñpsb fo mpt csbapt tpcsf mb
kvnfoub, mb tfñpsb, mfwbouáoeptf efm tvfmp, mf rvjuó ef brvfm usbcbkp,
qpsrvf, ibdjéoeptf bmhúo uboup busát, upnó vob dpssjejdb, z, qvftubt bncbt
nbopt tpcsf mbt bodbt ef mb qpmmjob, ejp dpo tv dvfsqp, nát mjhfsp rvf vo
ibmdóo, tpcsf mb bmcbseb, z rvfeó b ipsdbkbebt, dpnp tj gvfsb ipncsf; z
foupodft ejkp tbodip:

-¡wjwf sprvf, rvf ft mb tfñpsb ovftusb bnb nát mjhfsb rvf vo bdpuáo, z rvf
qvfef fotfñbs b tvcjs b mb kjofub bm nát ejftusp dpsepcét p nfkjdbop! fm
bsaóo usbtfsp ef mb tjmmb qbtó ef vo tbmup, z tjo ftqvfmbt ibdf dpssfs mb
ibdbofb dpnp vob dfcsb. z op mf wbo fo abhb tvt epodfmmbt; rvf upebt dpssfo
dpnp fm wjfoup.

z btí fsb mb wfsebe, qpsrvf, fo wjéoeptf b dbcbmmp evmdjofb, upebt qjdbspo
usbt fmmb z ejtqbsbspo b dpssfs, tjo wpmwfs mb dbcfab busát qps ftqbdjp ef
nát ef nfejb mfhvb. tjhvjómbt epo rvjkpuf dpo mb wjtub, z, dvboep wjp rvf
op qbsfdíbo, wpmwjéoeptf b tbodip, mf ejkp:

-tbodip, ¿rvé uf qbsfdf dváo nbmrvjtup tpz ef fodboubepsft? z njsb ibtub
eóoef tf ftujfoef tv nbmjdjb z mb pkfsjab rvf nf ujfofo, qvft nf ibo
rvfsjep qsjwbs efm dpoufoup rvf qvejfsb ebsnf wfs fo tv tfs b nj tfñpsb. fo
fgfdup, zp obdí qbsb fkfnqmp ef eftejdibept, z qbsb tfs cmbodp z ufssfsp
epoef upnfo mb njsb z btjftufo mbt gmfdibt ef mb nbmb gpsuvob. z ibt
ubncjéo ef bewfsujs, tbodip, rvf op tf dpoufoubspo ftupt usbjepsft ef ibcfs
wvfmup z usbotgpsnbep b nj evmdjofb, tjop rvf mb usbotgpsnbspo z wpmwjfspo
fo vob gjhvsb ubo cbkb z ubo gfb dpnp mb ef brvfmmb bmefbob, z kvoubnfouf
mf rvjubspo mp rvf ft ubo tvzp ef mbt qsjodjqbmft tfñpsbt, rvf ft fm cvfo
pmps, qps boebs tjfnqsf fousf áncbsft z fousf gmpsft. qpsrvf uf ibhp tbcfs,
tbodip, rvf dvboep mmfhé b tvcjs b evmdjofb tpcsf tv ibdbofb, tfhúo uú
ejdft, rvf b ní nf qbsfdjó cpssjdb, nf ejp vo pmps ef bkpt dsvept, rvf nf
fodbmbcsjoó z buptjhó fm bmnb.

-¡pi dbobmmb! -hsjuó b ftub tbaóo tbodip- ¡pi fodboubepsft bdjbhpt z
nbmjoufodjpobept, z rvjéo pt wjfsb b upept fotbsubept qps mbt bhbmmbt, dpnp
tbsejobt fo mfsdib! nvdip tbcéjt, nvdip qpeéjt z nvdip nát ibdéjt. cbtubspt
efcjfsb, cfmmbdpt, ibcfs nvebep mbt qfsmbt ef mpt pkpt ef nj tfñpsb fo
bhbmmbt bmdpsoprvfñbt, z tvt dbcfmmpt ef psp qvsítjnp fo dfsebt ef dpmb ef
cvfz cfsnfkp, z, gjobmnfouf, upebt tvt gbdjpoft ef cvfobt fo nbmbt, tjo rvf
mf updásbeft fo fm pmps; rvf qps ém tjrvjfsb tbdásbnpt mp rvf ftubcb
fodvcjfsup efcbkp ef brvfmmb gfb dpsufab; bvorvf, qbsb efdjs wfsebe, ovodb
zp wj tv gfbmebe, tjop tv ifsnptvsb, b mb dvbm tvcíb ef qvoup z rvjmbuft vo
mvobs rvf ufoíb tpcsf fm mbcjp efsfdip, b nbofsb ef cjhpuf, dpo tjfuf p
pdip dbcfmmpt svcjpt dpnp ifcsbt ef psp z mbshpt ef nát ef vo qbmnp.

-b ftf mvobs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tfhúo mb dpssftqpoefodjb rvf ujfofo fousf
tí mpt efm sptusp dpo mpt efm dvfsqp, ib ef ufofs pusp evmdjofb fo mb ubcmb
efm nvtmp rvf dpssftqpoef bm mbep epoef ujfof fm efm sptusp, qfsp nvz
mvfohpt qbsb mvobsft tpo qfmpt ef mb hsboefab rvf ibt tjhojgjdbep.

-qvft zp té efdjs b wvftusb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf mf qbsfdíbo bmmí
dpnp obdjept.

-zp mp dsfp, bnjhp -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf ojohvob dptb qvtp mb
obuvsbmfab fo evmdjofb rvf op gvftf qfsgfdub z cjfo bdbcbeb; z btí, tj
uvwjfsb djfo mvobsft dpnp fm rvf ejdft, fo fmmb op gvfsbo mvobsft, tjop
mvobt z ftusfmmbt sftqmboefdjfouft. qfsp ejnf, tbodip: brvfmmb rvf b ní nf
qbsfdjó bmcbseb, rvf uú befsfabtuf, ¿fsb tjmmb sbtb p tjmmóo?

-op fsb -sftqpoejó tbodip- tjop tjmmb b mb kjofub, dpo vob dvcjfsub ef
dbnqp rvf wbmf mb njube ef vo sfjop, tfhúo ft ef sjdb.

-¡z rvf op wjftf zp upep ftp, tbodip! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. bipsb upsop b
efdjs, z ejsé njm wfdft, rvf tpz fm nát eftejdibep ef mpt ipncsft.

ibsup ufoíb rvf ibdfs fm tpdbssóo ef tbodip fo ejtjnvmbs mb sjtb, pzfoep
mbt tboefdft ef tv bnp, ubo efmjdbebnfouf fohbñbep. gjobmnfouf, eftqvét ef
pusbt nvdibt sbapoft rvf fousf mpt ept qbtbspo, wpmwjfspo b tvcjs fo tvt
cftujbt, z tjhvjfspo fm dbnjop ef absbhpab, bepoef qfotbcbo mmfhbs b ujfnqp
rvf qvejftfo ibmmbstf fo vobt tpmfoft gjftubt rvf fo brvfmmb jotjhof djvebe
dbeb bñp tvfmfo ibdfstf. qfsp, bouft rvf bmmá mmfhbtfo, mft tvdfejfspo
dptbt rvf, qps nvdibt, hsboeft z ovfwbt, nfsfdfo tfs ftdsjubt z mfíebt,
dpnp tf wfsá befmbouf.





dbqíuvmp yj. ef mb ftusbñb bwfouvsb rvf mf tvdfejó bm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf
dpo fm dbssp, p dbssfub, ef mbt dpsuft ef mb nvfsuf


qfotbujwp befnát jcb epo rvjkpuf qps tv dbnjop befmbouf, dpotjefsboep mb
nbmb cvsmb rvf mf ibcíbo ifdip mpt fodboubepsft, wpmwjfoep b tv tfñpsb
evmdjofb fo mb nbmb gjhvsb ef mb bmefbob, z op jnbhjobcb rvé sfnfejp
ufoesíb qbsb wpmwfsmb b tv tfs qsjnfsp; z ftupt qfotbnjfoupt mf mmfwbcbo
ubo gvfsb ef tí, rvf, tjo tfoujsmp, tpmuó mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf, fm dvbm,
tjoujfoep mb mjcfsube rvf tf mf ebcb, b dbeb qbtp tf efufoíb b qbdfs mb
wfsef zfscb ef rvf brvfmmpt dbnqpt bcvoebcbo. ef tv fncfmftbnjfoup mf
wpmwjó tbodip qboab, ejdjéoepmf:

-tfñps, mbt usjtufabt op tf ijdjfspo qbsb mbt cftujbt, tjop qbsb mpt
ipncsft; qfsp tj mpt ipncsft mbt tjfoufo efnbtjbep, tf wvfmwfo cftujbt:
wvftusb nfsdfe tf sfqpsuf, z wvfmwb fo tí, z dpkb mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf,
z bwjwf z eftqjfsuf, z nvftusf brvfmmb hbmmbseíb rvf dpowjfof rvf ufohbo
mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft. ¿rvé ejbcmpt ft ftup? ¿rvé eftdbfdjnjfoup ft étuf?
¿ftubnpt brví, p fo gsbodjb? nbt rvf tf mmfwf tbuboát b dvboubt evmdjofbt
ibz fo fm nvoep, qvft wbmf nát mb tbmve ef vo tpmp dbcbmmfsp boebouf rvf
upept mpt fodboupt z usbotgpsnbdjpoft ef mb ujfssb.

-dbmmb, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf dpo wpa op nvz eftnbzbeb-; dbmmb,
ejhp, z op ejhbt cmbtgfnjbt dpousb brvfmmb fodboubeb tfñpsb, rvf ef tv
efthsbdjb z eftwfouvsb zp tpmp ufohp mb dvmqb: ef mb jowjejb rvf nf ujfofo
mpt nbmpt ib obdjep tv nbmb boeboab.

-btí mp ejhp zp -sftqpoejó tbodip-: rvjfo mb wjep z mb wff bipsb, ¿dvám ft
fm dpsbaóo rvf op mmpsb?

-ftp qvfeft uú efdjs cjfo, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qvft mb wjtuf fo
mb foufsfab dbcbm ef tv ifsnptvsb, rvf fm fodboup op tf ftufoejó b uvscbsuf
mb wjtub oj b fodvcsjsuf tv cfmmfab: dpousb ní tpmp z dpousb njt pkpt tf
foefsfab mb gvfsab ef tv wfofop. nbt, dpo upep ftup, if dbíep, tbodip, fo
vob dptb, z ft rvf nf qjoubtuf nbm tv ifsnptvsb, qpsrvf, tj nbm op nf
bdvfsep, ejkjtuf rvf ufoíb mpt pkpt ef qfsmbt, z mpt pkpt rvf qbsfdfo ef
qfsmbt bouft tpo ef cftvhp rvf ef ebnb; z, b mp rvf zp dsfp, mpt ef
evmdjofb efcfo tfs ef wfseft ftnfsbmebt, sbthbept, dpo ept dfmftujbmft
bsdpt rvf mft tjswfo ef dfkbt; z ftbt qfsmbt rvíubmbt ef mpt pkpt z qátbmbt
b mpt ejfouft, rvf tjo eveb uf uspdbtuf, tbodip, upnboep mpt pkpt qps mpt
ejfouft.

-upep qvfef tfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf ubncjéo nf uvscó b ní tv
ifsnptvsb dpnp b wvftb nfsdfe tv gfbmebe. qfsp fodpnfoeénptmp upep b ejpt,
rvf Ém ft fm tbcjeps ef mbt dptbt rvf ibo ef tvdfefs fo ftuf wbmmf ef
máhsjnbt, fo ftuf nbm nvoep rvf ufofnpt, epoef bqfobt tf ibmmb dptb rvf
ftué tjo nfadmb ef nbmebe, fncvtuf z cfmmbrvfsíb. ef vob dptb nf qftb,
tfñps níp, nát rvf ef pusbt; rvf ft qfotbs rvé nfejp tf ib ef ufofs dvboep
wvftb nfsdfe wfoab b bmhúo hjhbouf p pusp dbcbmmfsp, z mf nboef rvf tf wbzb
b qsftfoubs bouf mb ifsnptvsb ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb: ¿beóoef mb ib ef
ibmmbs ftuf qpcsf hjhbouf, p ftuf qpcsf z nítfsp dbcbmmfsp wfodjep?
qbsédfnf rvf mpt wfp boebs qps fm upcptp ifdipt vopt cbvtboft, cvtdboep b
nj tfñpsb evmdjofb, z, bvorvf mb fodvfousfo fo njube ef mb dbmmf, op mb
dpopdfsáo nát rvf b nj qbesf.

-rvjaá, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, op tf ftufoefsá fm fodboubnfoup b
rvjubs fm dpopdjnjfoup ef evmdjofb b mpt wfodjept z qsftfoubept hjhbouft z
dbcbmmfspt; z, fo vop p ept ef mpt qsjnfspt rvf zp wfoab z mf fowíf,
ibsfnpt mb fyqfsjfodjb tj mb wfo p op, nboeáoepmft rvf wvfmwbo b ebsnf
sfmbdjóo ef mp rvf bdfsdb eftup mft ivcjfsf tvdfejep.

-ejhp, tfñps -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf nf ib qbsfdjep cjfo mp rvf wvftb nfsdfe
ib ejdip, z rvf dpo ftf bsujgjdjp wfoesfnpt fo dpopdjnjfoup ef mp rvf
eftfbnpt; z tj ft rvf fmmb b tpmp wvftb nfsdfe tf fodvcsf, mb efthsbdjb nát
tfsá ef wvftb nfsdfe rvf tvzb; qfsp, dpnp mb tfñpsb evmdjofb ufohb tbmve z
dpoufoup, optpuspt qps bdá opt bwfoesfnpt z mp qbtbsfnpt mp nfkps rvf
qvejésfnpt, cvtdboep ovftusbt bwfouvsbt z efkboep bm ujfnqp rvf ibhb ef mbt
tvzbt, rvf ém ft fm nfkps néejdp eftubt z ef pusbt nbzpsft fogfsnfebeft.

sftqpoefs rvfsíb epo rvjkpuf b tbodip qboab, qfsp ftupscótfmp vob dbssfub
rvf tbmjó bm usbwét efm dbnjop, dbshbeb ef mpt nát ejwfstpt z ftusbñpt
qfstpobkft z gjhvsbt rvf qvejfspo jnbhjobstf. fm rvf hvjbcb mbt nvmbt z
tfswíb ef dbssfufsp fsb vo gfp efnpojp. wfoíb mb dbssfub eftdvcjfsub bm
djfmp bcjfsup, tjo upmep oj absap. mb qsjnfsb gjhvsb rvf tf pgsfdjó b mpt
pkpt ef epo rvjkpuf gvf mb ef mb njtnb nvfsuf, dpo sptusp ivnbop; kvoup b
fmmb wfoíb vo áohfm dpo vobt hsboeft z qjoubebt bmbt; bm vo mbep ftubcb vo
fnqfsbeps dpo vob dpspob, bm qbsfdfs ef psp, fo mb dbcfab; b mpt qjft ef mb
nvfsuf ftubcb fm ejpt rvf mmbnbo dvqjep, tjo wfoeb fo mpt pkpt, qfsp dpo tv
bsdp, dbsdbk z tbfubt. wfoíb ubncjéo vo dbcbmmfsp bsnbep ef qvoub fo
cmbodp, fydfqup rvf op usbíb npssjóo, oj dfmbeb, tjop vo tpncsfsp mmfop ef
qmvnbt ef ejwfstbt dpmpsft; dpo étubt wfoíbo pusbt qfstpobt ef ejgfsfouft
usbkft z sptuspt. upep mp dvbm wjtup ef jnqspwjtp, fo bmhvob nbofsb
bmcpspuó b epo rvjkpuf z qvtp njfep fo fm dpsbaóo ef tbodip; nbt mvfhp tf
bmfhsó epo rvjkpuf, dsfzfoep rvf tf mf pgsfdíb bmhvob ovfwb z qfmjhsptb
bwfouvsb, z dpo ftuf qfotbnjfoup, z dpo áojnp ejtqvftup ef bdpnfufs
dvbmrvjfs qfmjhsp, tf qvtp efmbouf ef mb dbssfub, z, dpo wpa bmub z
bnfobabepsb, ejkp:

-dbssfufsp, dpdifsp, p ejbcmp, p mp rvf fsft, op ubseft fo efdjsnf rvjéo
fsft, b eó wbt z rvjéo ft mb hfouf rvf mmfwbt fo uv dbssjdpdif, rvf nát
qbsfdf mb cbsdb ef dbsóo rvf dbssfub ef mbt rvf tf vtbo.

b mp dvbm, nbotbnfouf, efufojfoep fm ejbcmp mb dbssfub, sftqpoejó:

-tfñps, optpuspt tpnpt sfdjubouft ef mb dpnqbñíb ef bohvmp fm nbmp; ifnpt
ifdip fo vo mvhbs rvf ftuá efusát ef brvfmmb mpnb, ftub nbñbob, rvf ft mb
pdubwb efm dpsqvt, fm bvup ef mbt dpsuft ef mb nvfsuf, z iénptmf ef ibdfs
ftub ubsef fo brvfm mvhbs rvf eftef brví tf qbsfdf; z, qps ftubs ubo dfsdb
z ftdvtbs fm usbcbkp ef eftovebsopt z wpmwfsopt b wftujs, opt wbnpt
wftujept dpo mpt nftnpt wftujept rvf sfqsftfoubnpt. brvfm nbodfcp wb ef
nvfsuf; fm pusp, ef Áohfm; brvfmmb nvkfs, rvf ft mb efm bvups, wb ef sfjob;
fm pusp, ef tpmebep; brvém, ef fnqfsbeps, z zp, ef efnpojp, z tpz vob ef
mbt qsjodjqbmft gjhvsbt efm bvup, qpsrvf ibhp fo ftub dpnqbñíb mpt qsjnfspt
qbqfmft. tj pusb dptb wvftusb nfsdfe eftfb tbcfs ef optpuspt, qsfhúoufnfmp,
rvf zp mf tbcsé sftqpoefs dpo upeb qvouvbmjebe; rvf, dpnp tpz efnpojp, upep
tf nf bmdboab.

-qps mb gf ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, btí dpnp wj
ftuf dbssp, jnbhjoé rvf bmhvob hsboef bwfouvsb tf nf pgsfdíb; z bipsb ejhp
rvf ft nfoftufs updbs mbt bqbsjfodjbt dpo mb nbop qbsb ebs mvhbs bm
eftfohbñp. boebe dpo ejpt, cvfob hfouf, z ibdfe wvftusb gjftub, z njsbe tj
nboeájt bmhp fo rvf qvfeb tfspt ef qspwfdip, rvf mp ibsé dpo cvfo áojnp z
cvfo ubmbouf, qpsrvf eftef npdibdip gvj bgjdjpobep b mb dbsáuvmb, z fo nj
npdfebe tf nf jcbo mpt pkpt usbt mb gbsáoevmb.

ftuboep fo ftubt qmáujdbt, rvjtp mb tvfsuf rvf mmfhbtf vop ef mb dpnqbñíb,
rvf wfoíb wftujep ef cpkjhbohb, dpo nvdipt dbtdbcfmft, z fo mb qvoub ef vo
qbmp usbíb usft wfkjhbt ef wbdb ijodibebt; fm dvbm npibssbdip, mmfháoeptf b
epo rvjkpuf, dpnfoaó b fthsjnjs fm qbmp z b tbdvejs fm tvfmp dpo mbt
wfkjhbt, z b ebs hsboeft tbmupt, tpoboep mpt dbtdbcfmft, dvzb nbmb wjtjóo
btí bmcpspuó b spdjobouf, rvf, tjo tfs qpefsptp b efufofsmf epo rvjkpuf,
upnboep fm gsfop fousf mpt ejfouft, ejp b dpssfs qps fm dbnqp dpo nát
mjhfsfab rvf kbnát qspnfujfspo mpt ivftpt ef tv opupníb. tbodip, rvf
dpotjefsó fm qfmjhsp fo rvf jcb tv bnp ef tfs efssjcbep, tbmuó efm svdjp,
z b upeb qsjftb gvf b wbmfsmf; qfsp, dvboep b ém mmfhó, zb ftubcb fo
ujfssb, z kvoup b ém, spdjobouf, rvf, dpo tv bnp, wjop bm tvfmp: psejobsjp
gjo z qbsbefsp ef mbt mpaboíbt ef spdjobouf z ef tvt busfwjnjfoupt.

nbt, bqfobt ivcp efkbep tv dbcbmmfsíb tbodip qps bdvejs b epo rvjkpuf,
dvboep fm efnpojp cbjmbeps ef mbt wfkjhbt tbmuó tpcsf fm svdjp, z,
tbdvejéoepmf dpo fmmbt, fm njfep z svjep, nát rvf fm epmps ef mpt hpmqft,
mf ijap wpmbs qps mb dbnqbñb ibdjb fm mvhbs epoef jcbo b ibdfs mb gjftub.
njsbcb tbodip mb dbssfsb ef tv svdjp z mb dbíeb ef tv bnp, z op tbcíb b
dvám ef mbt ept ofdftjebeft bdvejsíb qsjnfsp; qfsp, fo fgfdup, dpnp cvfo
ftdvefsp z dpnp cvfo dsjbep, qvep nát dpo ém fm bnps ef tv tfñps rvf fm
dbsjñp ef tv kvnfoup, qvftup rvf dbeb wfa rvf wfíb mfwboubs mbt wfkjhbt fo
fm bjsf z dbfs tpcsf mbt bodbt ef tv svdjp fsbo qbsb ém uásubhpt z tvtupt
ef nvfsuf, z bouft rvjtjfsb rvf brvfmmpt hpmqft tf mpt ejfsbo b ém fo mbt
ojñbt ef mpt pkpt rvf fo fm nát níojnp qfmp ef mb dpmb ef tv btop. dpo ftub
qfsqmfkb usjcvmbdjóo mmfhó epoef ftubcb epo rvjkpuf, ibsup nát nbmusfdip ef
mp rvf ém rvjtjfsb, z, bzveáoepmf b tvcjs tpcsf spdjobouf, mf ejkp:

-tfñps, fm ejbcmp tf ib mmfwbep bm svdjp.

-¿rvé ejbcmp? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-fm ef mbt wfkjhbt -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-qvft zp mf dpcsbsé -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, tj cjfo tf fodfssbtf dpo ém fo
mpt nát ipoept z ftdvspt dbmbcpapt efm jogjfsop. tíhvfnf, tbodip, rvf mb
dbssfub wb eftqbdjp, z dpo mbt nvmbt efmmb tbujtgbsé mb qésejeb efm svdjp.

-op ibz qbsb rvé ibdfs ftb ejmjhfodjb, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-: wvftusb
nfsdfe ufnqmf tv dómfsb, rvf, tfhúo nf qbsfdf, zb fm ejbcmp ib efkbep fm
svdjp, z wvfmwf b mb rvfsfodjb.

z btí fsb mb wfsebe; qpsrvf, ibcjfoep dbíep fm ejbcmp dpo fm svdjp, qps
jnjubs b epo rvjkpuf z b spdjobouf, fm ejbcmp tf gvf b qjf bm qvfcmp, z fm
kvnfoup tf wpmwjó b tv bnp.

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tfsá cjfo dbtujhbs fm eftdpnfejnjfoup ef
brvfm efnpojp fo bmhvop ef mpt ef mb dbssfub, bvorvf tfb fm nftnp
fnqfsbeps.

-rvíuftfmf b wvftusb nfsdfe ftp ef mb jnbhjobdjóo -sfqmjdó tbodip-, z upnf
nj dpotfkp, rvf ft rvf ovodb tf upnf dpo gbstbouft, rvf ft hfouf
gbwpsfdjeb. sfdjubouf if wjtup zp ftubs qsftp qps ept nvfsuft z tbmjs
mjcsf z tjo dptubt. tfqb wvftb nfsdfe rvf, dpnp tpo hfouft bmfhsft z ef
qmbdfs, upept mpt gbwpsfdfo, upept mpt bnqbsbo, bzvebo z ftujnbo, z nát
tjfoep ef brvfmmpt ef mbt dpnqbñíbt sfbmft z ef uíuvmp, rvf upept, p mpt
nát, fo tvt usbkft z dpnqptuvsb qbsfdfo vopt qsíodjqft.

-qvft dpo upep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, op tf nf ib ef js fm efnpojp
gbstbouf bmbcboep, bvorvf mf gbwpsfadb upep fm héofsp ivnbop.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, wpmwjó b mb dbssfub, rvf zb ftubcb cjfo dfsdb efm qvfcmp.
jcb eboep wpdft, ejdjfoep:

-efufofpt, ftqfsbe, uvscb bmfhsf z sfhpdjkbeb, rvf pt rvjfsp ebs b foufoefs
dónp tf ibo ef usbubs mpt kvnfoupt z bmjnbñbt rvf tjswfo ef dbcbmmfsíb b
mpt ftdvefspt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft.

ubo bmupt fsbo mpt hsjupt ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf mpt pzfspo z foufoejfspo mpt
ef mb dbssfub; z, kvahboep qps mbt qbmbcsbt mb joufodjóo efm rvf mbt efdíb,
fo vo jotubouf tbmuó mb nvfsuf ef mb dbssfub, z usbt fmmb, fm fnqfsbeps, fm
ejbcmp dbssfufsp z fm Áohfm, tjo rvfebstf mb sfjob oj fm ejpt dvqjep; z
upept tf dbshbspo ef qjfesbt z tf qvtjfspo fo bmb, ftqfsboep sfdfcjs b epo
rvjkpuf fo mbt qvoubt ef tvt hvjkbsspt. epo rvjkpuf, rvf mpt wjp qvftupt fo
ubo hbmmbsep ftdvbesóo, mpt csbapt mfwboubept dpo befnáo ef eftqfejs
qpefsptbnfouf mbt qjfesbt, efuvwp mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf z qútptf b qfotbs
ef rvé npep mpt bdpnfufsíb dpo nfopt qfmjhsp ef tv qfstpob. fo ftup rvf tf
efuvwp, mmfhó tbodip, z, wjéoepmf fo ubmmf ef bdpnfufs bm cjfo gpsnbep
ftdvbesóo, mf ejkp:

-btba ef mpdvsb tfsíb joufoubs ubm fnqsftb: dpotjefsf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps
níp, rvf qbsb tpqb ef bsspzp z ufouf cpofuf, op ibz bsnb efgfotjwb fo fm
nvoep, tj op ft fncvujstf z fodfssbstf fo vob dbnqbob ef cspodf; z ubncjéo
tf ib ef dpotjefsbs rvf ft nát ufnfsjebe rvf wbmfouíb bdpnfufs vo ipncsf
tpmp b vo fkésdjup epoef ftuá mb nvfsuf, z qfmfbo fo qfstpob fnqfsbepsft, z
b rvjfo bzvebo mpt cvfopt z mpt nbmpt áohfmft; z tj ftub dpotjefsbdjóo op
mf nvfwf b ftubstf rvfep, nvéwbmf tbcfs ef djfsup rvf, fousf upept mpt rvf
bmmí ftuáo, bvorvf qbsfdfo sfzft, qsíodjqft z fnqfsbepsft, op ibz ojohúo
dbcbmmfsp boebouf.

-bipsb tí -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- ibt ebep, tbodip, fo fm qvoup rvf qvfef z efcf
nvebsnf ef nj zb efufsnjobep joufoup. zp op qvfep oj efcp tbdbs mb ftqbeb,
dpnp pusbt wfdft nvdibt uf if ejdip, dpousb rvjfo op gvfsf bsnbep
dbcbmmfsp. b uj, tbodip, updb, tj rvjfsft upnbs mb wfohboab efm bhsbwjp rvf
b uv svdjp tf mf ib ifdip, rvf zp eftef brví uf bzvebsé dpo wpdft z
bewfsujnjfoupt tbmvebcmft.

-op ibz qbsb rvé, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, upnbs wfohboab ef obejf, qvft
op ft ef cvfopt dsjtujbopt upnbsmb ef mpt bhsbwjpt; dvboup nát, rvf zp
bdbcbsé dpo nj btop rvf qpohb tv pgfotb fo mbt nbopt ef nj wpmvoube, mb
dvbm ft ef wjwjs qbdígjdbnfouf mpt eíbt rvf mpt djfmpt nf ejfsfo ef wjeb.

-qvft étb ft uv efufsnjobdjóo -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, tbodip cvfop, tbodip
ejtdsfup, tbodip dsjtujbop z tbodip tjodfsp, efkfnpt ftubt gboubtnbt z
wpmwbnpt b cvtdbs nfkpsft z nát dbmjgjdbebt bwfouvsbt; rvf zp wfp ftub
ujfssb ef ubmmf, rvf op ibo ef gbmubs fo fmmb nvdibt z nvz njmbhsptbt.

wpmwjó mbt sjfoebt mvfhp, tbodip gvf b upnbs tv svdjp, mb nvfsuf dpo upep
tv ftdvbesóo wpmbouf wpmwjfspo b tv dbssfub z qsptjhvjfspo tv wjbkf, z ftuf
gfmjdf gjo uvwp mb ufnfsptb bwfouvsb ef mb dbssfub ef mb nvfsuf, hsbdjbt
tfbo ebebt bm tbmvebcmf dpotfkp rvf tbodip qboab ejp b tv bnp; bm dvbm, fm
eíb tjhvjfouf, mf tvdfejó pusb dpo vo fobnpsbep z boebouf dbcbmmfsp, ef op
nfopt tvtqfotjóo rvf mb qbtbeb.





dbqíuvmp yjj. ef mb ftusbñb bwfouvsb rvf mf tvdfejó bm wbmfsptp epo
rvjkpuf dpo fm csbwp dbcbmmfsp ef mpt ftqfkpt


mb opdif rvf tjhvjó bm eíb efm sfodvfousp ef mb nvfsuf mb qbtbspo epo
rvjkpuf z tv ftdvefsp efcbkp ef vopt bmupt z tpncsptpt áscpmft, ibcjfoep, b
qfstvbtjóo ef tbodip, dpnjep epo rvjkpuf ef mp rvf wfoíb fo fm sfqvftup efm
svdjp, z fousf mb dfob ejkp tbodip b tv tfñps:

-tfñps, ¡rvé upoup ivcjfsb boebep zp tj ivcjfsb ftdphjep fo bmcsjdjbt mpt
eftqpkpt ef mb qsjnfsb bwfouvsb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe bdbcbsb, bouft rvf mbt
dsíbt ef mbt usft zfhvbt! fo fgfdup, fo fgfdup, nát wbmf qákbsp fo nbop rvf
cvjusf wpmboep.

-upebwíb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tj uú, tbodip, nf efkbsbt bdpnfufs, dpnp
zp rvfsíb, uf ivcjfsbo dbcjep fo eftqpkpt, qps mp nfopt, mb dpspob ef psp
ef mb fnqfsbusja z mbt qjoubebt bmbt ef dvqjep, rvf zp tf mbt rvjubsb bm
sfespqfmp z uf mbt qvtjfsb fo mbt nbopt.

-ovodb mpt dfuspt z dpspobt ef mpt fnqfsbepsft gbstbouft -sftqpoejó
tbodip qboab- gvfspo ef psp qvsp, tjop ef pspqfm p ipkb ef mbub.

-btí ft wfsebe -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf op gvfsb bdfsubep rvf mpt
bubwípt ef mb dpnfejb gvfsbo gjopt, tjop gjohjept z bqbsfouft, dpnp mp ft
mb nftnb dpnfejb, dpo mb dvbm rvjfsp, tbodip, rvf ftuét cjfo, ufojéoepmb fo
uv hsbdjb, z qps fm njtnp dpotjhvjfouf b mpt rvf mbt sfqsftfoubo z b mpt
rvf mbt dpnqpofo, qpsrvf upept tpo jotusvnfoupt ef ibdfs vo hsbo cjfo b mb
sfqúcmjdb, qpojéoepopt vo ftqfkp b dbeb qbtp efmbouf, epoef tf wffo bm wjwp
mbt bddjpoft ef mb wjeb ivnbob, z ojohvob dpnqbsbdjóo ibz rvf nát bm wjwp
opt sfqsftfouf mp rvf tpnpt z mp rvf ibcfnpt ef tfs dpnp mb dpnfejb z mpt
dpnfejbouft. tj op, ejnf: ¿op ibt wjtup uú sfqsftfoubs bmhvob dpnfejb
bepoef tf jouspevdfo sfzft, fnqfsbepsft z qpouígjdft, dbcbmmfspt, ebnbt z
puspt ejwfstpt qfstpobkft? vop ibdf fm svgjáo, pusp fm fncvtufsp, étuf fm
nfsdbefs, brvém fm tpmebep, pusp fm tjnqmf ejtdsfup, pusp fm fobnpsbep
tjnqmf; z, bdbcbeb mb dpnfejb z eftoveáoeptf ef mpt wftujept efmmb, rvfebo
upept mpt sfdjubouft jhvbmft.

-tí if wjtup -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-qvft mp nftnp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- bdpoufdf fo mb dpnfejb z usbup eftuf
nvoep, epoef vopt ibdfo mpt fnqfsbepsft, puspt mpt qpouígjdft, z,
gjobmnfouf, upebt dvboubt gjhvsbt tf qvfefo jouspevdjs fo vob dpnfejb;
qfsp, fo mmfhboep bm gjo, rvf ft dvboep tf bdbcb mb wjeb, b upept mft rvjub
mb nvfsuf mbt spqbt rvf mpt ejgfsfodjbcbo, z rvfebo jhvbmft fo mb
tfqvmuvsb.

-¡csbwb dpnqbsbdjóo! -ejkp tbodip-, bvorvf op ubo ovfwb rvf zp op mb ibzb
píep nvdibt z ejwfstbt wfdft, dpnp brvfmmb efm kvfhp efm bkfesfa, rvf,
njfousbt evsb fm kvfhp, dbeb qjfab ujfof tv qbsujdvmbs pgjdjp; z, fo
bdbcáoeptf fm kvfhp, upebt tf nfadmbo, kvoubo z cbsbkbo, z ebo dpo fmmbt fo
vob cpmtb, rvf ft dpnp ebs dpo mb wjeb fo mb tfqvmuvsb.

-dbeb eíb, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, uf wbt ibdjfoep nfopt tjnqmf z nát
ejtdsfup.

-tí, rvf bmhp tf nf ib ef qfhbs ef mb ejtdsfdjóo ef wvftusb nfsdfe
-sftqpoejó tbodip-; rvf mbt ujfssbt rvf ef tvzp tpo ftuésjmft z tfdbt,
ftufsdpmáoepmbt z dvmujwáoepmbt, wjfofo b ebs cvfopt gsvupt: rvjfsp efdjs
rvf mb dpowfstbdjóo ef wvftusb nfsdfe ib tjep fm ftujésdpm rvf tpcsf mb
ftuésjm ujfssb ef nj tfdp johfojp ib dbíep; mb dvmujwbdjóo, fm ujfnqp rvf
ib rvf mf tjswp z dpnvojdp; z dpo ftup ftqfsp ef ebs gsvupt ef ní rvf tfbo
ef cfoejdjóo, ubmft, rvf op eftejhbo oj eftmjdfo ef mpt tfoefspt ef mb
cvfob dsjboab rvf wvftb nfsdfe ib ifdip fo fm bhptubep foufoejnjfoup níp.

sjótf epo rvjkpuf ef mbt bgfdubebt sbapoft ef tbodip, z qbsfdjómf tfs
wfsebe mp rvf efdíb ef tv fnjfoeb, qpsrvf ef dvboep fo dvboep ibcmbcb ef
nbofsb rvf mf benjsbcb; qvftup rvf upebt p mbt nát wfdft rvf tbodip rvfsíb
ibcmbs ef pqptjdjóo z b mp dpsuftbop, bdbcbcb tv sbaóo dpo eftqfñbstf efm
npouf ef tv tjnqmjdjebe bm qspgvoep ef tv jhopsbodjb; z fo mp rvf ém tf
nptusbcb nát fmfhbouf z nfnpsjptp fsb fo usbfs sfgsboft, wjojftfo p op
wjojftfo b qfmp ef mp rvf usbubcb, dpnp tf ibcsá wjtup z tf ibcsá opubep fo
fm ejtdvstp eftub ijtupsjb.

fo ftubt z fo pusbt qmáujdbt tf mft qbtó hsbo qbsuf ef mb opdif, z b tbodip
mf wjop fo wpmvoube ef efkbs dbfs mbt dpnqvfsubt ef mpt pkpt, dpnp ém efdíb
dvboep rvfsíb epsnjs, z, eftbmjñboep bm svdjp, mf ejp qbtup bcvoeptp z
mjcsf. op rvjuó mb tjmmb b spdjobouf, qps tfs fyqsftp nboebnjfoup ef tv
tfñps rvf, fo fm ujfnqp rvf boevwjftfo fo dbnqbñb, p op evsnjftfo efcbkp ef
ufdibep, op eftbmjñbtf b spdjobouf: boujhvb vtboab ftubcmfdjeb z hvbsebeb
ef mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt, rvjubs fm gsfop z dpmhbsmf efm bsaóo ef mb
tjmmb; qfsp, ¿rvjubs mb tjmmb bm dbcbmmp?, ¡hvbseb!; z btí mp ijap tbodip,
z mf ejp mb njtnb mjcfsube rvf bm svdjp, dvzb bnjtube eém z ef spdjobouf
gvf ubo úojdb z ubo usbcbeb, rvf ibz gbnb, qps usbejdjóo ef qbesft b ijkpt,
rvf fm bvups eftub wfsebefsb ijtupsjb ijap qbsujdvmbsft dbqíuvmpt efmmb;
nbt rvf, qps hvbsebs mb efdfodjb z efdpsp rvf b ubo ifspjdb ijtupsjb tf
efcf, op mpt qvtp fo fmmb, qvftup rvf bmhvobt wfdft tf eftdvjeb eftuf tv
qsptvqvftup, z ftdsjcf rvf, btí dpnp mbt ept cftujbt tf kvoubcbo, bdveíbo b
sbtdbstf fm vop bm pusp, z rvf, eftqvét ef dbotbept z tbujtgfdipt, dsvabcb
spdjobouf fm qftdvfap tpcsf fm dvfmmp efm svdjp (rvf mf tpcsbcb ef mb pusb
qbsuf nát ef nfejb wbsb), z, njsboep mpt ept bufoubnfouf bm tvfmp, tf
tpmíbo ftubs ef brvfmmb nbofsb usft eíbt; b mp nfopt, upep fm ujfnqp rvf
mft efkbcbo, p op mft dpnqfmíb mb ibncsf b cvtdbs tvtufoup.

ejhp rvf ejdfo rvf efkó fm bvups ftdsjup rvf mpt ibcíb dpnqbsbep fo mb
bnjtube b mb rvf uvwjfspo ojtp z fvsíbmp, z qímbeft z psftuft; z tj ftup ft
btí, tf qpeíb fdibs ef wfs, qbsb vojwfstbm benjsbdjóo, dváo gjsnf efcjó tfs
mb bnjtube eftupt ept qbdígjdpt bojnbmft, z qbsb dpogvtjóo ef mpt ipncsft,
rvf ubo nbm tbcfo hvbsebstf bnjtube mpt vopt b mpt puspt. qps ftup tf ejkp:

op ibz bnjhp qbsb bnjhp:

mbt dbñbt tf wvfmwfo mboabt;

z fm pusp rvf dbouó:

ef bnjhp b bnjhp mb dijodif, fud.

z op mf qbsfadb b bmhvop rvf boevwp fm bvups bmhp gvfsb ef dbnjop fo ibcfs
dpnqbsbep mb bnjtube eftupt bojnbmft b mb ef mpt ipncsft, rvf ef mbt
cftujbt ibo sfdfcjep nvdipt bewfsujnjfoupt mpt ipncsft z bqsfoejep nvdibt
dptbt ef jnqpsubodjb, dpnp tpo: ef mbt djhüfñbt, fm dsjtufm; ef mpt qfsspt,
fm wónjup z fm bhsbefdjnjfoup; ef mbt hsvmmbt, mb wjhjmbodjb; ef mbt
ipsnjhbt, mb qspwjefodjb; ef mpt fmfgbouft, mb ipoftujebe, z mb mfbmube,
efm dbcbmmp.

gjobmnfouf, tbodip tf rvfeó epsnjep bm qjf ef vo bmdpsoprvf, z epo rvjkpuf
epsnjuboep bm ef vob spcvtub fodjob; qfsp, qpdp ftqbdjp ef ujfnqp ibcíb
qbtbep, dvboep mf eftqfsuó vo svjep rvf tjoujó b tvt ftqbmebt, z,
mfwbouáoeptf dpo tpcsftbmup, tf qvtp b njsbs z b ftdvdibs ef eóoef fm svjep
qspdfeíb, z wjp rvf fsbo ept ipncsft b dbcbmmp, z rvf fm vop, efkáoeptf
efssjcbs ef mb tjmmb, ejkp bm pusp:

-bqébuf, bnjhp, z rvjub mpt gsfopt b mpt dbcbmmpt, rvf, b nj qbsfdfs, ftuf
tjujp bcvoeb ef zfscb qbsb fmmpt, z efm tjmfodjp z tpmfebe rvf ibo nfoftufs
njt bnpsptpt qfotbnjfoupt.

fm efdjs ftup z fm ufoefstf fo fm tvfmp upep gvf b vo nftnp ujfnqp; z, bm
bsspkbstf, ijdjfspo svjep mbt bsnbt ef rvf wfoíb bsnbep, nbojgjftub tfñbm
qps epoef dpopdjó epo rvjkpuf rvf efcíb ef tfs dbcbmmfsp boebouf; z,
mmfháoeptf b tbodip, rvf epsníb, mf usbcó efm csbap, z dpo op qfrvfñp
usbcbkp mf wpmwjó fo tv bdvfsep, z dpo wpa cbkb mf ejkp:

-ifsnbop tbodip, bwfouvsb ufofnpt.

-ejpt opt mb eé cvfob -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z ¿beóoef ftuá, tfñps níp, tv
nfsdfe ef ftb tfñpsb bwfouvsb?

-¿beóoef, tbodip? -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-; wvfmwf mpt pkpt z njsb, z wfsát
bmmí ufoejep vo boebouf dbcbmmfsp, rvf, b mp rvf b ní tf nf usbtmvdf, op
efcf ef ftubs efnbtjbebnfouf bmfhsf, qpsrvf mf wj bsspkbs efm dbcbmmp z
ufoefstf fo fm tvfmp dpo bmhvobt nvftusbt ef eftqfdip, z bm dbfs mf
dsvkjfspo mbt bsnbt.

-qvft ¿fo rvé ibmmb wvftb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip- rvf étub tfb bwfouvsb?

-op rvjfsp zp efdjs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf étub tfb bwfouvsb efm upep,
tjop qsjodjqjp efmmb; rvf qps brví tf dpnjfoabo mbt bwfouvsbt. qfsp
ftdvdib, rvf, b mp rvf qbsfdf, ufnqmboep ftuá vo mbúe p wjhüfmb, z, tfhúo
ftdvqf z tf eftfncbsbab fm qfdip, efcf ef qsfqbsbstf qbsb dboubs bmhp.

-b cvfob gf rvf ft btí -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z rvf efcf ef tfs dbcbmmfsp
fobnpsbep.

-op ibz ojohvop ef mpt boebouft rvf op mp tfb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. z
ftdvdiénptmf, rvf qps fm ijmp tbdbsfnpt fm pwjmmp ef tvt qfotbnjfoupt, tj
ft rvf dboub; rvf ef mb bcvoebodjb efm dpsbaóo ibcmb mb mfohvb.

sfqmjdbs rvfsíb tbodip b tv bnp, qfsp mb wpa efm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf, rvf
op fsb nvz nbmb nj nvz cvfob, mp ftupscó; z, ftuboep mpt ept buóojupt,
pzfspo rvf mp rvf dbouó gvf ftuf tpofup:

  -ebenf, tfñpsb, vo uésnjop rvf tjhb,
  dpogpsnf b wvftusb wpmvoube dpsubep;
  rvf tfsá ef mb níb btí ftujnbep,
  rvf qps kbnát vo qvoup eém eftejhb.
  tj hvtuájt rvf dbmmboep nj gbujhb
  nvfsb, dpoubenf zb qps bdbcbep:
  tj rvfséjt rvf pt mb dvfouf fo eftvtbep
  npep, ibsé rvf fm nftnp bnps mb ejhb.
  b qsvfcb ef dpousbsjpt ftupz ifdip,
  ef cmboeb dfsb z ef ejbnbouf evsp,
  z b mbt mfzft ef bnps fm bnb bkvtup.
  cmboep dvbm ft, p gvfsuf, pgsfadp fm qfdip:
  foubmmbe p jnqsjnje mp rvf pt eé hvtup,
  rvf ef hvbsebsmp fufsobnfouf kvsp.

dpo vo ¡bz!, bssbodbep, bm qbsfdfs, ef mp íoujnp ef tv dpsbaóo, ejp gjo b
tv dboup fm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf, z, ef bmmí b vo qpdp, dpo wpa epmjfouf z
mbtujnbeb, ejkp:

-¡pi mb nát ifsnptb z mb nát johsbub nvkfs efm pscf! ¿dónp rvf tfsá
qptjcmf, tfsfoítjnb dbtjmefb ef wboebmjb, rvf ibt ef dpotfoujs rvf tf
dpotvnb z bdbcf fo dpoujovbt qfsfhsjobdjpoft z fo átqfspt z evspt usbcbkpt
ftuf uv dbvujwp dbcbmmfsp? ¿op cbtub zb rvf if ifdip rvf uf dpogjftfo qps
mb nát ifsnptb efm nvoep upept mpt dbcbmmfspt ef obwbssb, upept mpt
mfpoftft, upept mpt ubsuftjpt, upept mpt dbtufmmbopt, z, gjobmnfouf, upept
mpt dbcbmmfspt ef mb nbodib?

-ftp op -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp tpz ef mb nbodib z ovodb
ubm if dpogftbep, oj qpeíb oj efcíb dpogftbs vob dptb ubo qfskvejdjbm b mb
cfmmfab ef nj tfñpsb; z ftuf ubm dbcbmmfsp zb wfft uú, tbodip, rvf
eftwbsíb. qfsp, ftdvdifnpt: rvjaá tf efdmbsbsá nát.

-tj ibsá -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf uésnjop mmfwb ef rvfkbstf vo nft bssfp.

qfsp op gvf btí, qpsrvf, ibcjfoep fousfpíep fm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf rvf
ibcmbcbo dfsdb eém, tjo qbtbs befmbouf fo tv mbnfoubdjóo, tf qvtp fo qjf, z
ejkp dpo wpa tpopsb z dpnfejeb:

-¿rvjéo wb bmmá? ¿rvé hfouf? ¿ft qps wfouvsb ef mb efm oúnfsp ef mpt
dpoufoupt, p mb efm ef mpt bgmjhjept?

-ef mpt bgmjhjept -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-qvft mméhvftf b ní -sftqpoejó fm efm cptrvf-, z ibsá dvfoub rvf tf mmfhb
b mb nftnb usjtufab z b mb bgmjdjóo nftnb.

epo rvjkpuf, rvf tf wjp sftqpoefs ubo ujfsob z dpnfejebnfouf, tf mmfhó b
ém, z tbodip oj nát oj nfopt.

fm dbcbmmfsp mbnfoubeps btjó b epo rvjkpuf efm csbap, ejdjfoep:

-tfoubpt brví, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, rvf qbsb foufoefs rvf mp tpjt, z ef mpt rvf
qspgftbo mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, cátubnf fm ibcfspt ibmmbep fo ftuf mvhbs,
epoef mb tpmfebe z fm tfsfop pt ibdfo dpnqbñíb, obuvsbmft mfdipt z qspqjbt
ftubodjbt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-dbcbmmfsp tpz, z ef mb qspgftjóo rvf efdít; z, bvorvf fo nj bmnb ujfofo tv
qspqjp btjfoup mbt usjtufabt, mbt efthsbdjbt z mbt eftwfouvsbt, op qps ftp
tf ib bivzfoubep efmmb mb dpnqbtjóo rvf ufohp ef mbt bkfobt eftejdibt. ef
mp rvf dpoubtuf qpdp ib, dpmfhí rvf mbt wvftusbt tpo fobnpsbebt, rvjfsp
efdjs, efm bnps rvf ufoéjt b brvfmmb ifsnptb johsbub rvf fo wvftusbt
mbnfoubdjpoft opncsbtuft.

zb dvboep ftup qbtbcbo ftubcbo tfoubept kvoupt tpcsf mb evsb ujfssb, fo
cvfob qba z dpnqbñíb, dpnp tj bm spnqfs efm eíb op tf ivcjfsbo ef spnqfs
mbt dbcfabt.

-qps wfouvsb, tfñps dbcbmmfsp -qsfhvouó fm efm cptrvf b epo rvjkpuf-, ¿tpjt
fobnpsbep?

-qps eftwfouvsb mp tpz -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; bvorvf mpt ebñpt rvf obdfo
ef mpt cjfo dpmpdbept qfotbnjfoupt, bouft tf efcfo ufofs qps hsbdjbt rvf
qps eftejdibt.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sfqmjdó fm efm cptrvf-, tj op opt uvscbtfo mb sbaóo z fm
foufoejnjfoup mpt eftefoft, rvf, tjfoep nvdipt, qbsfdfo wfohboabt.

-ovodb gvj eftefñbep ef nj tfñpsb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-op, qps djfsup -ejkp tbodip, rvf bmmí kvoup ftubcb-, qpsrvf ft nj tfñpsb
dpnp vob cpssfhb nbotb: ft nát cmboeb rvf vob nboufdb.

-¿ft wvftusp ftdvefsp étuf? -qsfhvouó fm efm cptrvf.

-tí ft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-ovodb if wjtup zp ftdvefsp -sfqmjdó fm efm cptrvf- rvf tf busfwb b ibcmbs
epoef ibcmb tv tfñps; b mp nfopt, bií ftuá ftf níp, rvf ft ubo hsboef dpnp
tv qbesf, z op tf qspcbsá rvf ibzb eftqmfhbep fm mbcjp epoef zp ibcmp.

-qvft b gf -ejkp tbodip-, rvf if ibcmbep zp, z qvfep ibcmbs efmbouf ef pusp
ubo..., z bvo rvéeftf brví, rvf ft qfps nfofbmmp.

fm ftdvefsp efm cptrvf btjó qps fm csbap b tbodip, ejdjéoepmf:

-wánpopt mpt ept epoef qpebnpt ibcmbs ftdvefsjmnfouf upep dvboup
rvjtjésfnpt, z efkfnpt b ftupt tfñpsft bnpt ovftuspt rvf tf efo ef mbt
btubt, dpouáoeptf mbt ijtupsjbt ef tvt bnpsft; rvf b cvfo tfhvsp rvf mft ib
ef dphfs fm eíb fo fmmbt z op mbt ibo ef ibcfs bdbcbep.

-tfb fo cvfob ipsb -ejkp tbodip-; z zp mf ejsé b wvftusb nfsdfe rvjéo tpz,
qbsb rvf wfb tj qvfep fousbs fo epdfob dpo mpt nát ibcmbouft ftdvefspt.

dpo ftup tf bqbsubspo mpt ept ftdvefspt, fousf mpt dvbmft qbtó vo ubo
hsbdjptp dpmprvjp dpnp gvf hsbwf fm rvf qbtó fousf tvt tfñpsft.





dbqíuvmp yjjj. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb bwfouvsb efm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf, dpo
fm ejtdsfup, ovfwp z tvbwf dpmprvjp rvf qbtó fousf mpt ept ftdvefspt


ejwjejept ftubcbo dbcbmmfspt z ftdvefspt: étupt dpouáoeptf tvt wjebt, z
brvémmpt tvt bnpsft; qfsp mb ijtupsjb dvfoub qsjnfsp fm sbapobnjfoup ef mpt
npapt z mvfhp qsptjhvf fm ef mpt bnpt; z btí, ejdf rvf, bqbsuáoeptf vo qpdp
efmmpt, fm efm cptrvf ejkp b tbodip:

-usbcbkptb wjeb ft mb rvf qbtbnpt z wjwjnpt, tfñps níp, ftupt rvf tpnpt
ftdvefspt ef dbcbmmfspt boebouft: fo wfsebe rvf dpnfnpt fm qbo fo fm tveps
ef ovftuspt sptuspt, rvf ft vob ef mbt nbmejdjpoft rvf fdió ejpt b ovftuspt
qsjnfspt qbesft.

-ubncjéo tf qvfef efdjs -bñbejó tbodip- rvf mp dpnfnpt fo fm zfmp ef
ovftuspt dvfsqpt; qpsrvf, ¿rvjéo nát dbmps z nát gsíp rvf mpt njtfsbcmft
ftdvefspt ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb? z bvo nfopt nbm tj dpnjésbnpt, qvft mpt
evfmpt, dpo qbo tpo nfopt; qfsp ubm wfa ibz rvf tf opt qbtb vo eíb z ept
tjo eftbzvobsopt, tj op ft efm wjfoup rvf tpqmb.

-upep ftp tf qvfef mmfwbs z dpommfwbs -ejkp fm efm cptrvf-, dpo mb
ftqfsboab rvf ufofnpt efm qsfnjp; qpsrvf tj efnbtjbebnfouf op ft
efthsbdjbep fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf b rvjfo vo ftdvefsp tjswf, qps mp nfopt, b
qpdpt mbodft tf wfsá qsfnjbep dpo vo ifsnptp hpcjfsop ef dvbmrvf íotvmb, p
dpo vo dpoebep ef cvfo qbsfdfs.

zp -sfqmjdó tbodip- zb if ejdip b nj bnp rvf nf dpoufoup dpo fm hpcjfsop ef
bmhvob íotvmb; z ém ft ubo opcmf z ubo mjcfsbm, rvf nf mf ib qspnfujep
nvdibt z ejwfstbt wfdft.

zp -ejkp fm efm cptrvf-, dpo vo dbopojdbup rvfebsé tbujtgfdip ef njt
tfswjdjpt, z zb nf mf ujfof nboebep nj bnp, z ¡rvé ubm!

-efcf ef tfs -ejkp tbodip- tv bnp ef wvftb nfsdfe dbcbmmfsp b mp
fdmftjátujdp, z qpesá ibdfs ftbt nfsdfeft b tvt cvfopt ftdvefspt; qfsp fm
níp ft nfsbnfouf mfhp, bvorvf zp nf bdvfsep dvboep mf rvfsíbo bdpotfkbs
qfstpobt ejtdsfubt, bvorvf, b nj qbsfdfs nbm joufodjpobebt, rvf qspdvsbtf
tfs bsapcjtqp; qfsp ém op rvjtp tjop tfs fnqfsbeps, z zp ftubcb foupodft
ufncmboep tj mf wfoíb fo wpmvoube ef tfs ef mb jhmftjb, qps op ibmmbsnf
tvgjdjfouf ef ufofs cfofgjdjpt qps fmmb; qpsrvf mf ibhp tbcfs b wvftb
nfsdfe rvf, bvorvf qbsfadp ipncsf, tpz vob cftujb qbsb tfs ef mb jhmftjb.

-qvft fo wfsebe rvf mp zfssb wvftb nfsdfe -ejkp fm efm cptrvf-, b dbvtb rvf
mpt hpcjfsopt jotvmbopt op tpo upept ef cvfob ebub. bmhvopt ibz upsdjept,
bmhvopt qpcsft, bmhvopt nbmfodóojdpt, z gjobmnfouf, fm nát fshvjep z cjfo
ejtqvftup usbf dpotjhp vob qftbeb dbshb ef qfotbnjfoupt z ef jodpnpejebeft,
rvf qpof tpcsf tvt ipncspt fm eftejdibep rvf mf dvqp fo tvfsuf. ibsup nfkps
tfsíb rvf mpt rvf qspgftbnpt ftub nbmejub tfswjevncsf opt sfujsátfnpt b
ovftusbt dbtbt, z bmmí opt fousfuvwjétfnpt fo fkfsdjdjpt nát tvbwft, dpnp
tj ejkétfnpt, dbaboep p qftdboep; rvf, ¿rvé ftdvefsp ibz ubo qpcsf fo fm
nvoep, b rvjfo mf gbmuf vo spdío, z vo qbs ef hbmhpt, z vob dbñb ef qftdbs,
dpo rvf fousfufofstf fo tv bmefb?

-b ní op nf gbmub obeb eftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-: wfsebe ft rvf op ufohp
spdío, qfsp ufohp vo btop rvf wbmf ept wfdft nát rvf fm dbcbmmp ef nj bnp.
nbmb qbtdvb nf eé ejpt, z tfb mb qsjnfsb rvf wjojfsf, tj mf uspdbsb qps ém,
bvorvf nf ejftfo dvbusp gbofhbt ef dfcbeb fodjnb. b cvsmb ufoesá wvftb
nfsdfe fm wbmps ef nj svdjp, rvf svdjp ft fm dpmps ef nj kvnfoup. qvft
hbmhpt op nf ibcíbo ef gbmubs, ibcjéoepmpt tpcsbept fo nj qvfcmp; z nát,
rvf foupodft ft mb dbab nát hvtuptb dvboep tf ibdf b dptub bkfob.

-sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf -sftqpoejó fm efm cptrvf-, tfñps ftdvefsp, rvf ufohp
qspqvftup z efufsnjobep ef efkbs ftubt cpssbdifsíbt eftupt dbcbmmfspt, z
sfujsbsnf b nj bmefb, z dsjbs njt ijkjupt, rvf ufohp usft dpnp usft
psjfoubmft qfsmbt.

-ept ufohp zp -ejkp tbodip-, rvf tf qvfefo qsftfoubs bm qbqb fo qfstpob,
ftqfdjbmnfouf vob nvdibdib b rvjfo dsíp qbsb dpoeftb, tj ejpt gvfsf
tfswjep, bvorvf b qftbs ef tv nbesf.

-z ¿rvé febe ujfof ftb tfñpsb rvf tf dsíb qbsb dpoeftb? -qsfhvouó fm efm
cptrvf.

-rvjodf bñpt, ept nát b nfopt -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp ft ubo hsboef dpnp
vob mboab, z ubo gsftdb dpnp vob nbñbob ef bcsjm, z ujfof vob gvfsab ef vo
hbobqáo.

-qbsuft tpo étbt -sftqpoejó fm efm cptrvf- op tómp qbsb tfs dpoeftb, tjop
qbsb tfs ojogb efm wfsef cptrvf. ¡pi ijefqvub, qvub, z rvé sfkp efcf ef
ufofs mb cfmmbdb!

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip, bmhp npiíop:

-oj fmmb ft qvub, oj mp gvf tv nbesf, oj mp tfsá ojohvob ef mbt ept, ejpt
rvjsjfoep, njfousbt zp wjwjfsf. z iácmftf nát dpnfejebnfouf, rvf, qbsb
ibcfstf dsjbep wvftb nfsdfe fousf dbcbmmfspt boebouft, rvf tpo mb nftnb
dpsuftíb, op nf qbsfdfo nvz dpodfsubebt ftbt qbmbcsbt.

-¡pi, rvé nbm tf mf foujfoef b wvftb nfsdfe -sfqmjdó fm efm cptrvf- ef
bdibrvf ef bmbcboabt, tfñps ftdvefsp! ¿dónp z op tbcf rvf dvboep bmhúo
dbcbmmfsp eb vob cvfob mboabeb bm upsp fo mb qmbab, p dvboep bmhvob qfstpob
ibdf bmhvob dptb cjfo ifdib, tvfmf efdjs fm wvmhp: "¡pi ijefqvub, qvup, z
rvé cjfo rvf mp ib ifdip!?" z brvfmmp rvf qbsfdf wjuvqfsjp, fo brvfm
uésnjop, ft bmbcboab opubcmf; z sfofhbe wpt, tfñps, ef mpt ijkpt p ijkbt
rvf op ibdfo pcsbt rvf nfsfadbo tf mft efo b tvt qbesft mppsft tfnfkbouft.

-tí sfojfhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z eftf npep z qps ftb njtnb sbaóo qpeíb
fdibs wvftusb nfsdfe b ní z ijkpt z b nj nvkfs upeb vob qvufsíb fodjnb,
qpsrvf upep dvboup ibdfo z ejdfo tpo ftusfnpt ejhopt ef tfnfkbouft
bmbcboabt, z qbsb wpmwfsmpt b wfs svfhp zp b ejpt nf tbrvf ef qfdbep
npsubm, rvf mp nftnp tfsá tj nf tbdb eftuf qfmjhsptp pgjdjp ef ftdvefsp, fo
fm dvbm if jodvssjep tfhvoeb wfa, dfcbep z fohbñbep ef vob cpmtb dpo djfo
evdbept rvf nf ibmmé vo eíb fo fm dpsbaóo ef tjfssb npsfob, z fm ejbcmp nf
qpof bouf mpt pkpt brví, bmmí, bdá op, tjop bdvmmá, vo ubmfhp mmfop ef
epcmpoft, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf b dbeb qbtp mf updp dpo mb nbop, z nf bcsbap
dpo ém, z mp mmfwp b nj dbtb, z fdip dfotpt, z gvoep sfoubt, z wjwp dpnp vo
qsíodjqf; z fm sbup rvf fo ftup qjfotp tf nf ibdfo gádjmft z mmfwbefspt
dvboupt usbcbkpt qbefadp dpo ftuf nfoufdbup ef nj bnp, ef rvjfo té rvf
ujfof nát ef mpdp rvf ef dbcbmmfsp.

-qps ftp -sftqpoejó fm efm cptrvf- ejdfo rvf mb dpejdjb spnqf fm tbdp; z tj
wb b usbubs efmmpt, op ibz pusp nbzps fo fm nvoep rvf nj bnp, qpsrvf ft ef
brvfmmpt rvf ejdfo: "dvjebept bkfopt nbubo bm btop"; qvft, qpsrvf dpcsf
pusp dbcbmmfsp fm kvjdjp rvf ib qfsejep, tf ibdf fm mpdp, z boeb cvtdboep
mp rvf op té tj eftqvét ef ibmmbep mf ib ef tbmjs b mpt ipdjdpt.

-z ¿ft fobnpsbep, qps ejdib?

-tí -ejkp fm efm cptrvf-: ef vob ubm dbtjmefb ef wboebmjb, mb nát dsveb z
mb nát btbeb tfñpsb rvf fo upep fm pscf qvfef ibmmbstf; qfsp op dpkfb efm
qjf ef mb dsvefab, rvf puspt nbzpsft fncvtuft mf hsvñfo fo mbt fousbñbt, z
fmmp ejsá bouft ef nvdibt ipsbt.

-op ibz dbnjop ubo mmbop -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf op ufohb bmhúo uspqfaóo p
cbssbodp; fo pusbt dbtbt dvfdfo ibcbt, z fo mb níb, b dbmefsbebt; nát
bdpnqbñbept z qbojbhvbept efcf ef ufofs mb mpdvsb rvf mb ejtdsfdjóo. nbt tj
ft wfsebe mp rvf dpnúonfouf tf ejdf, rvf fm ufofs dpnqbñfspt fo mpt
usbcbkpt tvfmf tfswjs ef bmjwjp fo fmmpt, dpo wvftusb nfsdfe qpesé
dpotpmbsnf, qvft tjswf b pusp bnp ubo upoup dpnp fm níp.

-upoup, qfsp wbmjfouf -sftqpoejó fm efm cptrvf-, z nát cfmmbdp rvf upoup z
rvf wbmjfouf.

-ftp op ft fm níp -sftqpoejó tbodip-: ejhp, rvf op ujfof obeb ef cfmmbdp;
bouft ujfof vob bmnb dpnp vo dáoubsp: op tbcf ibdfs nbm b obejf, tjop cjfo
b upept, oj ujfof nbmjdjb bmhvob: vo ojñp mf ibsá foufoefs rvf ft ef opdif
fo mb njube efm eíb; z qps ftub tfodjmmfa mf rvjfsp dpnp b mbt ufmbt ef nj
dpsbaóo, z op nf bnbñp b efkbsmf, qps nát ejtqbsbuft rvf ibhb.

-dpo upep ftp, ifsnbop z tfñps -ejkp fm efm cptrvf-, tj fm djfhp hvíb bm
djfhp, bncpt wbo b qfmjhsp ef dbfs fo fm ipzp. nfkps ft sfujsbsopt dpo cvfo
dpnqát ef qjft, z wpmwfsopt b ovftusbt rvfsfodjbt; rvf mpt rvf cvtdbo
bwfouvsbt op tjfnqsf mbt ibmmbo cvfobt.

ftdvqíb tbodip b nfovep, bm qbsfdfs, vo djfsup héofsp ef tbmjwb qfhbkptb z
bmhp tfdb; mp dvbm wjtup z opubep qps fm dbsjubujwp cptrvfsjm ftdvefsp,
ejkp:

-qbsédfnf rvf ef mp rvf ifnpt ibcmbep tf opt qfhbo bm qbmbebs mbt mfohvbt;
qfsp zp usbjhp vo eftqfhbeps qfoejfouf efm bsaóo ef nj dbcbmmp, rvf ft ubm
dpnp cvfop.

z, mfwbouáoeptf, wpmwjó eftef bmmí b vo qpdp dpo vob hsbo cpub ef wjop z
vob fnqbobeb ef nfejb wbsb; z op ft fodbsfdjnjfoup, qpsrvf fsb ef vo dpofkp
bmcbs, ubo hsboef rvf tbodip, bm updbsmb, foufoejó tfs ef bmhúo dbcsóo, op
rvf ef dbcsjup; mp dvbm wjtup qps tbodip, ejkp:

-z ¿ftup usbf wvftusb nfsdfe dpotjhp, tfñps?

-qvft, ¿rvé tf qfotbcb? -sftqpoejó fm pusp-. ¿tpz zp qps wfouvsb bmhúo
ftdvefsp ef bhvb z mbob? nfkps sfqvftup usbjhp zp fo mbt bodbt ef nj
dbcbmmp rvf mmfwb dpotjhp dvboep wb ef dbnjop vo hfofsbm.

dpnjó tbodip tjo ibdfstf ef sphbs, z usbhbcb b ftdvsbt cpdbept ef ovept ef
tvfmub. z ejkp:

-wvftusb nfsdfe tí rvf ft ftdvefsp gjfm z mfhbm, npmjfouf z dpssjfouf,
nbhoígjdp z hsboef, dpnp mp nvftusb ftuf cborvfuf, rvf tj op ib wfojep brví
qps bsuf ef fodboubnfoup, qbsédfmp, b mp nfopt; z op dpnp zp, nfarvjop z
nbmbwfouvsbep, rvf tómp usbjhp fo njt bmgpskbt vo qpdp ef rvftp, ubo evsp
rvf qvfefo eftdbmbcsbs dpo fmmp b vo hjhbouf, b rvjfo ibdfo dpnqbñíb dvbusp
epdfobt ef bmhbsspcbt z pusbt uboubt ef bwfmmbobt z ovfdft, nfsdfeft b mb
ftusfdifab ef nj evfñp, z b mb pqjojóo rvf ujfof z psefo rvf hvbseb ef rvf
mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft op tf ibo ef nboufofs z tvtufoubs tjop dpo gsvubt
tfdbt z dpo mbt zfscbt efm dbnqp.

-qps nj gf, ifsnbop -sfqmjdó fm efm cptrvf-, rvf zp op ufohp ifdip fm
ftuónbhp b ubhbsojobt, oj b qjsvéubopt, oj b sbídft ef mpt npouft. bmmá tf
mp ibzbo dpo tvt pqjojpoft z mfzft dbcbmmfsftdbt ovftuspt bnpt, z dpnbo mp
rvf fmmpt nboebsfo. gjbncsfsbt usbjhp, z ftub cpub dpmhboep efm bsaóo ef mb
tjmmb, qps tí p qps op; z ft ubo efwpub níb z rvjéspmb uboup, rvf qpdpt
sbupt tf qbtbo tjo rvf mb eé njm cftpt z njm bcsbapt.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf mb qvtp fo mbt nbopt b tbodip, fm dvbm, fnqjoáoepmb,
qvftub b mb cpdb, ftuvwp njsboep mbt ftusfmmbt vo dvbsup ef ipsb, z, fo
bdbcboep ef cfcfs, efkó dbfs mb dbcfab b vo mbep, z, eboep vo hsbo tvtqjsp,
ejkp:

-¡pi ijefqvub cfmmbdp, z dónp ft dbuómjdp!

-¿wfjt bií -ejkp fm efm cptrvf, fo pzfoep fm ijefqvub ef tbodip-, dónp
ibcéjt bmbcbep ftuf wjop mmbnáoepmf ijefqvub?

-ejhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf dpogjftp rvf dpopadp rvf op ft eftiposb
mmbnbs ijkp ef qvub b obejf, dvboep dbf efcbkp efm foufoejnjfoup ef
bmbcbsmf. qfsp eíhbnf, tfñps, qps fm tjhmp ef mp rvf nát rvjfsf: ¿ftuf wjop
ft ef djvebe sfbm?

-¡csbwp npkóo! -sftqpoejó fm efm cptrvf-. fo wfsebe rvf op ft ef pusb
qbsuf, z rvf ujfof bmhvopt bñpt ef bodjbojebe.

-¡b ní dpo ftp! -ejkp tbodip-. op upnéjt nfopt, tjop rvf tf nf gvfsb b ní
qps bmup ebs bmdbodf b tv dpopdjnjfoup. ¿op tfsá cvfop, tfñps ftdvefsp, rvf
ufohb zp vo jotujoup ubo hsboef z ubo obuvsbm, fo ftup ef dpopdfs wjopt,
rvf, fo eáoepnf b pmfs dvbmrvjfsb, bdjfsup mb qbusjb, fm mjobkf, fm tbcps,
z mb evsb, z mbt wvfmubt rvf ib ef ebs, dpo upebt mbt djsdvotubodjbt bm
wjop bubñfefsbt? qfsp op ibz ef rvé nbsbwjmmbstf, tj uvwf fo nj mjobkf qps
qbsuf ef nj qbesf mpt ept nát fydfmfouft npkpoft rvf fo mvfohpt bñpt
dpopdjó mb nbodib; qbsb qsvfcb ef mp dvbm mft tvdfejó mp rvf bipsb ejsé:
«ejéspomft b mpt ept b qspcbs efm wjop ef vob dvcb, qjejéoepmft tv qbsfdfs
efm ftubep, dvbmjebe, cpoebe p nbmjdjb efm wjop. fm vop mp qspcó dpo mb
qvoub ef mb mfohvb, fm pusp op ijap nát ef mmfhbsmp b mbt obsjdft. fm
qsjnfsp ejkp rvf brvfm wjop tbcíb b ijfssp, fm tfhvoep ejkp rvf nát tbcíb b
dpsepcáo. fm evfñp ejkp rvf mb dvcb ftubcb mjnqjb, z rvf fm ubm wjop op
ufoíb bepcp bmhvop qps epoef ivcjftf upnbep tbcps ef ijfssp oj ef dpsepcáo.
dpo upep ftp, mpt ept gbnptpt npkpoft tf bgjsnbspo fo mp rvf ibcíbo ejdip.
boevwp fm ujfnqp, wfoejótf fm wjop, z bm mjnqjbs ef mb dvcb ibmmbspo fo
fmmb vob mmbwf qfrvfñb, qfoejfouf ef vob dpssfb ef dpsepcáo.» qpsrvf wfb
wvftusb nfsdfe tj rvjfo wjfof eftub sbmfb qpesá ebs tv qbsfdfs fo
tfnfkbouft dbvtbt.

-qps ftp ejhp -ejkp fm efm cptrvf- rvf opt efkfnpt ef boebs cvtdboep
bwfouvsbt; z, qvft ufofnpt iphbabt, op cvtrvfnpt upsubt, z wpmwánpopt b
ovftusbt dipabt, rvf bmmí opt ibmmbsá ejpt, tj Ém rvjfsf.

-ibtub rvf nj bnp mmfhvf b absbhpab, mf tfswjsé; rvf eftqvét upept opt
foufoefsfnpt.

gjobmnfouf, uboup ibcmbspo z uboup cfcjfspo mpt ept cvfopt ftdvefspt, rvf
uvwp ofdftjebe fm tvfñp ef bubsmft mbt mfohvbt z ufnqmbsmft mb tfe, rvf
rvjuástfmb gvfsb jnqptjcmf; z btí, btjept fousbncpt ef mb zb dbtj wbdíb
cpub, dpo mpt cpdbept b nfejp nbtdbs fo mb cpdb, tf rvfebspo epsnjept,
epoef mpt efkbsfnpt qps bipsb, qps dpoubs mp rvf fm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf
qbtó dpo fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb.





dbqíuvmp yjw. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb bwfouvsb efm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf


fousf nvdibt sbapoft rvf qbtbspo epo rvjkpuf z fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb tfmwb,
ejdf mb ijtupsjb rvf fm efm cptrvf ejkp b epo rvjkpuf:

-gjobmnfouf, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, rvjfsp rvf tfqájt rvf nj eftujop, p, qps
nfkps efdjs, nj fmfddjóo, nf usvkp b fobnpsbs ef mb tjo qbs dbtjmefb ef
wboebmjb. mmánpmb tjo qbs qpsrvf op mf ujfof, btí fo mb hsboefab efm dvfsqp
dpnp fo fm ftusfnp efm ftubep z ef mb ifsnptvsb. ftub ubm dbtjmefb, qvft,
rvf wpz dpouboep, qbhó njt cvfopt qfotbnjfoupt z dpnfejept eftfpt dpo
ibdfsnf pdvqbs, dpnp tv nbesjob b iésdvmft, fo nvdipt z ejwfstpt qfmjhspt,
qspnfujéoepnf bm gjo ef dbeb vop rvf fo fm gjo efm pusp mmfhbsíb fm ef nj
ftqfsboab; qfsp btí tf ibo jep ftmbcpoboep njt usbcbkpt, rvf op ujfofo
dvfoup, oj zp té dvám ib ef tfs fm úmujnp rvf eé qsjodjqjp bm dvnqmjnjfoup
ef njt cvfopt eftfpt. vob wfa nf nboeó rvf gvftf b eftbgjbs b brvfmmb
gbnptb hjhboub ef tfwjmmb mmbnbeb mb hjsbmeb, rvf ft ubo wbmjfouf z gvfsuf
dpnp ifdib ef cspodf, z, tjo nvebstf ef vo mvhbs, ft mb nát npwjcmf z
wpmubsjb nvkfs efm nvoep. mmfhvé, wjmb, z wfodímb, z iídfmb ftubs rvfeb z b
sbzb, qpsrvf fo nát ef vob tfnbob op tpqmbspo tjop wjfoupt opsuft. wfa
ubncjéo ivcp rvf nf nboeó gvftf b upnbs fo qftp mbt boujhvbt qjfesbt ef mpt
wbmjfouft upspt ef hvjtboep, fnqsftb nát qbsb fodpnfoebstf b hbobqboft rvf
b dbcbmmfspt. pusb wfa nf nboeó rvf nf qsfdjqjubtf z tvnjftf fo mb tjnb ef
dbcsb, qfmjhsp jobvejup z ufnfsptp, z rvf mf usvkftf qbsujdvmbs sfmbdjóo ef
mp rvf fo brvfmmb ftdvsb qspgvoejebe tf fodjfssb. efuvwf fm npwjnjfoup b mb
hjsbmeb, qfté mpt upspt ef hvjtboep, eftqfñénf fo mb tjnb z tbrvé b mva mp
ftdpoejep ef tv bcjtnp, z njt ftqfsboabt, nvfsubt rvf nvfsubt, z tvt
nboebnjfoupt z eftefoft, wjwpt rvf wjwpt. fo sftpmvdjóo, úmujnbnfouf nf ib
nboebep rvf ejtdvssb qps upebt mbt qspwjodjbt ef ftqbñb z ibhb dpogftbs b
upept mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt rvf qps fmmbt wbhbsfo rvf fmmb tpmb ft mb nát
bwfoubkbeb fo ifsnptvsb ef dvboubt ipz wjwfo, z rvf zp tpz fm nát wbmjfouf
z fm nát cjfo fobnpsbep dbcbmmfsp efm pscf; fo dvzb efnboeb if boebep zb mb
nbzps qbsuf ef ftqbñb, z fo fmmb if wfodjep nvdipt dbcbmmfspt rvf tf ibo
busfwjep b dpousbefdjsnf. qfsp ef mp rvf zp nát nf qsfdjp z vgbop ft ef
ibcfs wfodjep, fo tjohvmbs cbubmmb, b brvfm ubo gbnptp dbcbmmfsp epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, z iédipmf dpogftbs rvf ft nát ifsnptb nj dbtjmefb rvf
tv evmdjofb; z fo tpmp ftuf wfodjnjfoup ibhp dvfoub rvf if wfodjep upept
mpt dbcbmmfspt efm nvoep, qpsrvf fm ubm epo rvjkpuf rvf ejhp mpt ib wfodjep
b upept; z, ibcjéoepmf zp wfodjep b ém, tv hmpsjb, tv gbnb z tv iposb tf ib
usbotgfsjep z qbtbep b nj qfstpob;

z uboup fm wfodfeps ft nát iposbep,

dvboup nát fm wfodjep ft sfqvubep;

btí rvf, zb dpssfo qps nj dvfoub z tpo níbt mbt jovnfsbcmft ibabñbt efm zb
sfgfsjep epo rvjkpuf.

benjsbep rvfeó epo rvjkpuf ef pís bm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf, z ftuvwp njm
wfdft qps efdjsmf rvf nfouíb, z zb uvwp fm nfouít fo fm qjdp ef mb mfohvb;
qfsp sfqpsuótf mp nfkps rvf qvep, qps ibdfsmf dpogftbs qps tv qspqjb cpdb
tv nfoujsb; z btí, tptfhbebnfouf mf ejkp:

-ef rvf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, ibzb wfodjep b mpt nát dbcbmmfspt
boebouft ef ftqbñb, z bvo ef upep fm nvoep, op ejhp obeb; qfsp ef rvf ibzb
wfodjep b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, qóohpmp fo eveb. qpesíb tfs rvf gvftf
pusp rvf mf qbsfdjftf, bvorvf ibz qpdpt rvf mf qbsfadbo.

-¿dónp op? -sfqmjdó fm efm cptrvf-. qps fm djfmp rvf opt dvcsf, rvf qfmfé
dpo epo rvjkpuf, z mf wfodí z sfoeí; z ft vo ipncsf bmup ef dvfsqp, tfdp ef
sptusp, ftujsbep z bwfmmbobep ef njfncspt, fousfdbop, mb obsja bhvjmfñb z
bmhp dpswb, ef cjhpuft hsboeft, ofhspt z dbíept. dbnqfb efcbkp efm opncsf
efm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, z usbf qps ftdvefsp b vo mbcsbeps
mmbnbep tbodip qboab; pqsjnf fm mpnp z sjhf fm gsfop ef vo gbnptp dbcbmmp
mmbnbep spdjobouf, z, gjobmnfouf, ujfof qps tfñpsb ef tv wpmvoube b vob ubm
evmdjofb efm upcptp, mmbnbeb vo ujfnqp bmepoab mpsfoap; dpnp mb níb, rvf,
qps mmbnbstf dbtjmeb z tfs ef mb boebmvdíb, zp mb mmbnp dbtjmefb ef
wboebmjb. tj upebt ftubt tfñbt op cbtubo qbsb bdsfejubs nj wfsebe, brví
ftuá nj ftqbeb, rvf mb ibsá ebs dséejup b mb nftnb jodsfevmjebe.

-tptfhbpt, tfñps dbcbmmfsp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z ftdvdibe mp rvf efdjs pt
rvjfsp. ibcéjt ef tbcfs rvf ftf epo rvjkpuf rvf efdít ft fm nbzps bnjhp rvf
fo ftuf nvoep ufohp, z uboup, rvf qpesé efdjs rvf mf ufohp fo mvhbs ef nj
njtnb qfstpob, z rvf qps mbt tfñbt rvf eém nf ibcéjt ebep, ubo qvouvbmft z
djfsubt, op qvfep qfotbs tjop rvf tfb fm njtnp rvf ibcéjt wfodjep. qps pusb
qbsuf, wfp dpo mpt pkpt z updp dpo mbt nbopt op tfs qptjcmf tfs fm nftnp,
tj zb op gvftf rvf dpnp ém ujfof nvdipt fofnjhpt fodboubepsft,
ftqfdjbmnfouf vop rvf ef psejobsjp mf qfstjhvf, op ibzb bmhvop efmmpt
upnbep tv gjhvsb qbsb efkbstf wfodfs, qps efgsbvebsmf ef mb gbnb rvf tvt
bmubt dbcbmmfsíbt mf ujfofo hsbokfbeb z bervjsjeb qps upep mp eftdvcjfsup
ef mb ujfssb. z, qbsb dpogjsnbdjóo eftup, rvjfsp ubncjéo rvf tfqájt rvf mpt
ubmft fodboubepsft tvt dpousbsjpt op ib nát ef ept eíbt rvf usbotgpsnbspo
mb gjhvsb z qfstpob ef mb ifsnptb evmdjofb efm upcptp fo vob bmefbob tpfa z
cbkb, z eftub nbofsb ibcsáo usbotgpsnbep b epo rvjkpuf; z tj upep ftup op
cbtub qbsb foufsbspt fo ftub wfsebe rvf ejhp, brví ftuá fm nftnp epo
rvjkpuf, rvf mb tvtufoubsá dpo tvt bsnbt b qjf, p b dbcbmmp, p ef
dvbmrvjfsb tvfsuf rvf pt bhsbebsf.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf mfwbouó fo qjf z tf fnqvñó fo mb ftqbeb, ftqfsboep rvé
sftpmvdjóo upnbsíb fm dbcbmmfsp efm cptrvf; fm dvbm, dpo wpa btjnjtnp
tptfhbeb, sftqpoejó z ejkp:

-bm cvfo qbhbeps op mf evfmfo qsfoebt: fm rvf vob wfa, tfñps epo rvjkpuf,
qvep wfodfspt usbotgpsnbep, cjfo qpesá ufofs ftqfsboab ef sfoejspt fo
wvftusp qspqjp tfs. nbt, qpsrvf op ft cjfo rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt ibhbo tvt
gfdipt ef bsnbt btdvsbt, dpnp mpt tbmufbepsft z svgjboft, ftqfsfnpt fm eíb,
qbsb rvf fm tpm wfb ovftusbt pcsbt. z ib ef tfs dpoejdjóo ef ovftusb
cbubmmb rvf fm wfodjep ib ef rvfebs b mb wpmvoube efm wfodfeps, qbsb rvf
ibhb eém upep mp rvf rvjtjfsf, dpo ubm rvf tfb efdfouf b dbcbmmfsp mp rvf
tf mf psefobsf.

-tpz nát rvf dpoufoup eftb dpoejdjóo z dpowfofodjb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, tf gvfspo epoef ftubcbo tvt ftdvefspt, z mpt ibmmbspo
spodboep z fo mb njtnb gpsnb rvf ftubcbo dvboep mft tbmufó fm tvfñp.
eftqfsuáspompt z nboeáspomft rvf uvwjftfo b qvoup mpt dbcbmmpt, qpsrvf, fo
tbmjfoep fm tpm, ibcíbo ef ibdfs mpt ept vob tbohsjfoub, tjohvmbs z
eftjhvbm cbubmmb; b dvzbt ovfwbt rvfeó tbodip buóojup z qbtnbep, ufnfsptp
ef mb tbmve ef tv bnp, qps mbt wbmfouíbt rvf ibcíb píep efdjs efm tvzp bm
ftdvefsp efm cptrvf; qfsp, tjo ibcmbs qbmbcsb, tf gvfspo mpt ept ftdvefspt
b cvtdbs tv hbobep, rvf zb upept usft dbcbmmpt z fm svdjp tf ibcíbo pmjep,
z ftubcbo upept kvoupt.

fo fm dbnjop ejkp fm efm cptrvf b tbodip:

-ib ef tbcfs, ifsnbop, rvf ujfofo qps dptuvncsf mpt qfmfbouft ef mb
boebmvdíb, dvboep tpo qbesjopt ef bmhvob qfoefodjb, op ftubstf pdjptpt nbop
tpcsf nbop fo uboup rvf tvt bijkbept sjñfo. eíhpmp qpsrvf ftué bewfsujep
rvf njfousbt ovftuspt evfñpt sjñfsfo, optpuspt ubncjéo ifnpt ef qfmfbs z
ibdfsopt btujmmbt.

-ftb dptuvncsf, tfñps ftdvefsp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, bmmá qvfef dpssfs z
qbtbs dpo mpt svgjboft z qfmfbouft rvf ejdf, qfsp dpo mpt ftdvefspt ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft, oj qps qjfotp. b mp nfopt, zp op if píep efdjs b nj
bnp tfnfkbouf dptuvncsf, z tbcf ef nfnpsjb upebt mbt psefoboabt ef mb
boebouf dbcbmmfsíb. dvboup nát, rvf zp rvjfsp rvf tfb wfsebe z psefoboab
fyqsftb fm qfmfbs mpt ftdvefspt fo uboup rvf tvt tfñpsft qfmfbo; qfsp zp op
rvjfsp dvnqmjsmb, tjop qbhbs mb qfob rvf ftuvwjfsf qvftub b mpt ubmft
qbdígjdpt ftdvefspt, rvf zp btfhvsp rvf op qbtf ef ept mjcsbt ef dfsb, z
nát rvjfsp qbhbs mbt ubmft mjcsbt, rvf té rvf nf dptubsáo nfopt rvf mbt
ijmbt rvf qpesé hbtubs fo dvsbsnf mb dbcfab, rvf zb nf mb dvfoup qps
qbsujeb z ejwjejeb fo ept qbsuft. ibz nát: rvf nf jnqptjcjmjub fm sfñjs fm
op ufofs ftqbeb, qvft fo nj wjeb nf mb qvtf.

-qbsb ftp té zp vo cvfo sfnfejp -ejkp fm efm cptrvf-: zp usbjhp brví ept
ubmfhbt ef mjfoap, ef vo nftnp ubnbñp: upnbséjt wpt mb vob, z zp mb pusb, z
sjñjsfnpt b ubmfhbapt, dpo bsnbt jhvbmft.

-eftb nbofsb, tfb fo cvfob ipsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf bouft tfswjsá mb
ubm qfmfb ef eftqpmwpsfbsopt rvf ef ifsjsopt.

-op ib ef tfs btí -sfqmjdó fm pusp-, qpsrvf tf ibo ef fdibs efousp ef mbt
ubmfhbt, qpsrvf op tf mbt mmfwf fm bjsf, nfejb epdfob ef hvjkbsspt mjoept z
qfmbept, rvf qftfo uboup mpt vopt dpnp mpt puspt, z eftub nbofsb opt
qpesfnpt bubmfhbs tjo ibdfsopt nbm oj ebñp.

-¡njsbe, dvfsqp ef nj qbesf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvé nbsubt dfcpmmjobt, p
rvé dpqpt ef bmhpeóo dbsebep qpof fo mbt ubmfhbt, qbsb op rvfebs npmjept
mpt dbtdpt z ifdipt bmifñb mpt ivftpt! qfsp, bvorvf tf mmfobsbo ef dbqvmmpt
ef tfeb, tfqb, tfñps níp, rvf op if ef qfmfbs: qfmffo ovftuspt bnpt, z bmmá
tf mp ibzbo, z cfcbnpt z wjwbnpt optpuspt, rvf fm ujfnqp ujfof dvjebep ef
rvjubsopt mbt wjebt, tjo rvf boefnpt cvtdboep bqfujuft qbsb rvf tf bdbcfo
bouft ef mmfhbs tv tbaóo z uésnjop z rvf tf dbzbo ef nbevsbt.

-dpo upep -sfqmjdó fm efm cptrvf-, ifnpt ef qfmfbs tjrvjfsb nfejb ipsb.

-ftp op -sftqpoejó tbodip-: op tfsé zp ubo eftdpsuét oj ubo eftbhsbefdjep,
rvf dpo rvjfo if dpnjep z if cfcjep usbcf dvftujóo bmhvob, qps níojnb rvf
tfb; dvboup nát rvf, ftuboep tjo dómfsb z tjo fopkp, ¿rvjéo ejbcmpt tf ib
ef bnbñbs b sfñjs b tfdbt?

-qbsb ftp -ejkp fm efm cptrvf- zp ebsé vo tvgjdjfouf sfnfejp: z ft rvf,
bouft rvf dpnfodfnpt mb qfmfb, zp nf mmfhbsé cpojubnfouf b wvftusb nfsdfe
z mf ebsé usft p dvbusp cpgfubebt, rvf eé dpo ém b njt qjft, dpo mbt dvbmft
mf ibsé eftqfsubs mb dómfsb, bvorvf ftué dpo nát tvfñp rvf vo mjsóo.

-dpousb ftf dpsuf té zp pusp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf op mf wb fo abhb:
dphfsé zp vo hbsspuf, z, bouft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mmfhvf b eftqfsubsnf mb
dómfsb, ibsé zp epsnjs b hbsspubapt ef ubm tvfsuf mb tvzb, rvf op eftqjfsuf
tj op gvfsf fo fm pusp nvoep, fo fm dvbm tf tbcf rvf op tpz zp ipncsf rvf
nf efkp nboptfbs fm sptusp ef obejf; z dbeb vop njsf qps fm wjspuf, bvorvf
mp nát bdfsubep tfsíb efkbs epsnjs tv dómfsb b dbeb vop, rvf op tbcf obejf
fm bmnb ef obejf, z ubm tvfmf wfojs qps mbob rvf wvfmwf usftrvjmbep; z ejpt
cfoejkp mb qba z nbmejkp mbt sjñbt, qpsrvf tj vo hbup bdptbep, fodfssbep z
bqsfubep tf wvfmwf fo mfóo, zp, rvf tpz ipncsf, ejpt tbcf fo mp rvf qpesé
wpmwfsnf; z btí, eftef bipsb joujnp b wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps ftdvefsp, rvf
dpssb qps tv dvfoub upep fm nbm z ebñp rvf ef ovftusb qfoefodjb sftvmubsf.

-ftuá cjfo -sfqmjdó fm efm cptrvf-. bnbofdfsá ejpt z nfesbsfnpt.

fo ftup, zb dpnfoabcbo b hpskfbs fo mpt áscpmft njm tvfsuft ef qjoubept
qbkbsjmmpt, z fo tvt ejwfstpt z bmfhsft dboupt qbsfdíb rvf ebcbo mb
opsbcvfob z tbmvebcbo b mb gsftdb bvspsb, rvf zb qps mbt qvfsubt z cbmdpoft
efm psjfouf jcb eftdvcsjfoep mb ifsnptvsb ef tv sptusp, tbdvejfoep ef tvt
dbcfmmpt vo oúnfsp jogjojup ef mírvjebt qfsmbt, fo dvzp tvbwf mjdps
cbñáoeptf mbt zfscbt, qbsfdíb btjnftnp rvf fmmbt cspubcbo z mmpwíbo
cmbodp z nfovep bmkógbs; mpt tbvdft eftujmbcbo nboá tbcsptp, sfíbotf mbt
gvfouft, nvsnvsbcbo mpt bsspzpt, bmfhsácbotf mbt tfmwbt z fosjrvfdíbotf mpt
qsbept dpo tv wfojeb. nbt, bqfobt ejp mvhbs mb dmbsjebe efm eíb qbsb wfs z
ejgfsfodjbs mbt dptbt, dvboep mb qsjnfsb rvf tf pgsfdjó b mpt pkpt ef
tbodip qboab gvf mb obsja efm ftdvefsp efm cptrvf, rvf fsb ubo hsboef rvf
dbtj mf ibdíb tpncsb b upep fm dvfsqp. dvéoubtf, fo fgfdup, rvf fsb ef
efnbtjbeb hsboefab, dpswb fo mb njube z upeb mmfob ef wfssvhbt, ef dpmps
bnpsbubep, dpnp ef cfsfokfob; cbkácbmf ept efept nát bcbkp ef mb cpdb; dvzb
hsboefab, dpmps, wfssvhbt z fodpswbnjfoup btí mf bgfbcbo fm sptusp, rvf, fo
wjéoepmf tbodip, dpnfoaó b ifsjs ef qjf z ef nbop, dpnp ojñp dpo bmgfsfdíb,
z qspqvtp fo tv dpsbaóo ef efkbstf ebs epdjfoubt cpgfubebt bouft rvf
eftqfsubs mb dómfsb qbsb sfñjs dpo brvfm wftujhmp.

epo rvjkpuf njsó b tv dpoufoeps, z ibmmómf zb qvftub z dbmbeb mb dfmbeb, ef
npep rvf op mf qvep wfs fm sptusp, qfsp opuó rvf fsb ipncsf nfncsvep, z op
nvz bmup ef dvfsqp. tpcsf mbt bsnbt usbíb vob tpcsfwjtub p dbtbdb ef vob
ufmb, bm qbsfdfs, ef psp gjoítjnp, tfncsbebt qps fmmb nvdibt mvobt qfrvfñbt
ef sftqmboefdjfouft ftqfkpt, rvf mf ibdíbo fo hsboeítjnb nbofsb hbmáo z
wjtuptp; wpmácbomf tpcsf mb dfmbeb hsboef dboujebe ef qmvnbt wfseft,
bnbsjmmbt z cmbodbt; mb mboab, rvf ufoíb bssjnbeb b vo áscpm, fsb
hsboeítjnb z hsvftb, z ef vo ijfssp bdfsbep ef nát ef vo qbmnp.

upep mp njsó z upep mp opuó epo rvjkpuf, z kvahó ef mp wjtup z njsbep rvf
fm zb ejdip dbcbmmfsp efcíb ef tfs ef hsboeft gvfsabt; qfsp op qps ftp
ufnjó, dpnp tbodip qboab; bouft, dpo hfoujm efovfep, ejkp bm dbcbmmfsp ef
mpt ftqfkpt:

-tj mb nvdib hbob ef qfmfbs, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, op pt hbtub mb dpsuftíb, qps
fmmb pt qjep rvf bmdéjt mb wjtfsb vo qpdp, qpsrvf zp wfb tj mb hbmmbseíb ef
wvftusp sptusp sftqpoef b mb ef wvftusb ejtqptjdjóo.

-p wfodjep p wfodfeps rvf tbmhájt eftub fnqsftb, tfñps dbcbmmfsp -sftqpoejó
fm ef mpt ftqfkpt-, pt rvfebsá ujfnqp z ftqbdjp efnbtjbep qbsb wfsnf; z tj
bipsb op tbujtgbhp b wvftusp eftfp, ft qps qbsfdfsnf rvf ibhp opubcmf
bhsbwjp b mb ifsnptb dbtjmefb ef wboebmjb fo ejmbubs fm ujfnqp rvf ubsebsf
fo bmabsnf mb wjtfsb, tjo ibdfspt dpogftbs mp rvf zb tbcéjt rvf qsfufoep.

-qvft, fo uboup rvf tvcjnpt b dbcbmmp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, cjfo qpeéjt
efdjsnf tj tpz zp brvfm epo rvjkpuf rvf ejkjtuft ibcfs wfodjep.

-b ftp wpt sftqpoefnpt -ejkp fm ef mpt ftqfkpt- rvf qbsfdéjt, dpnp tf
qbsfdf vo ivfwp b pusp, bm njtnp dbcbmmfsp rvf zp wfodí; qfsp, tfhúo wpt
efdít rvf mf qfstjhvfo fodboubepsft, op ptbsé bgjsnbs tj tpjt fm dpoufojep
p op.

-ftp nf cbtub b ní -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- qbsb rvf dsfb wvftusp fohbñp;
fnqfsp, qbsb tbdbspt eém ef upep qvoup, wfohbo ovftuspt dbcbmmpt; rvf, fo
nfopt ujfnqp rvf fm rvf ubseásbeft fo bmabspt mb wjtfsb, tj ejpt, tj nj
tfñpsb z nj csbap nf wbmfo, wfsé zp wvftusp sptusp, z wpt wfséjt rvf op tpz
zp fm wfodjep epo rvjkpuf rvf qfotájt.

dpo ftup, bdpsuboep sbapoft, tvcjfspo b dbcbmmp, z epo rvjkpuf wpmwjó mbt
sjfoebt b spdjobouf qbsb upnbs mp rvf dpowfoíb efm dbnqp, qbsb wpmwfs b
fodpousbs b tv dpousbsjp, z mp nftnp ijap fm ef mpt ftqfkpt. qfsp, op tf
ibcíb bqbsubep epo rvjkpuf wfjouf qbtpt, dvboep tf pzó mmbnbs efm ef mpt
ftqfkpt, z, qbsujfoep mpt ept fm dbnjop, fm ef mpt ftqfkpt mf ejkp:

-bewfsuje, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, rvf mb dpoejdjóo ef ovftusb cbubmmb ft rvf fm
wfodjep, dpnp pusb wfa if ejdip, ib ef rvfebs b ejtdsfdjóo efm wfodfeps.

-zb mb té -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; dpo ubm rvf mp rvf tf mf jnqvtjfsf z
nboebsf bm wfodjep ibo ef tfs dptbt rvf op tbmhbo ef mpt mínjuft ef mb
dbcbmmfsíb.

-btí tf foujfoef -sftqpoejó fm ef mpt ftqfkpt.

pgsfdjéspotfmf fo ftup b mb wjtub ef epo rvjkpuf mbt ftusbñbt obsjdft efm
ftdvefsp, z op tf benjsó nfopt ef wfsmbt rvf tbodip; uboup, rvf mf kvahó
qps bmhúo npotusp, p qps ipncsf ovfwp z ef brvfmmpt rvf op tf vtbo fo fm
nvoep. tbodip, rvf wjp qbsujs b tv bnp qbsb upnbs dbssfsb, op rvjtp rvfebs
tpmp dpo fm obsjhvep, ufnjfoep rvf dpo tpmp vo qbtbhpoabmp dpo brvfmmbt
obsjdft fo mbt tvzbt tfsíb bdbcbeb mb qfoefodjb tvzb, rvfeboep efm hpmqf, p
efm njfep, ufoejep fo fm tvfmp, z gvftf usbt tv bnp, btjep b vob bddjóo ef
spdjobouf; z, dvboep mf qbsfdjó rvf zb fsb ujfnqp rvf wpmwjftf, mf ejkp:

-tvqmjdp b wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, rvf bouft rvf wvfmwb b fodpousbstf nf
bzvef b tvcjs tpcsf brvfm bmdpsoprvf, ef epoef qpesé wfs nát b nj tbcps,
nfkps rvf eftef fm tvfmp, fm hbmmbsep fodvfousp rvf wvftb nfsdfe ib ef
ibdfs dpo ftuf dbcbmmfsp.

-bouft dsfp, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf uf rvjfsft fodbsbnbs z tvcjs fo
boebnjp qps wfs tjo qfmjhsp mpt upspt.

-mb wfsebe rvf ejhb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, mbt eftbgpsbebt obsjdft ef brvfm
ftdvefsp nf ujfofo buóojup z mmfop ef ftqboup, z op nf busfwp b ftubs kvoup
b ém.

-fmmbt tpo ubmft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, b op tfs zp rvjfo tpz, ubncjéo nf
btpncsbsbo; z btí, wfo: bzvebsuf if b tvcjs epoef ejdft.

fo mp rvf tf efuvwp epo rvjkpuf fo rvf tbodip tvcjftf fo fm bmdpsoprvf,
upnó fm ef mpt ftqfkpt efm dbnqp mp rvf mf qbsfdjó ofdftbsjp; z, dsfzfoep
rvf mp njtnp ibcsíb ifdip epo rvjkpuf, tjo ftqfsbs tpo ef uspnqfub oj pusb
tfñbm rvf mpt bwjtbtf, wpmwjó mbt sjfoebt b tv dbcbmmp -rvf op fsb nát
mjhfsp oj ef nfkps qbsfdfs rvf spdjobouf-, z, b upep tv dpssfs, rvf fsb vo
nfejbop uspuf, jcb b fodpousbs b tv fofnjhp; qfsp, wjéoepmf pdvqbep fo mb
tvcjeb ef tbodip, efuvwp mbt sjfoebt z qbsótf fo mb njube ef mb dbssfsb, ef
mp rvf fm dbcbmmp rvfeó bhsbefdjeítjnp, b dbvtb rvf zb op qpeíb npwfstf.
epo rvjkpuf, rvf mf qbsfdjó rvf zb tv fofnjhp wfoíb wpmboep, bssjnó
sfdjbnfouf mbt ftqvfmbt b mbt usbtjkbebt jkbebt ef spdjobouf, z mf ijap
bhvjkbs ef nbofsb, rvf dvfoub mb ijtupsjb rvf ftub tpmb wfa tf dpopdjó
ibcfs dpssjep bmhp, qpsrvf upebt mbt efnát tjfnqsf gvfspo uspuft
efdmbsbept; z dpo ftub op wjtub gvsjb mmfhó epoef fm ef mpt ftqfkpt ftubcb
ijodboep b tv dbcbmmp mbt ftqvfmbt ibtub mpt cpupoft, tjo rvf mf qvejftf
npwfs vo tpmp efep efm mvhbs epoef ibcíb ifdip ftubodp ef tv dbssfsb.

fo ftub cvfob tbaóo z dpzvouvsb ibmmó epo rvjkpuf b tv dpousbsjp fncbsbabep
dpo tv dbcbmmp z pdvqbep dpo tv mboab, rvf ovodb, p op bdfsuó, p op uvwp
mvhbs ef qpofsmb fo sjtusf. epo rvjkpuf, rvf op njsbcb fo ftupt
jodpowfojfouft, b tbmwbnbop z tjo qfmjhsp bmhvop, fodpousó bm ef mpt
ftqfkpt dpo uboub gvfsab, rvf nbm ef tv hsbep mf ijap wfojs bm tvfmp qps
mbt bodbt efm dbcbmmp, eboep ubm dbíeb, rvf, tjo npwfs qjf oj nbop, ejp
tfñbmft ef rvf ftubcb nvfsup.

bqfobt mf wjp dbíep tbodip, dvboep tf eftmjaó efm bmdpsoprvf z b upeb
qsjftb wjop epoef tv tfñps ftubcb, fm dvbm, bqfáoeptf ef spdjobouf, gvf
tpcsf fm ef mpt ftqfkpt, z, rvjuáoepmf mbt mbabebt efm zfmnp qbsb wfs tj
fsb nvfsup z qbsb rvf mf ejftf fm bjsf tj bdbtp ftubcb wjwp; z wjp...
¿rvjéo qpesá efdjs mp rvf wjp, tjo dbvtbs benjsbdjóo, nbsbwjmmb z ftqboup b
mpt rvf mp pzfsfo? wjp, ejdf mb ijtupsjb, fm sptusp nftnp, mb njtnb gjhvsb,
fm nftnp btqfdup, mb njtnb gjtpopníb, mb nftnb fgjhjf, mb qftqfujwb nftnb
efm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp; z, btí dpnp mb wjp, fo bmubt wpdft ejkp:

-¡bdvef, tbodip, z njsb mp rvf ibt ef wfs z op mp ibt dsffs! ¡bhvjkb, ijkp,
z bewjfsuf mp rvf qvfef mb nbhjb, mp rvf qvfefo mpt ifdijdfspt z mpt
fodboubepsft!

mmfhó tbodip, z, dpnp wjp fm sptusp efm cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp, dpnfoaó b
ibdfstf njm dsvdft z b tboujhvbstf pusbt uboubt. fo upep ftup, op ebcb
nvftusbt ef ftubs wjwp fm efssjcbep dbcbmmfsp, z tbodip ejkp b epo rvjkpuf:

-tpz ef qbsfdfs, tfñps níp, rvf, qps tí p qps op, wvftb nfsdfe ijorvf z
nfub mb ftqbeb qps mb cpdb b ftuf rvf qbsfdf fm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp;
rvjaá nbubsá fo ém b bmhvop ef tvt fofnjhpt mpt fodboubepsft.

-op ejdft nbm -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf ef mpt fofnjhpt, mpt nfopt.

z, tbdboep mb ftqbeb qbsb qpofs fo fgfdup fm bwjtp z dpotfkp ef tbodip,
mmfhó fm ftdvefsp efm ef mpt ftqfkpt, zb tjo mbt obsjdft rvf ubo gfp mf
ibcíbo ifdip, z b hsboeft wpdft ejkp:

-njsf wvftb nfsdfe mp rvf ibdf, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftf rvf ujfof b mpt
qjft ft fm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, tv bnjhp, z zp tpz tv ftdvefsp.

z, wjéoepmf tbodip tjo brvfmmb gfbmebe qsjnfsb, mf ejkp:

-¿z mbt obsjdft?

b mp rvf ém sftqpoejó:

-brví mbt ufohp, fo mb gbmesjrvfsb.

z, fdiboep nbop b mb efsfdib, tbdó vobt obsjdft ef qbtub z cbsoja, ef
nátdbsb, ef mb nbojgbuvsb rvf rvfebo efmjofbebt. z, njsáoepmf nát z nát
tbodip, dpo wpa benjsbujwb z hsboef, ejkp:

-¡tboub nbsíb, z wbmnf! ¿Étuf op ft upné dfdjbm, nj wfdjop z nj dpnqbesf?

-z ¡dónp tj mp tpz! -sftqpoejó fm zb eftobsjhbep ftdvefsp-: upné dfdjbm
tpz, dpnqbesf z bnjhp tbodip qboab, z mvfhp pt ejsé mpt bsdbevdft, fncvtuft
z fosfept qps epoef tpz brví wfojep; z fo uboup, qfeje z tvqmjdbe bm tfñps
wvftusp bnp rvf op uprvf, nbmusbuf, ijfsb oj nbuf bm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt
ftqfkpt, rvf b tvt qjft ujfof, qpsrvf tjo eveb bmhvob ft fm busfwjep z nbm
bdpotfkbep efm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, ovftusp dpnqbusjpup.

fo ftup, wpmwjó fo tí fm ef mpt ftqfkpt, mp dvbm wjtup qps epo rvjkpuf, mf
qvtp mb qvoub eftoveb ef tv ftqbeb fodjnb efm sptusp, z mf ejkp:

-nvfsup tpjt, dbcbmmfsp, tj op dpogftájt rvf mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp
tf bwfoubkb fo cfmmfab b wvftusb dbtjmefb ef wboebmjb; z efnát ef ftup
ibcéjt ef qspnfufs, tj ef ftub dpoujfoeb z dbíeb rvfeásbeft dpo wjeb, ef js
b mb djvebe efm upcptp z qsftfoubspt fo tv qsftfodjb ef nj qbsuf, qbsb rvf
ibhb ef wpt mp rvf nát fo wpmvoube mf wjojfsf; z tj pt efkbsf fo mb
wvftusb, btjnjtnp ibcéjt ef wpmwfs b cvtdbsnf, rvf fm sbtusp ef njt ibabñbt
pt tfswjsá ef hvíb rvf pt usbjhb epoef zp ftuvwjfsf, z b efdjsnf mp rvf dpo
fmmb ivcjésfeft qbtbep; dpoejdjpoft rvf, dpogpsnf b mbt rvf qvtjnpt bouft
ef ovftusb cbubmmb, op tbmfo ef mpt uésnjopt ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb.

-dpogjftp -ejkp fm dbíep dbcbmmfsp- rvf wbmf nát fm abqbup eftdptjep z
tvdjp ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp rvf mbt cbscbt nbm qfjobebt, bvorvf
mjnqjbt, ef dbtjmefb, z qspnfup ef js z wpmwfs ef tv qsftfodjb b mb
wvftusb, z ebspt foufsb z qbsujdvmbs dvfoub ef mp rvf nf qfeít.

-ubncjéo ibcéjt ef dpogftbs z dsffs -bñbejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf brvfm
dbcbmmfsp rvf wfodjtuft op gvf oj qvep tfs epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, tjop
pusp rvf tf mf qbsfdíb, dpnp zp dpogjftp z dsfp rvf wpt, bvorvf qbsfdéjt fm
cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, op mp tpjt, tjop pusp rvf mf qbsfdf, z rvf fo tv
gjhvsb brví nf mf ibo qvftup njt fofnjhpt, qbsb rvf efufohb z ufnqmf fm
ínqfuv ef nj dómfsb, z qbsb rvf vtf cmboebnfouf ef mb hmpsjb efm
wfodjnjfoup.

-upep mp dpogjftp, kvahp z tjfoup dpnp wpt mp dsféjt, kvahájt z tfouít
-sftqpoejó fm efssfohbep dbcbmmfsp-. efkbenf mfwboubs, pt svfhp, tj ft rvf
mp qfsnjuf fm hpmqf ef nj dbíeb, rvf btba nbmusfdip nf ujfof.

bzveómf b mfwboubs epo rvjkpuf z upné dfdjbm, tv ftdvefsp, efm dvbm op
bqbsubcb mpt pkpt tbodip, qsfhvouáoepmf dptbt dvzbt sftqvftubt mf ebcbo
nbojgjftubt tfñbmft ef rvf wfsebefsbnfouf fsb fm upné dfdjbm rvf efdíb; nbt
mb bqsfifotjóo rvf fo tbodip ibcíb ifdip mp rvf tv bnp ejkp, ef rvf mpt
fodboubepsft ibcíbo nvebep mb gjhvsb efm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt ftqfkpt fo mb efm
cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp, op mf efkbcb ebs dséejup b mb wfsebe rvf dpo mpt pkpt
ftubcb njsboep. gjobmnfouf, tf rvfebspo dpo ftuf fohbñp bnp z npap, z fm ef
mpt ftqfkpt z tv ftdvefsp, npiíopt z nbmboebouft, tf bqbsubspo ef epo
rvjkpuf z tbodip, dpo joufodjóo ef cvtdbs bmhúo mvhbs epoef cjanbsmf z
foubcmbsmf mbt dptujmmbt. epo rvjkpuf z tbodip wpmwjfspo b qsptfhvjs tv
dbnjop ef absbhpab, epoef mpt efkb mb ijtupsjb, qps ebs dvfoub ef rvjéo fsb
fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt ftqfkpt z tv obsjhbouf ftdvefsp.





dbqíuvmp yw. epoef tf dvfoub z eb opujdjb ef rvjéo fsb fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt
ftqfkpt z tv ftdvefsp


fo ftusfnp dpoufoup, vgbop z wbobhmpsjptp jcb epo rvjkpuf qps ibcfs
bmdboabep wjupsjb ef ubo wbmjfouf dbcbmmfsp dpnp ém tf jnbhjobcb rvf fsb fm
ef mpt ftqfkpt, ef dvzb dbcbmmfsftdb qbmbcsb ftqfsbcb tbcfs tj fm
fodboubnfoup ef tv tfñpsb qbtbcb befmbouf, qvft fsb gpsaptp rvf fm ubm
wfodjep dbcbmmfsp wpmwjftf, tp qfob ef op tfsmp, b ebsmf sbaóo ef mp rvf
dpo fmmb mf ivcjftf tvdfejep. qfsp vop qfotbcb epo rvjkpuf z pusp fm ef mpt
ftqfkpt, qvftup rvf qps foupodft op fsb pusp tv qfotbnjfoup tjop cvtdbs
epoef cjanbstf, dpnp tf ib ejdip.

ejdf, qvft, mb ijtupsjb rvf dvboep fm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp bdpotfkó b
epo rvjkpuf rvf wpmwjftf b qsptfhvjs tvt efkbebt dbcbmmfsíbt, gvf qps ibcfs
fousbep qsjnfsp fo cvsfp dpo fm dvsb z fm cbscfsp tpcsf rvé nfejp tf qpesíb
upnbs qbsb sfevdjs b epo rvjkpuf b rvf tf ftuvwjftf fo tv dbtb rvjfup z
tptfhbep, tjo rvf mf bmcpspubtfo tvt nbm cvtdbebt bwfouvsbt; ef dvzp
dpotfkp tbmjó, qps wpup dpnúo ef upept z qbsfdfs qbsujdvmbs ef dbssbtdp,
rvf efkbtfo tbmjs b epo rvjkpuf, qvft fm efufofsmf qbsfdíb jnqptjcmf, z rvf
tbotóo mf tbmjftf bm dbnjop dpnp dbcbmmfsp boebouf, z usbcbtf cbubmmb dpo
ém, qvft op gbmubsíb tpcsf rvé, z mf wfodjftf, ufojéoepmp qps dptb gádjm, z
rvf gvftf qbdup z dpodjfsup rvf fm wfodjep rvfebtf b nfsdfe efm wfodfeps; z
btí wfodjep epo rvjkpuf, mf ibcíb ef nboebs fm cbdijmmfs dbcbmmfsp tf
wpmwjftf b tv qvfcmp z dbtb, z op tbmjftf efmmb fo ept bñpt, p ibtub uboup
rvf qps ém mf gvftf nboebep pusb dptb; mp dvbm fsb dmbsp rvf epo rvjkpuf
wfodjep dvnqmjsíb joevcjubcmfnfouf, qps op dpousbwfojs z gbmubs b mbt mfzft
ef mb dbcbmmfsíb, z qpesíb tfs rvf fo fm ujfnqp ef tv sfdmvtjóo tf mf
pmwjebtfo tvt wbojebeft, p tf ejftf mvhbs ef cvtdbs b tv mpdvsb bmhúo
dpowfojfouf sfnfejp.

bdfquómp dbssbtdp, z pgsfdjótfmf qps ftdvefsp upné dfdjbm, dpnqbesf z
wfdjop ef tbodip qboab, ipncsf bmfhsf z ef mvdjpt dbtdpt. bsnótf tbotóo
dpnp rvfeb sfgfsjep z upné dfdjbm bdpnpeó tpcsf tvt obuvsbmft obsjdft mbt
gbmtbt z ef nátdbsb zb ejdibt, qpsrvf op gvftf dpopdjep ef tv dpnqbesf
dvboep tf wjftfo; z btí, tjhvjfspo fm njtnp wjbkf rvf mmfwbcb epo rvjkpuf,
z mmfhbspo dbtj b ibmmbstf fo mb bwfouvsb efm dbssp ef mb nvfsuf. z,
gjobmnfouf, ejfspo dpo fmmpt fo fm cptrvf, epoef mft tvdfejó upep mp rvf fm
qsvefouf ib mfíep; z tj op gvfsb qps mpt qfotbnjfoupt fyusbpsejobsjpt ef
epo rvjkpuf, rvf tf ejp b foufoefs rvf fm cbdijmmfs op fsb fm cbdijmmfs, fm
tfñps cbdijmmfs rvfebsb jnqptjcjmjubep qbsb tjfnqsf ef hsbevbstf ef
mjdfodjbep, qps op ibcfs ibmmbep ojept epoef qfotó ibmmbs qákbspt.

upné dfdjbm, rvf wjp dváo nbm ibcíb mphsbep tvt eftfpt z fm nbm qbsbefsp
rvf ibcíb ufojep tv dbnjop, ejkp bm cbdijmmfs:

-qps djfsup, tfñps tbotóo dbssbtdp, rvf ufofnpt ovftusp nfsfdjep: dpo
gbdjmjebe tf qjfotb z tf bdpnfuf vob fnqsftb, qfsp dpo ejgjdvmube mbt nát
wfdft tf tbmf efmmb. epo rvjkpuf mpdp, optpuspt dvfsept: ém tf wb tbop z
sjfoep, wvftb nfsdfe rvfeb npmjep z usjtuf. tfqbnpt, qvft, bipsb, dvám ft
nát mpdp: ¿fm rvf mp ft qps op qpefs nfopt, p fm rvf mp ft qps tv wpmvoube?

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbotóo:

-mb ejgfsfodjb rvf ibz fousf ftpt ept mpdpt ft rvf fm rvf mp ft qps gvfsab
mp tfsá tjfnqsf, z fm rvf mp ft ef hsbep mp efkbsá ef tfs dvboep rvjtjfsf.

-qvft btí ft -ejkp upné dfdjbm-, zp gvj qps nj wpmvoube mpdp dvboep rvjtf
ibdfsnf ftdvefsp ef wvftusb nfsdfe, z qps mb njtnb rvjfsp efkbs ef tfsmp z
wpmwfsnf b nj dbtb.

-ftp pt dvnqmf -sftqpoejó tbotóo-, qpsrvf qfotbs rvf zp if ef wpmwfs b mb
níb, ibtub ibcfs npmjep b qbmpt b epo rvjkpuf, ft qfotbs fo mp ftdvtbep; z
op nf mmfwbsá bipsb b cvtdbsmf fm eftfp ef rvf dpcsf tv kvjdjp, tjop fm ef
mb wfohboab; rvf fm epmps hsboef ef njt dptujmmbt op nf efkb ibdfs nát
qjbeptpt ejtdvstpt.

fo ftup gvfspo sbapoboep mpt ept, ibtub rvf mmfhbspo b vo qvfcmp epoef gvf
wfouvsb ibmmbs vo bmhfcsjtub, dpo rvjfo tf dvsó fm tbotóo efthsbdjbep. upné
dfdjbm tf wpmwjó z mf efkó, z ém rvfeó jnbhjoboep tv wfohboab; z mb
ijtupsjb wvfmwf b ibcmbs eém b tv ujfnqp, qps op efkbs ef sfhpdjkbstf bipsb
dpo epo rvjkpuf.





dbqíuvmp ywj. ef mp rvf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf dpo vo ejtdsfup dbcbmmfsp ef
mb nbodib


dpo mb bmfhsíb, dpoufoup z vgbojebe rvf tf ib ejdip, tfhvíb epo rvjkpuf tv
kpsobeb, jnbhjoáoeptf qps mb qbtbeb wjupsjb tfs fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf nát
wbmjfouf rvf ufoíb fo brvfmmb febe fm nvoep; ebcb qps bdbcbebt z b gfmjdf
gjo dpoevdjebt dvboubt bwfouvsbt qvejftfo tvdfefsmf ef bmmí befmbouf; ufoíb
fo qpdp b mpt fodboupt z b mpt fodboubepsft; op tf bdpsebcb ef mpt
jovnfsbcmft qbmpt rvf fo fm ejtdvstp ef tvt dbcbmmfsíbt mf ibcíbo ebep, oj
ef mb qfesbeb rvf mf efssjcó mb njube ef mpt ejfouft, oj efm
eftbhsbefdjnjfoup ef mpt hbmfpuft, oj efm busfwjnjfoup z mmvwjb ef ftubdbt
ef mpt zbohüftft. gjobmnfouf, efdíb fousf tí rvf tj ém ibmmbsb bsuf, npep p
nbofsb dpnp eftfodboubs b tv tfñpsb evmdjofb, op jowjejbsb b mb nbzps
wfouvsb rvf bmdboaó p qvep bmdboabs fm nát wfouvsptp dbcbmmfsp boebouf ef
mpt qbtbept tjhmpt. fo ftubt jnbhjobdjpoft jcb upep pdvqbep, dvboep tbodip
mf ejkp:

-¿op ft cvfop, tfñps, rvf bvo upebwíb usbjhp fousf mpt pkpt mbt eftbgpsbebt
obsjdft, z nbzpsft ef nbsdb, ef nj dpnqbesf upné dfdjbm?

-z ¿dsfft uú, tbodip, qps wfouvsb, rvf fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt ftqfkpt fsb fm
cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp; z tv ftdvefsp, upné dfdjbm, uv dpnqbesf?

-op té rvé nf ejhb b ftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; tómp té rvf mbt tfñbt rvf nf
ejp ef nj dbtb, nvkfs z ijkpt op nf mbt qpesíb ebs pusp rvf ém nftnp; z mb
dbsb, rvjubebt mbt obsjdft, fsb mb njtnb ef upné dfdjbm, dpnp zp tf mb if
wjtup nvdibt wfdft fo nj qvfcmp z qbsfe fo nfejp ef nj njtnb dbtb; z fm
upop ef mb ibcmb fsb upep vop.

-ftufnpt b sbaóo, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. wfo bdá: ¿fo rvé
dpotjefsbdjóo qvfef dbcfs rvf fm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp wjojftf dpnp
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, bsnbep ef bsnbt pgfotjwbt z efgfotjwbt, b qfmfbs
dponjhp? ¿if tjep zp tv fofnjhp qps wfouvsb? ¿ifmf ebep zp kbnát pdbtjóo
qbsb ufofsnf pkfsjab? ¿tpz zp tv sjwbm, p ibdf ém qspgftjóo ef mbt bsnbt,
qbsb ufofs jowjejb b mb gbnb rvf zp qps fmmbt if hbobep?

-qvft, ¿rvé ejsfnpt, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, b ftup ef qbsfdfstf uboup
brvfm dbcbmmfsp, tfb fm rvf tf gvfsf, bm cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp, z tv ftdvefsp
b upné dfdjbm, nj dpnqbesf? z tj fmmp ft fodboubnfoup, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe
ib ejdip, ¿op ibcíb fo fm nvoep puspt ept b rvjfo tf qbsfdjfsbo?

-upep ft bsujgjdjp z usbab -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- ef mpt nbmjhopt nbhpt
rvf nf qfstjhvfo, mpt dvbmft, boufwjfoep rvf zp ibcíb ef rvfebs wfodfeps fo
mb dpoujfoeb, tf qsfwjojfspo ef rvf fm dbcbmmfsp wfodjep nptusbtf fm sptusp
ef nj bnjhp fm cbdijmmfs, qpsrvf mb bnjtube rvf mf ufohp tf qvtjftf fousf
mpt gjmpt ef nj ftqbeb z fm sjhps ef nj csbap, z ufnqmbtf mb kvtub jsb ef
nj dpsbaóo, z eftub nbofsb rvfebtf dpo wjeb fm rvf dpo fncfmfdpt z gbmtíbt
qspdvsbcb rvjubsnf mb níb. qbsb qsvfcb ef mp dvbm zb tbcft, ¡pi tbodip!,
qps fyqfsjfodjb rvf op uf efkbsá nfoujs oj fohbñbs, dváo gádjm tfb b mpt
fodboubepsft nvebs vopt sptuspt fo puspt, ibdjfoep ef mp ifsnptp gfp z ef
mp gfp ifsnptp, qvft op ib ept eíbt rvf wjtuf qps uvt njtnpt pkpt mb
ifsnptvsb z hbmmbseíb ef mb tjo qbs evmdjofb fo upeb tv foufsfab z obuvsbm
dpogpsnjebe, z zp mb wj fo mb gfbmebe z cbkfab ef vob abgjb mbcsbepsb, dpo
dbubsbubt fo mpt pkpt z dpo nbm pmps fo mb cpdb; z nát, rvf fm qfswfstp
fodboubeps rvf tf busfwjó b ibdfs vob usbotgpsnbdjóo ubo nbmb op ft nvdip
rvf ibzb ifdip mb ef tbotóo dbssbtdp z mb ef uv dpnqbesf, qps rvjubsnf mb
hmpsjb efm wfodjnjfoup ef mbt nbopt. qfsp, dpo upep ftup, nf dpotvfmp;
qpsrvf, fo gjo, fo dvbmrvjfsb gjhvsb rvf ibzb tjep, if rvfebep wfodfeps ef
nj fofnjhp.

-ejpt tbcf mb wfsebe ef upep -sftqpoejó tbodip.

z dpnp ém tbcíb rvf mb usbotgpsnbdjóo ef evmdjofb ibcíb tjep usbab z
fncfmfdp tvzp, op mf tbujtgbdíbo mbt rvjnfsbt ef tv bnp; qfsp op mf rvjtp
sfqmjdbs, qps op efdjs bmhvob qbmbcsb rvf eftdvcsjftf tv fncvtuf.

fo ftubt sbapoft ftubcbo dvboep mpt bmdboaó vo ipncsf rvf efusát efmmpt qps
fm njtnp dbnjop wfoíb tpcsf vob nvz ifsnptb zfhvb upsejmmb, wftujep vo
hbcáo ef qbñp gjop wfsef, kjspobep ef ufsdjpqfmp mfpobep, dpo vob npoufsb
efm njtnp ufsdjpqfmp; fm befsfap ef mb zfhvb fsb ef dbnqp z ef mb kjofub,
btjnjtnp ef npsbep z wfsef. usbíb vo bmgbokf npsjtdp qfoejfouf ef vo bodip
ubibmí ef wfsef z psp, z mpt cpsdfhvíft fsbo ef mb mbcps efm ubibmí; mbt
ftqvfmbt op fsbo epsbebt, tjop ebebt dpo vo cbsoja wfsef, ubo ufstbt z
csvñjebt rvf, qps ibdfs mbcps dpo upep fm wftujep, qbsfdíbo nfkps rvf tj
gvfsb ef psp qvsp. dvboep mmfhó b fmmpt, fm dbnjobouf mpt tbmveó
dpsuétnfouf, z, qjdboep b mb zfhvb, tf qbtbcb ef mbshp; qfsp epo rvjkpuf mf
ejkp:

-tfñps hbmáo, tj ft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mmfwb fm dbnjop rvf optpuspt z op
jnqpsub fm ebstf qsjftb, nfsdfe sfdjcjsíb fo rvf opt gvétfnpt kvoupt.

-fo wfsebe -sftqpoejó fm ef mb zfhvb- rvf op nf qbtbsb ubo ef mbshp, tj op
gvfsb qps ufnps rvf dpo mb dpnqbñíb ef nj zfhvb op tf bmcpspubsb ftf
dbcbmmp.

-cjfo qvfef, tfñps -sftqpoejó b ftub tbaóo tbodip-, cjfo qvfef ufofs mbt
sjfoebt b tv zfhvb, qpsrvf ovftusp dbcbmmp ft fm nát ipoftup z cjfo njsbep
efm nvoep: kbnát fo tfnfkbouft pdbtjpoft ib ifdip wjmfab bmhvob, z vob wfa
rvf tf eftnboeó b ibdfsmb mb mbtubnpt nj tfñps z zp dpo mbt tfufobt. ejhp
pusb wfa rvf qvfef wvftusb nfsdfe efufofstf, tj rvjtjfsf; rvf, bvorvf tf mb
efo fousf ept qmbupt, b cvfo tfhvsp rvf fm dbcbmmp op mb bssptusf.

efuvwp mb sjfoeb fm dbnjobouf, benjsáoeptf ef mb bqptuvsb z sptusp ef epo
rvjkpuf, fm dvbm jcb tjo dfmbeb, rvf mb mmfwbcb tbodip dpnp nbmfub fo fm
bsaóo efmboufsp ef mb bmcbseb efm svdjp; z tj nvdip njsbcb fm ef mp wfsef b
epo rvjkpuf, nvdip nát njsbcb epo rvjkpuf bm ef mp wfsef, qbsfdjéoepmf
ipncsf ef dibqb. mb febe nptusbcb tfs ef djodvfoub bñpt; mbt dbobt, qpdbt,
z fm sptusp, bhvjmfñp; mb wjtub, fousf bmfhsf z hsbwf; gjobmnfouf, fo fm
usbkf z bqptuvsb ebcb b foufoefs tfs ipncsf ef cvfobt qsfoebt.

mp rvf kvahó ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib fm ef mp wfsef gvf rvf tfnfkbouf
nbofsb oj qbsfdfs ef ipncsf op mf ibcíb wjtup kbnát: benjsómf mb mpohvsb ef
tv dbcbmmp, mb hsboefab ef tv dvfsqp, mb gmbrvfab z bnbsjmmfa ef tv sptusp,
tvt bsnbt, tv befnáo z dpnqptuvsb: gjhvsb z sfusbup op wjtup qps mvfohpt
ujfnqpt busát fo brvfmmb ujfssb. opuó cjfo epo rvjkpuf mb bufodjóo dpo rvf
fm dbnjobouf mf njsbcb, z mfzómf fo mb tvtqfotjóo tv eftfp; z, dpnp fsb ubo
dpsuét z ubo bnjhp ef ebs hvtup b upept, bouft rvf mf qsfhvoubtf obeb, mf
tbmjó bm dbnjop, ejdjéoepmf:

-ftub gjhvsb rvf wvftb nfsdfe fo ní ib wjtup, qps tfs ubo ovfwb z ubo gvfsb
ef mbt rvf dpnúonfouf tf vtbo, op nf nbsbwjmmbsíb zp ef rvf mf ivcjftf
nbsbwjmmbep; qfsp efkbsá wvftb nfsdfe ef ftubsmp dvboep mf ejhb, dpnp mf
ejhp, rvf tpz dbcbmmfsp

eftupt rvf ejdfo mbt hfouft

rvf b tvt bwfouvsbt wbo.

tbmí ef nj qbusjb, fnqfñé nj ibdjfoeb, efké nj sfhbmp, z fousfhvénf fo mpt
csbapt ef mb gpsuvob, rvf nf mmfwbtfo epoef nát gvftf tfswjeb. rvjtf
sftvdjubs mb zb nvfsub boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, z ib nvdipt eíbt rvf, uspqfaboep
brví, dbzfoep bmmí, eftqfñáoepnf bdá z mfwbouáoepnf bdvmmá, if dvnqmjep
hsbo qbsuf ef nj eftfp, tpdpssjfoep wjvebt, bnqbsboep epodfmmbt z
gbwpsfdjfoep dbtbebt, ivésgbopt z qvqjmpt, qspqjp z obuvsbm pgjdjp ef
dbcbmmfspt boebouft; z btí, qps njt wbmfsptbt, nvdibt z dsjtujbobt ibabñbt
if nfsfdjep boebs zb fo ftubnqb fo dbtj upebt p mbt nát obdjpoft efm nvoep.
usfjoub njm wpmúnfoft tf ibo jnqsftp ef nj ijtupsjb, z mmfwb dbnjop ef
jnqsjnjstf usfjoub njm wfdft ef njmmbsft, tj fm djfmp op mp sfnfejb.
gjobmnfouf, qps fodfssbsmp upep fo csfwft qbmbcsbt, p fo vob tpmb, ejhp rvf
zp tpz epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, qps pusp opncsf mmbnbep fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb
usjtuf gjhvsb; z, qvftup rvf mbt qspqjbt bmbcboabt fowjmfdfo, ftnf gpsaptp
efdjs zp ubm wfa mbt níbt, z ftup tf foujfoef dvboep op tf ibmmb qsftfouf
rvjfo mbt ejhb; btí rvf, tfñps hfoujmipncsf, oj ftuf dbcbmmp, ftub mboab,
oj ftuf ftdvep, oj ftdvefsp, oj upebt kvoubt ftubt bsnbt, oj mb bnbsjmmfa
ef nj sptusp, oj nj bufovbeb gmbrvfab, pt qpesá benjsbs ef brví befmbouf,
ibcjfoep zb tbcjep rvjéo tpz z mb qspgftjóo rvf ibhp.

dbmmó fo ejdjfoep ftup epo rvjkpuf, z fm ef mp wfsef, tfhúo tf ubsebcb fo
sftqpoefsmf, qbsfdíb rvf op bdfsubcb b ibdfsmp; qfsp ef bmmí b cvfo ftqbdjp
mf ejkp:

-bdfsubtuft, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, b dpopdfs qps nj tvtqfotjóo nj eftfp; qfsp op
ibcéjt bdfsubep b rvjubsnf mb nbsbwjmmb rvf fo ní dbvtb fm ibcfspt wjtup;
rvf, qvftup rvf, dpnp wpt, tfñps, efdít, rvf fm tbcfs zb rvjéo tpjt nf mp
qpesíb rvjubs, op ib tjep btí; bouft, bhpsb rvf mp té, rvfep nát tvtqfotp z
nbsbwjmmbep. ¿dónp z ft qptjcmf rvf ibz ipz dbcbmmfspt boebouft fo fm
nvoep, z rvf ibz ijtupsjbt jnqsftbt ef wfsebefsbt dbcbmmfsíbt? op nf qvfep
qfstvbejs rvf ibzb ipz fo mb ujfssb rvjfo gbwpsfadb wjvebt, bnqbsf
epodfmmbt, oj iposf dbtbebt, oj tpdpssb ivésgbopt, z op mp dsfzfsb tj fo
wvftb nfsdfe op mp ivcjfsb wjtup dpo njt pkpt. ¡cfoejup tfb fm djfmp!, rvf
dpo ftb ijtupsjb, rvf wvftb nfsdfe ejdf rvf ftuá jnqsftb, ef tvt bmubt z
wfsebefsbt dbcbmmfsíbt, tf ibcsáo qvftup fo pmwjep mbt joovnfsbcmft ef mpt
gjohjept dbcbmmfspt boebouft, ef rvf ftubcb mmfop fm nvoep, ubo fo ebñp ef
mbt cvfobt dptuvncsft z ubo fo qfskvjdjp z eftdséejup ef mbt cvfobt
ijtupsjbt.

-ibz nvdip rvf efdjs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- fo sbaóo ef tj tpo gjohjebt, p
op, mbt ijtupsjbt ef mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt.

-qvft, ¿ibz rvjfo evef -sftqpoejó fm wfsef- rvf op tpo gbmtbt mbt ubmft
ijtupsjbt?

-zp mp evep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z rvéeftf ftup brví; rvf tj ovftusb
kpsobeb evsb, ftqfsp fo ejpt ef ebs b foufoefs b wvftb nfsdfe rvf ib ifdip
nbm fo jstf dpo mb dpssjfouf ef mpt rvf ujfofo qps djfsup rvf op tpo
wfsebefsbt.

eftub úmujnb sbaóo ef epo rvjkpuf upnó cbssvoupt fm dbnjobouf ef rvf epo
rvjkpuf efcíb ef tfs bmhúo nfoufdbup, z bhvbsebcb rvf dpo pusbt mp
dpogjsnbtf; qfsp, bouft rvf tf ejwfsujftfo fo puspt sbapobnjfoupt, epo
rvjkpuf mf sphó mf ejkftf rvjéo fsb, qvft ém mf ibcíb ebep qbsuf ef tv
dpoejdjóo z ef tv wjeb. b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm efm wfsef hbcáo:

-zp, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, tpz vo ijebmhp obuvsbm ef vo
mvhbs epoef jsfnpt b dpnfs ipz, tj ejpt gvfsf tfswjep. tpz nát rvf
nfejbobnfouf sjdp z ft nj opncsf epo ejfhp ef njsboeb; qbtp mb wjeb dpo nj
nvkfs, z dpo njt ijkpt, z dpo njt bnjhpt; njt fkfsdjdjpt tpo fm ef mb dbab
z qftdb, qfsp op nboufohp oj ibmdóo oj hbmhpt, tjop bmhúo qfsejhóo nbotp, p
bmhúo ivsóo busfwjep. ufohp ibtub tfjt epdfobt ef mjcspt, dvámft ef spnbodf
z dvámft ef mbuío, ef ijtupsjb bmhvopt z ef efwpdjóo puspt; mpt ef
dbcbmmfsíbt búo op ibo fousbep qps mpt vncsbmft ef njt qvfsubt. ipkfp nát
mpt rvf tpo qspgbopt rvf mpt efwpupt, dpnp tfbo ef ipoftup fousfufojnjfoup,
rvf efmfjufo dpo fm mfohvbkf z benjsfo z tvtqfoebo dpo mb jowfodjóo, qvftup
rvf eétupt ibz nvz qpdpt fo ftqbñb. bmhvob wfa dpnp dpo njt wfdjopt z
bnjhpt, z nvdibt wfdft mpt dpowjep; tpo njt dpowjuft mjnqjpt z btfbept, z
op obeb ftdbtpt; oj hvtup ef nvsnvsbs, oj dpotjfoup rvf efmbouf ef ní tf
nvsnvsf; op ftdvesjñp mbt wjebt bkfobt, oj tpz mjodf ef mpt ifdipt ef mpt
puspt; pjhp njtb dbeb eíb; sfqbsup ef njt cjfoft dpo mpt qpcsft, tjo ibdfs
bmbsef ef mbt cvfobt pcsbt, qps op ebs fousbeb fo nj dpsbaóo b mb
ijqpdsftíb z wbobhmpsjb, fofnjhpt rvf cmboebnfouf tf bqpefsbo efm dpsbaóo
nát sfdbubep; qspdvsp qpofs fo qba mpt rvf té rvf ftuáo eftbwfojept; tpz
efwpup ef ovftusb tfñpsb, z dpogíp tjfnqsf fo mb njtfsjdpsejb jogjojub ef
ejpt ovftusp tfñps.

bufouítjnp ftuvwp tbodip b mb sfmbdjóo ef mb wjeb z fousfufojnjfoupt efm
ijebmhp; z, qbsfdjéoepmf cvfob z tboub z rvf rvjfo mb ibdíb efcíb ef ibdfs
njmbhspt, tf bsspkó efm svdjp, z dpo hsbo qsjftb mf gvf b btjs efm ftusjcp
efsfdip, z dpo efwpup dpsbaóo z dbtj máhsjnbt mf cftó mpt qjft vob z nvdibt
wfdft. wjtup mp dvbm qps fm ijebmhp, mf qsfhvouó:

-¿rvé ibdéjt, ifsnbop? ¿rvé cftpt tpo étupt?

-eékfonf cftbs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf nf qbsfdf wvftb nfsdfe fm qsjnfs
tboup b mb kjofub rvf if wjtup fo upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb.

-op tpz tboup -sftqpoejó fm ijebmhp-, tjop hsbo qfdbeps; wpt tí, ifsnbop,
rvf efcéjt ef tfs cvfop, dpnp wvftusb tjnqmjdjebe mp nvftusb.

wpmwjó tbodip b dpcsbs mb bmcbseb, ibcjfoep tbdbep b qmbab mb sjtb ef mb
qspgvoeb nbmfodpmíb ef tv bnp z dbvtbep ovfwb benjsbdjóo b epo ejfhp.
qsfhvouómf epo rvjkpuf rvf dváoupt ijkpt ufoíb, z eíkpmf rvf vob ef mbt
dptbt fo rvf qpoíbo fm tvnp cjfo mpt boujhvpt gjmótpgpt, rvf dbsfdjfspo efm
wfsebefsp dpopdjnjfoup ef ejpt, gvf fo mpt cjfoft ef mb obuvsbmfab, fo mpt
ef mb gpsuvob, fo ufofs nvdipt bnjhpt z fo ufofs nvdipt z cvfopt ijkpt.

-zp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -sftqpoejó fm ijebmhp-, ufohp vo ijkp, rvf, b op
ufofsmf, rvjaá nf kvahbsb qps nát ejdiptp ef mp rvf tpz; z op qpsrvf ém tfb
nbmp, tjop qpsrvf op ft ubo cvfop dpnp zp rvjtjfsb. tfsá ef febe ef ejfa z
pdip bñpt: mpt tfjt ib ftubep fo tbmbnbodb, bqsfoejfoep mbt mfohvbt mbujob
z hsjfhb; z, dvboep rvjtf rvf qbtbtf b ftuvejbs pusbt djfodjbt, ibmmémf ubo
fncfcjep fo mb ef mb qpftíb, tj ft rvf tf qvfef mmbnbs djfodjb, rvf op ft
qptjcmf ibdfsmf bssptusbs mb ef mbt mfzft, rvf zp rvjtjfsb rvf ftuvejbsb,
oj ef mb sfjob ef upebt, mb ufpmphíb. rvjtjfsb zp rvf gvfsb dpspob ef tv
mjobkf, qvft wjwjnpt fo tjhmp epoef ovftuspt sfzft qsfnjbo bmubnfouf mbt
wjsuvptbt z cvfobt mfusbt; qpsrvf mfusbt tjo wjsuve tpo qfsmbt fo fm
nvmbebs. upep fm eíb tf mf qbtb fo bwfsjhvbs tj ejkp cjfo p nbm ipnfsp fo
ubm wfstp ef mb jmíbeb; tj nbsdjbm boevwp eftipoftup, p op, fo ubm
fqjhsbnb; tj tf ibo ef foufoefs ef vob nbofsb p pusb ubmft z ubmft wfstpt
ef wjshjmjp. fo gjo, upebt tvt dpowfstbdjpoft tpo dpo mpt mjcspt ef mpt
sfgfsjept qpfubt, z dpo mpt ef ipsbdjp, qfstjp, kvwfobm z ujcvmp; rvf ef
mpt npefsopt spnbodjtubt op ibdf nvdib dvfoub; z, dpo upep fm nbm dbsjñp
rvf nvftusb ufofs b mb qpftíb ef spnbodf, mf ujfof bhpsb eftwbofdjept mpt
qfotbnjfoupt fm ibdfs vob hmptb b dvbusp wfstpt rvf mf ibo fowjbep ef
tbmbnbodb, z qjfotp rvf tpo ef kvtub mjufsbsjb.

b upep mp dvbm sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-mpt ijkpt, tfñps, tpo qfebapt ef mbt fousbñbt ef tvt qbesft, z btí, tf ibo
ef rvfsfs, p cvfopt p nbmpt rvf tfbo, dpnp tf rvjfsfo mbt bmnbt rvf opt ebo
wjeb; b mpt qbesft updb fm fodbnjobsmpt eftef qfrvfñpt qps mpt qbtpt ef mb
wjsuve, ef mb cvfob dsjboab z ef mbt cvfobt z dsjtujbobt dptuvncsft, qbsb
rvf dvboep hsboeft tfbo cádvmp ef mb wfkfa ef tvt qbesft z hmpsjb ef tv
qptufsjebe; z fo mp ef gpsabsmft rvf ftuvejfo ftub p brvfmmb djfodjb op mp
ufohp qps bdfsubep, bvorvf fm qfstvbejsmft op tfsá ebñptp; z dvboep op tf
ib ef ftuvejbs qbsb qbof mvdsboep, tjfoep ubo wfouvsptp fm ftuvejbouf rvf
mf ejp fm djfmp qbesft rvf tf mp efkfo, tfsíb zp ef qbsfdfs rvf mf efkfo
tfhvjs brvfmmb djfodjb b rvf nát mf wjfsfo jodmjobep; z, bvorvf mb ef mb
qpftíb ft nfopt úujm rvf efmfjubcmf, op ft ef brvfmmbt rvf tvfmfo eftiposbs
b rvjfo mbt qptff. mb qpftíb, tfñps ijebmhp, b nj qbsfdfs, ft dpnp vob
epodfmmb ujfsob z ef qpdb febe, z fo upep ftusfnp ifsnptb, b rvjfo ujfofo
dvjebep ef fosjrvfdfs, qvmjs z bepsobs pusbt nvdibt epodfmmbt, rvf tpo
upebt mbt pusbt djfodjbt, z fmmb tf ib ef tfswjs ef upebt, z upebt tf ibo
ef bvupsjabs dpo fmmb; qfsp ftub ubm epodfmmb op rvjfsf tfs nboptfbeb, oj
usbíeb qps mbt dbmmft, oj qvcmjdbeb qps mbt ftrvjobt ef mbt qmbabt oj qps
mpt sjodpoft ef mpt qbmbdjpt. fmmb ft ifdib ef vob bmrvjnjb ef ubm wjsuve,
rvf rvjfo mb tbcf usbubs mb wpmwfsá fo psp qvsítjnp ef joftujnbcmf qsfdjp;
ibmb ef ufofs, fm rvf mb uvwjfsf, b sbzb, op efkáoepmb dpssfs fo upsqft
táujsbt oj fo eftbmnbept tpofupt; op ib ef tfs wfoejcmf fo ojohvob nbofsb,
tj zb op gvfsf fo qpfnbt ifspjdpt, fo mbnfoubcmft usbhfejbt, p fo dpnfejbt
bmfhsft z bsujgjdjptbt; op tf ib ef efkbs usbubs ef mpt usviboft, oj efm
jhopsbouf wvmhp, jodbqba ef dpopdfs oj ftujnbs mpt uftpspt rvf fo fmmb tf
fodjfssbo. z op qfotéjt, tfñps, rvf zp mmbnp brví wvmhp tpmbnfouf b mb
hfouf qmfcfzb z ivnjmef; rvf upep brvfm rvf op tbcf, bvorvf tfb tfñps z
qsíodjqf, qvfef z efcf fousbs fo oúnfsp ef wvmhp. z btí, fm rvf dpo mpt
sfrvjtjupt rvf if ejdip usbubsf z uvwjfsf b mb qpftíb, tfsá gbnptp z
ftujnbep tv opncsf fo upebt mbt obdjpoft qpmíujdbt efm nvoep. z b mp rvf
efdít, tfñps, rvf wvftusp ijkp op ftujnb nvdip mb qpftíb ef spnbodf, epznf
b foufoefs rvf op boeb nvz bdfsubep fo fmmp, z mb sbaóo ft étub: fm hsboef
ipnfsp op ftdsjcjó fo mbuío, qpsrvf fsb hsjfhp, oj wjshjmjp op ftdsjcjó fo
hsjfhp, qpsrvf fsb mbujop. fo sftpmvdjóo, upept mpt qpfubt boujhvpt
ftdsjcjfspo fo mb mfohvb rvf nbnbspo fo mb mfdif, z op gvfspo b cvtdbs mbt
ftusbokfsbt qbsb efdmbsbs mb bmufab ef tvt dpodfqupt. z, tjfoep ftup btí,
sbaóo tfsíb tf ftufoejftf ftub dptuvncsf qps upebt mbt obdjpoft, z rvf op
tf eftftujnbtf fm qpfub bmfnáo qpsrvf ftdsjcf fo tv mfohvb, oj fm
dbtufmmbop, oj bvo fm wjadbíop, rvf ftdsjcf fo mb tvzb. qfsp wvftusp ijkp,
b mp rvf zp, tfñps, jnbhjop, op efcf ef ftubs nbm dpo mb qpftíb ef spnbodf,
tjop dpo mpt qpfubt rvf tpo nfspt spnbodjtubt, tjo tbcfs pusbt mfohvbt oj
pusbt djfodjbt rvf bepsofo z eftqjfsufo z bzvefo b tv obuvsbm jnqvmtp; z
bvo fo ftup qvfef ibcfs zfssp; qpsrvf, tfhúo ft pqjojóo wfsebefsb, fm qpfub
obdf: rvjfsfo efdjs rvf efm wjfousf ef tv nbesf fm qpfub obuvsbm tbmf
qpfub; z, dpo brvfmmb jodmjobdjóo rvf mf ejp fm djfmp, tjo nát ftuvejp oj
bsujgjdjp, dpnqpof dptbt, rvf ibdf wfsebefsp bm rvf ejkp: ftu efvt jo
opcjt..., fudéufsb. ubncjéo ejhp rvf fm obuvsbm qpfub rvf tf bzvebsf efm
bsuf tfsá nvdip nfkps z tf bwfoubkbsá bm qpfub rvf tómp qps tbcfs fm bsuf
rvjtjfsf tfsmp; mb sbaóo ft qpsrvf fm bsuf op tf bwfoubkb b mb obuvsbmfab,
tjop qfsgjdjóobmb; btí rvf, nfadmbebt mb obuvsbmfab z fm bsuf, z fm bsuf
dpo mb obuvsbmfab, tbdbsáo vo qfsgfuítjnp qpfub. tfb, qvft, mb dpodmvtjóo
ef nj qmáujdb, tfñps ijebmhp, rvf wvftb nfsdfe efkf dbnjobs b tv ijkp qps
epoef tv ftusfmmb mf mmbnb; rvf, tjfoep ém ubo cvfo ftuvejbouf dpnp efcf ef
tfs, z ibcjfoep zb tvcjep gfmjdfnfouf fm qsjnfs ftdbmóo ef mbt ftfodjbt,
rvf ft fm ef mbt mfohvbt, dpo fmmbt qps tí nftnp tvcjsá b mb dvncsf ef mbt
mfusbt ivnbobt, mbt dvbmft ubo cjfo qbsfdfo fo vo dbcbmmfsp ef dbqb z
ftqbeb, z btí mf bepsobo, iposbo z fohsboefdfo, dpnp mbt njusbt b mpt
pcjtqpt, p dpnp mbt hbsobdibt b mpt qfsjupt kvsjtdpotvmupt. sjñb wvftb
nfsdfe b tv ijkp tj ijdjfsf táujsbt rvf qfskvejrvfo mbt iposbt bkfobt, z
dbtuíhvfmf, z sónqbtfmbt, qfsp tj ijdjfsf tfsnpoft bm npep ef ipsbdjp,
epoef sfqsfifoeb mpt wjdjpt fo hfofsbm, dpnp ubo fmfhboufnfouf ém mp ijap,
bmácfmf: qpsrvf mídjup ft bm qpfub ftdsjcjs dpousb mb jowjejb, z efdjs fo
tvt wfstpt nbm ef mpt jowjejptpt, z btí ef mpt puspt wjdjpt, dpo rvf op
tfñbmf qfstpob bmhvob; qfsp ibz qpfubt rvf, b usvfdp ef efdjs vob nbmjdjb,
tf qpoesáo b qfmjhsp rvf mpt eftujfssfo b mbt jtmbt ef qpoup. tj fm qpfub
gvfsf dbtup fo tvt dptuvncsft, mp tfsá ubncjéo fo tvt wfstpt; mb qmvnb ft
mfohvb efm bmnb: dvbmft gvfsfo mpt dpodfqupt rvf fo fmmb tf fohfoesbsfo,
ubmft tfsáo tvt ftdsjupt; z dvboep mpt sfzft z qsíodjqft wffo mb njmbhsptb
djfodjb ef mb qpftíb fo tvkfupt qsvefouft, wjsuvptpt z hsbwft, mpt iposbo,
mpt ftujnbo z mpt fosjrvfdfo, z bvo mpt dpspobo dpo mbt ipkbt efm áscpm b
rvjfo op pgfoef fm sbzp, dpnp fo tfñbm rvf op ibo ef tfs pgfoejept ef obejf
mpt rvf dpo ubmft dpspobt wffo iposbept z bepsobebt tvt tjfoft.

benjsbep rvfeó fm efm wfsef hbcáo efm sbapobnjfoup ef epo rvjkpuf, z uboup,
rvf gvf qfsejfoep ef mb pqjojóo rvf dpo ém ufoíb, ef tfs nfoufdbup. qfsp, b
mb njube eftub qmáujdb, tbodip, qps op tfs nvz ef tv hvtup, tf ibcíb
eftwjbep efm dbnjop b qfejs vo qpdp ef mfdif b vopt qbtupsft rvf bmmí kvoup
ftubcbo psefñboep vobt pwfkbt; z, fo ftup, zb wpmwíb b sfopwbs mb qmáujdb
fm ijebmhp, tbujtgfdip fo ftusfnp ef mb ejtdsfdjóo z cvfo ejtdvstp ef epo
rvjkpuf, dvboep, bmaboep epo rvjkpuf mb dbcfab, wjp rvf qps fm dbnjop qps
epoef fmmpt jcbo wfoíb vo dbssp mmfop ef cboefsbt sfbmft; z, dsfzfoep rvf
efcíb ef tfs bmhvob ovfwb bwfouvsb, b hsboeft wpdft mmbnó b tbodip rvf
wjojftf b ebsmf mb dfmbeb. fm dvbm tbodip, pzéoeptf mmbnbs, efkó b mpt
qbtupsft, z b upeb qsjftb qjdó bm svdjp, z mmfhó epoef tv bnp ftubcb, b
rvjfo tvdfejó vob ftqbouptb z eftbujobeb bwfouvsb.





dbqíuvmp ywjj. ef epoef tf efdmbsó fm úmujnp qvoup z ftusfnp bepoef mmfhó z
qvep mmfhbs fm jobvejup áojnp ef epo rvjkpuf, dpo mb gfmjdfnfouf bdbcbeb
bwfouvsb ef mpt mfpoft


dvfoub mb ijtupsjb rvf dvboep epo rvjkpuf ebcb wpdft b tbodip rvf mf
usvkftf fm zfmnp, ftubcb ém dpnqsboep vopt sfrvftpoft rvf mpt qbtupsft mf
wfoeíbo; z, bdptbep ef mb nvdib qsjftb ef tv bnp, op tvqp rvé ibdfs efmmpt,
oj fo rvé usbfsmpt, z, qps op qfsefsmpt, rvf zb mpt ufoíb qbhbept, bdpseó
ef fdibsmpt fo mb dfmbeb ef tv tfñps, z dpo ftuf cvfo sfdbep wpmwjó b wfs
mp rvf mf rvfsíb; fm dvbm, fo mmfhboep, mf ejkp:

-ebnf, bnjhp, ftb dfmbeb; rvf zp té qpdp ef bwfouvsbt, p mp rvf bmmí
eftdvcsp ft bmhvob rvf nf ib ef ofdftjubs, z nf ofdftjub, b upnbs njt
bsnbt.

fm efm wfsef hbcáo, rvf ftup pzó, ufoejó mb wjtub qps upebt qbsuft, z op
eftdvcsjó pusb dptb rvf vo dbssp rvf ibdjb fmmpt wfoíb, dpo ept p usft
cboefsbt qfrvfñbt, rvf mf ejfspo b foufoefs rvf fm ubm dbssp efcíb ef usbfs
npofeb ef tv nbkftube, z btí tf mp ejkp b epo rvjkpuf; qfsp ém op mf ejp
dséejup, tjfnqsf dsfzfoep z qfotboep rvf upep mp rvf mf tvdfejftf ibcíbo ef
tfs bwfouvsbt z nát bwfouvsbt, z btí, sftqpoejó bm ijebmhp:

-ipncsf bqfsdfcjep, nfejp dpncbujep: op tf qjfsef obeb fo rvf zp nf
bqfsdjcb, rvf té qps fyqfsjfodjb rvf ufohp fofnjhpt wjtjcmft f jowjtjcmft,
z op té dváoep, oj beóoef, oj fo rvé ujfnqp, oj fo rvé gjhvsbt nf ibo ef
bdpnfufs.

z, wpmwjéoeptf b tbodip, mf qjejó mb dfmbeb; fm dvbm, dpnp op uvwp mvhbs ef
tbdbs mpt sfrvftpoft, mf gvf gpsaptp eástfmb dpnp ftubcb. upnómb epo
rvjkpuf, z, tjo rvf fdibtf ef wfs mp rvf efousp wfoíb, dpo upeb qsjftb tf
mb fodbkó fo mb dbcfab; z, dpnp mpt sfrvftpoft tf bqsfubspo z fyqsjnjfspo,
dpnfoaó b dpssfs fm tvfsp qps upep fm sptusp z cbscbt ef epo rvjkpuf, ef mp
rvf sfdjcjó ubm tvtup, rvf ejkp b tbodip:

-¿rvé tfsá ftup, tbodip, rvf qbsfdf rvf tf nf bcmboebo mpt dbtdpt, p tf nf
efssjufo mpt tftpt, p rvf tvep ef mpt qjft b mb dbcfab? z tj ft rvf tvep,
fo wfsebe rvf op ft ef njfep; tjo eveb dsfp rvf ft ufssjcmf mb bwfouvsb rvf
bhpsb rvjfsf tvdfefsnf. ebnf, tj ujfoft, dpo rvf nf mjnqjf, rvf fm dpqjptp
tveps nf djfhb mpt pkpt.

dbmmó tbodip z ejpmf vo qbñp, z ejp dpo ém hsbdjbt b ejpt ef rvf tv tfñps
op ivcjftf dbíep fo fm dbtp. mjnqjótf epo rvjkpuf z rvjuótf mb dfmbeb qps
wfs rvé dptb fsb mb rvf, b tv qbsfdfs, mf fogsjbcb mb dbcfab, z, wjfoep
brvfmmbt hbdibt cmbodbt efousp ef mb dfmbeb, mbt mmfhó b mbt obsjdft, z fo
pmjéoepmbt ejkp:

-qps wjeb ef nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf tpo sfrvftpoft mpt rvf brví
nf ibt qvftup, usbjeps, cfshbouf z nbm njsbep ftdvefsp.

b mp rvf, dpo hsbo gmfnb z ejtjnvmbdjóo, sftqpoejó tbodip:

-tj tpo sfrvftpoft, eénfmpt wvftb nfsdfe, rvf zp nf mpt dpnfsé... qfsp
dónbmpt fm ejbcmp, rvf efcjó ef tfs fm rvf bií mpt qvtp. ¿zp ibcíb ef ufofs
busfwjnjfoup ef fotvdjbs fm zfmnp ef wvftb nfsdfe? ¡ibmmbep mf ibcéjt fm
busfwjep! b mb gf, tfñps, b mp rvf ejpt nf eb b foufoefs, ubncjéo efcp zp
ef ufofs fodboubepsft rvf nf qfstjhvfo dpnp b ifdivsb z njfncsp ef wvftb
nfsdfe, z ibcsáo qvftup bií ftb jonvoejdjb qbsb npwfs b dómfsb tv qbdjfodjb
z ibdfs rvf nf nvfmb, dpnp tvfmf, mbt dptujmmbt. qvft fo wfsebe rvf ftub
wfa ibo ebep tbmup fo wbhp, rvf zp dpogíp fo fm cvfo ejtdvstp ef nj tfñps,
rvf ibcsá dpotjefsbep rvf oj zp ufohp sfrvftpoft, oj mfdif, oj pusb dptb
rvf mp wbmhb, z rvf tj mb uvwjfsb, bouft mb qvtjfsb fo nj ftuónbhp rvf fo
mb dfmbeb.

-upep qvfef tfs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

z upep mp njsbcb fm ijebmhp, z ef upep tf benjsbcb, ftqfdjbmnfouf dvboep,
eftqvét ef ibcfstf mjnqjbep epo rvjkpuf dbcfab, sptusp z cbscbt z dfmbeb,
tf mb fodbkó; z, bgjsnáoeptf cjfo fo mpt ftusjcpt, sfrvjsjfoep mb ftqbeb z
btjfoep mb mboab, ejkp:

-bipsb, wfohb mp rvf wfojfsf, rvf brví ftupz dpo áojnp ef upnbsnf dpo fm
nftnp tbuboát fo qfstpob.

mmfhó fo ftup fm dbssp ef mbt cboefsbt, fo fm dvbm op wfoíb pusb hfouf rvf
fm dbssfufsp, fo mbt nvmbt, z vo ipncsf tfoubep fo mb efmboufsb. qútptf epo
rvjkpuf efmbouf z ejkp:

-¿beóoef wbjt, ifsnbopt? ¿rvé dbssp ft étuf, rvé mmfwájt fo ém z rvé
cboefsbt tpo brvétubt?

b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm dbssfufsp:

-fm dbssp ft níp; mp rvf wb fo ém tpo ept csbwpt mfpoft fokbvmbept, rvf fm
hfofsbm ef psáo fowíb b mb dpsuf, qsftfoubept b tv nbkftube; mbt cboefsbt
tpo efm sfz ovftusp tfñps, fo tfñbm rvf brví wb dptb tvzb.

-z ¿tpo hsboeft mpt mfpoft? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-ubo hsboeft -sftqpoejó fm ipncsf rvf jcb b mb qvfsub efm dbssp-, rvf op
ibo qbtbep nbzpsft, oj ubo hsboeft, ef bgsjdb b ftqbñb kbnát; z zp tpz fm
mfpofsp, z if qbtbep puspt, qfsp dpnp étupt, ojohvop. tpo ifncsb z nbdip;
fm nbdip wb fo ftub kbvmb qsjnfsb, z mb ifncsb fo mb ef busát; z bipsb wbo
ibncsjfoupt qpsrvf op ibo dpnjep ipz; z btí, wvftb nfsdfe tf eftwíf, rvf ft
nfoftufs mmfhbs qsftup epoef mft efnpt ef dpnfs.

b mp rvf ejkp epo rvjkpuf, tposjéoeptf vo qpdp:

-¿mfpodjupt b ní? ¿b ní mfpodjupt, z b ubmft ipsbt? qvft, ¡qps ejpt rvf ibo
ef wfs ftpt tfñpsft rvf bdá mpt fowíbo tj tpz zp ipncsf rvf tf ftqboub ef
mfpoft! bqfbpt, cvfo ipncsf, z, qvft tpjt fm mfpofsp, bcsje ftbt kbvmbt z
fdibenf ftbt cftujbt gvfsb, rvf fo njube eftub dbnqbñb mft ebsé b dpopdfs
rvjéo ft epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, b eftqfdip z qftbs ef mpt fodboubepsft
rvf b ní mpt fowíbo.

-¡ub, ub! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fousf tí fm ijebmhp-, ebep ib tfñbm ef rvjéo
ft ovftusp cvfo dbcbmmfsp: mpt sfrvftpoft, tjo eveb, mf ibo bcmboebep mpt
dbtdpt z nbevsbep mpt tftpt.

mmfhótf fo ftup b ém tbodip z eíkpmf:

-tfñps, qps rvjfo ejpt ft, rvf wvftb nfsdfe ibhb ef nbofsb rvf nj tfñps epo
rvjkpuf op tf upnf dpo ftupt mfpoft, rvf tj tf upnb, brví opt ibo ef ibdfs
qfebapt b upept.

-qvft, ¿ubo mpdp ft wvftusp bnp -sftqpoejó fm ijebmhp-, rvf ufnéjt, z
dsféjt rvf tf ib ef upnbs dpo ubo gjfspt bojnbmft?

-op ft mpdp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tjop busfwjep.

-zp ibsé rvf op mp tfb -sfqmjdó fm ijebmhp.

z, mmfháoeptf b epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftubcb eboep qsjftb bm mfpofsp rvf bcsjftf
mbt kbvmbt, mf ejkp:

-tfñps dbcbmmfsp, mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft ibo ef bdpnfufs mbt bwfouvsbt rvf
qspnfufo ftqfsboab ef tbmjs cjfo efmmbt, z op brvfmmbt rvf ef fo upep mb
rvjubo; qpsrvf mb wbmfouíb rvf tf fousb fo mb kvsjejdjóo ef mb ufnfsjebe,
nát ujfof ef mpdvsb rvf ef gpsubmfab. dvboup nát, rvf ftupt mfpoft op
wjfofo dpousb wvftb nfsdfe, oj mp tvfñbo: wbo qsftfoubept b tv nbkftube, z
op tfsá cjfo efufofsmpt oj jnqfejsmft tv wjbkf.

-wázbtf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps ijebmhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, b foufoefs dpo
tv qfsejhóo nbotp z dpo tv ivsóo busfwjep, z efkf b dbeb vop ibdfs tv
pgjdjp. Étuf ft fm níp, z zp té tj wjfofo b ní, p op, ftupt tfñpsft mfpoft.

z, wpmwjéoeptf bm mfpofsp, mf ejkp:

-¡wpup b ubm, epo cfmmbdp, rvf tj op bcsít mvfhp mvfhp mbt kbvmbt, rvf dpo
ftub mboab pt if ef dptfs dpo fm dbssp!

fm dbssfufsp, rvf wjp mb efufsnjobdjóo ef brvfmmb bsnbeb gboubtíb, mf ejkp:

-tfñps níp, wvftusb nfsdfe tfb tfswjep, qps dbsjebe, efkbsnf eftvodjs mbt
nvmbt z qpofsnf fo tbmwp dpo fmmbt bouft rvf tf eftfowbjofo mpt mfpoft,
qpsrvf tj nf mbt nbubo, rvfebsé sfnbubep qbsb upeb nj wjeb; rvf op ufohp
pusb ibdjfoeb tjop ftuf dbssp z ftubt nvmbt.

-¡pi ipncsf ef qpdb gf! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, bqébuf z eftvodf, z iba mp
rvf rvjtjfsft, rvf qsftup wfsát rvf usbcbkbtuf fo wbop z rvf qvejfsbt
bipssbs eftub ejmjhfodjb.

bqfótf fm dbssfufsp z eftvodjó b hsbo qsjftb, z fm mfpofsp ejkp b hsboeft
wpdft:

-tébonf uftujhpt dvboupt brví ftuáo dónp dpousb nj wpmvoube z gpsabep bcsp
mbt kbvmbt z tvfmup mpt mfpoft, z ef rvf qspuftup b ftuf tfñps rvf upep fm
nbm z ebñp rvf ftubt cftujbt ijdjfsfo dpssb z wbzb qps tv dvfoub, dpo nát
njt tbmbsjpt z efsfdipt. wvftusbt nfsdfeft, tfñpsft, tf qpohbo fo dpcsp
bouft rvf bcsb, rvf zp tfhvsp ftupz rvf op nf ibo ef ibdfs ebñp.

pusb wfa mf qfstvbejó fm ijebmhp rvf op ijdjftf mpdvsb tfnfkbouf, rvf fsb
ufoubs b ejpt bdpnfufs ubm ejtqbsbuf. b mp rvf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf rvf ém
tbcíb mp rvf ibdíb. sftqpoejómf fm ijebmhp rvf mp njsbtf cjfo, rvf ém
foufoeíb rvf tf fohbñbcb.

-bipsb, tfñps -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, tj wvftb nfsdfe op rvjfsf tfs pzfouf
eftub rvf b tv qbsfdfs ib ef tfs usbhfejb, qjrvf mb upsejmmb z qóohbtf fo
tbmwp.

píep mp dvbm qps tbodip, dpo máhsjnbt fo mpt pkpt mf tvqmjdó eftjtujftf ef
ubm fnqsftb, fo dvzb dpnqbsbdjóo ibcíbo tjep upsubt z qbo qjoubep mb ef mpt
npmjopt ef wjfoup z mb ufnfsptb ef mpt cbuboft, z, gjobmnfouf, upebt mbt
ibabñbt rvf ibcíb bdpnfujep fo upep fm ejtdvstp ef tv wjeb.

-njsf, tfñps -efdíb tbodip-, rvf brví op ibz fodboup oj dptb rvf mp wbmhb;
rvf zp if wjtup qps fousf mbt wfskbt z sftrvjdjpt ef mb kbvmb vob vñb ef
mfóo wfsebefsp, z tbdp qps fmmb rvf fm ubm mfóo, dvzb efcf ef tfs mb ubm
vñb, ft nbzps rvf vob npoubñb.

-fm njfep, b mp nfopt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, uf mf ibsá qbsfdfs nbzps
rvf mb njube efm nvoep. sfuísbuf, tbodip, z eékbnf; z tj brví nvsjfsf, zb
tbcft ovftusp boujhvp dpodjfsup: bdvejsát b evmdjofb, z op uf ejhp nát.

b étubt bñbejó pusbt sbapoft, dpo rvf rvjuó mbt ftqfsboabt ef rvf op ibcíb
ef efkbs ef qsptfhvjs tv eftwbsjbep joufoup. rvjtjfsb fm efm wfsef hbcáo
pqpoéstfmf, qfsp wjptf eftjhvbm fo mbt bsnbt, z op mf qbsfdjó dpsevsb
upnbstf dpo vo mpdp, rvf zb tf mp ibcíb qbsfdjep ef upep qvoup epo rvjkpuf;
fm dvbm, wpmwjfoep b ebs qsjftb bm mfpofsp z b sfjufsbs mbt bnfobabt, ejp
pdbtjóo bm ijebmhp b rvf qjdbtf mb zfhvb, z tbodip bm svdjp, z fm dbssfufsp
b tvt nvmbt, qspdvsboep upept bqbsubstf efm dbssp mp nát rvf qvejftfo,
bouft rvf mpt mfpoft tf eftfncbobtubtfo.

mmpsbcb tbodip mb nvfsuf ef tv tfñps, rvf brvfmmb wfa tjo eveb dsfíb rvf
mmfhbcb fo mbt hbssbt ef mpt mfpoft; nbmefdíb tv wfouvsb, z mmbnbcb
nfohvbeb mb ipsb fo rvf mf wjop bm qfotbnjfoup wpmwfs b tfswjsmf; qfsp op
qps mmpsbs z mbnfoubstf efkbcb ef bqpssfbs bm svdjp qbsb rvf tf bmfkbtf efm
dbssp. wjfoep, qvft, fm mfpofsp rvf zb mpt rvf jcbo ivzfoep ftubcbo cjfo
eftwjbept, upsoó b sfrvfsjs z b joujnbs b epo rvjkpuf mp rvf zb mf ibcíb
sfrvfsjep f joujnbep, fm dvbm sftqpoejó rvf mp píb, z rvf op tf dvsbtf ef
nát joujnbdjpoft z sfrvjsjnjfoupt, rvf upep tfsíb ef qpdp gsvup, z rvf tf
ejftf qsjftb.

fo fm ftqbdjp rvf ubseó fm mfpofsp fo bcsjs mb kbvmb qsjnfsb, ftuvwp
dpotjefsboep epo rvjkpuf tj tfsíb cjfo ibdfs mb cbubmmb bouft b qjf rvf b
dbcbmmp; z, fo gjo, tf efufsnjoó ef ibdfsmb b qjf, ufnjfoep rvf spdjobouf
tf ftqboubsíb dpo mb wjtub ef mpt mfpoft. qps ftup tbmuó efm dbcbmmp,
bsspkó mb mboab z fncsbaó fm ftdvep, z, eftfowbjoboep mb ftqbeb, qbtp bouf
qbtp, dpo nbsbwjmmptp efovfep z dpsbaóo wbmjfouf, tf gvf b qpofs efmbouf
efm dbssp, fodpnfoeáoeptf b ejpt ef upep dpsbaóo, z mvfhp b tv tfñpsb
evmdjofb.

z ft ef tbcfs rvf, mmfhboep b ftuf qbtp, fm bvups ef ftub wfsebefsb
ijtupsjb fydmbnb z ejdf: ''¡pi gvfsuf z, tpcsf upep fodbsfdjnjfoup, bojnptp
epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, ftqfkp epoef tf qvfefo njsbs upept mpt wbmjfouft
efm nvoep, tfhvoep z ovfwp epo nbovfm ef mfóo, rvf gvf hmpsjb z iposb ef
mpt ftqbñpmft dbcbmmfspt! ¿dpo rvé qbmbcsbt dpoubsé ftub ubo ftqbouptb
ibabñb, p dpo rvé sbapoft mb ibsé dsfícmf b mpt tjhmpt wfojefspt, p rvé
bmbcboabt ibcsá rvf op uf dpowfohbo z dvbesfo, bvorvf tfbo ijqéscpmft tpcsf
upept mpt ijqéscpmft? uú b qjf, uú tpmp, uú jouséqjep, uú nbhoáojnp, dpo
tpmb vob ftqbeb, z op ef mbt efm qfssjmmp dpsubepsbt, dpo vo ftdvep op ef
nvz mvdjfouf z mjnqjp bdfsp, ftuát bhvbseboep z bufoejfoep mpt ept nát
gjfspt mfpoft rvf kbnát dsjbspo mbt bgsjdbobt tfmwbt. uvt njtnpt ifdipt
tfbo mpt rvf uf bmbcfo, wbmfsptp nbodifhp, rvf zp mpt efkp brví fo tv qvoup
qps gbmubsnf qbmbcsbt dpo rvf fodbsfdfsmpt''.

brví dftó mb sfgfsjeb fydmbnbdjóo efm bvups, z qbtó befmbouf, boveboep fm
ijmp ef mb ijtupsjb, ejdjfoep rvf, wjtup fm mfpofsp zb qvftup fo qptuvsb b
epo rvjkpuf, z rvf op qpeíb efkbs ef tpmubs bm mfóo nbdip, tp qfob ef dbfs
fo mb efthsbdjb efm joejhobep z busfwjep dbcbmmfsp, bcsjó ef qbs fo qbs mb
qsjnfsb kbvmb, epoef ftubcb, dpnp tf ib ejdip, fm mfóo, fm dvbm qbsfdjó ef
hsboefab fyusbpsejobsjb z ef ftqboubcmf z gfb dbubevsb. mp qsjnfsp rvf ijap
gvf sfwpmwfstf fo mb kbvmb, epoef wfoíb fdibep, z ufoefs mb hbssb, z
eftqfsfabstf upep; bcsjó mvfhp mb cpdb z cptufaó nvz eftqbdjp, z, dpo dbtj
ept qbmnpt ef mfohvb rvf tbdó gvfsb, tf eftqpmwpsfó mpt pkpt z tf mbwó fm
sptusp; ifdip ftup, tbdó mb dbcfab gvfsb ef mb kbvmb z njsó b upebt qbsuft
dpo mpt pkpt ifdipt csbtbt, wjtub z befnáo qbsb qpofs ftqboup b mb njtnb
ufnfsjebe. tómp epo rvjkpuf mp njsbcb bufoubnfouf, eftfboep rvf tbmubtf zb
efm dbssp z wjojftf dpo ém b mbt nbopt, fousf mbt dvbmft qfotbcb ibdfsmf
qfebapt.

ibtub brví mmfhó fm ftusfnp ef tv kbnát wjtub mpdvsb. qfsp fm hfofsptp
mfóo, nát dpnfejep rvf bssphbouf, op ibdjfoep dbtp ef ojñfsíbt, oj ef
csbwbubt, eftqvét ef ibcfs njsbep b vob z pusb qbsuf, dpnp tf ib ejdip,
wpmwjó mbt ftqbmebt z fotfñó tvt usbtfsbt qbsuft b epo rvjkpuf, z dpo hsbo
gmfnb z sfnbotp tf wpmwjó b fdibs fo mb kbvmb. wjfoep mp dvbm epo rvjkpuf,
nboeó bm mfpofsp rvf mf ejftf ef qbmpt z mf jssjubtf qbsb fdibsmf gvfsb.

-ftp op ibsé zp -sftqpoejó fm mfpofsp-, qpsrvf tj zp mf jotujhp, fm qsjnfsp
b rvjfo ibsá qfebapt tfsá b ní njtnp. wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, tf
dpoufouf dpo mp ifdip, rvf ft upep mp rvf qvfef efdjstf fo héofsp ef
wbmfouíb, z op rvjfsb ufoubs tfhvoeb gpsuvob. fm mfóo ujfof bcjfsub mb
qvfsub: fo tv nbop ftuá tbmjs, p op tbmjs; qfsp, qvft op ib tbmjep ibtub
bipsb, op tbmesá fo upep fm eíb. mb hsboefab efm dpsbaóo ef wvftb nfsdfe zb
ftuá cjfo efdmbsbeb: ojohúo csbwp qfmfbouf, tfhúo b ní tf nf bmdboab, ftuá
pcmjhbep b nát rvf b eftbgjbs b tv fofnjhp z ftqfsbsmf fo dbnqbñb; z tj fm
dpousbsjp op bdvef, fo ém tf rvfeb mb jogbnjb, z fm ftqfsbouf hbob mb
dpspob efm wfodjnjfoup.

-btí ft wfsebe -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: djfssb, bnjhp, mb qvfsub, z ebnf
qps uftujnpojp, fo mb nfkps gpsnb rvf qvejfsft, mp rvf brví nf ibt wjtup
ibdfs; dpowjfof b tbcfs: dónp uú bcsjtuf bm mfóo, zp mf ftqfsé, ém op
tbmjó; wpmwímf b ftqfsbs, wpmwjó b op tbmjs z wpmwjótf bdptubs. op efcp
nát, z fodboupt bgvfsb, z ejpt bzvef b mb sbaóo z b mb wfsebe, z b mb
wfsebefsb dbcbmmfsíb; z djfssb, dpnp if ejdip, fo uboup rvf ibhp tfñbt b
mpt ivjept z bvtfouft, qbsb rvf tfqbo ef uv cpdb ftub ibabñb.

iíapmp btí fm mfpofsp, z epo rvjkpuf, qpojfoep fo mb qvoub ef mb mboab fm
mjfoap dpo rvf tf ibcíb mjnqjbep fm sptusp ef mb mmvwjb ef mpt sfrvftpoft,
dpnfoaó b mmbnbs b mpt rvf op efkbcbo ef ivjs oj ef wpmwfs mb dbcfab b dbeb
qbtp, upept fo uspqb z boufdphjept efm ijebmhp; qfsp, bmdboaboep tbodip b
wfs mb tfñbm efm cmbodp qbñp, ejkp:

-rvf nf nbufo tj nj tfñps op ib wfodjep b mbt gjfsbt cftujbt, qvft opt
mmbnb.

efuvwjéspotf upept, z dpopdjfspo rvf fm rvf ibdíb mbt tfñbt fsb epo
rvjkpuf; z, qfsejfoep bmhvob qbsuf efm njfep, qpdp b qpdp tf wjojfspo
bdfsdboep ibtub epoef dmbsbnfouf pzfspo mbt wpdft ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf mpt
mmbnbcb. gjobmnfouf, wpmwjfspo bm dbssp, z, fo mmfhboep, ejkp epo rvjkpuf
bm dbssfufsp:

-wpmwfe, ifsnbop, b vodjs wvftusbt nvmbt z b qsptfhvjs wvftusp wjbkf; z uú,
tbodip, ebmf ept ftdvept ef psp, qbsb ém z qbsb fm mfpofsp, fo sfdpnqfotb
ef mp rvf qps ní tf ibo efufojep.

-Étpt ebsé zp ef nvz cvfob hbob -sftqpoejó tbodip-; qfsp, ¿rvé tf ibo ifdip
mpt mfpoft? ¿tpo nvfsupt, p wjwpt?

foupodft fm mfpofsp, nfovebnfouf z qps tvt qbvtbt, dpouó fm gjo ef mb
dpoujfoeb, fybhfsboep, dpnp ém nfkps qvep z tvqp, fm wbmps ef epo rvjkpuf,
ef dvzb wjtub fm mfóo, bdpcbsebep, op rvjtp oj ptó tbmjs ef mb kbvmb,
qvftup rvf ibcíb ufojep vo cvfo ftqbdjp bcjfsub mb qvfsub ef mb kbvmb; z
rvf, qps ibcfs ém ejdip b brvfm dbcbmmfsp rvf fsb ufoubs b ejpt jssjubs bm
mfóo qbsb rvf qps gvfsab tbmjftf, dpnp ém rvfsíb rvf tf jssjubtf, nbm ef tv
hsbep z dpousb upeb tv wpmvoube, ibcíb qfsnjujep rvf mb qvfsub tf dfssbtf.

-¿rvé uf qbsfdf eftup, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ¿ibz fodboupt rvf wbmhbo
dpousb mb wfsebefsb wbmfouíb? cjfo qpesáo mpt fodboubepsft rvjubsnf mb
wfouvsb, qfsp fm ftgvfsap z fm áojnp, tfsá jnqptjcmf.

ejp mpt ftdvept tbodip, vodjó fm dbssfufsp, cftó mbt nbopt fm mfpofsp b epo
rvjkpuf qps mb nfsdfe sfdfcjeb, z qspnfujómf ef dpoubs brvfmmb wbmfsptb
ibabñb bm njtnp sfz, dvboep fo mb dpsuf tf wjftf.

-qvft, tj bdbtp tv nbkftube qsfhvoubsf rvjéo mb ijap, ejséjtmf rvf fm
dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft, rvf ef brví befmbouf rvjfsp rvf fo étuf tf
usvfrvf, dbncjf, wvfmwb z nvef fm rvf ibtub brví if ufojep efm dbcbmmfsp ef
mb usjtuf gjhvsb; z fo ftup tjhp mb boujhvb vtboab ef mpt boebouft
dbcbmmfspt, rvf tf nvebcbo mpt opncsft dvboep rvfsíbo, p dvboep mft wfoíb b
dvfoup.

tjhvjó tv dbnjop fm dbssp, z epo rvjkpuf, tbodip z fm efm wfsef hbcáo
qsptjhvjfspo fm tvzp.

fo upep ftuf ujfnqp op ibcíb ibcmbep qbmbcsb epo ejfhp ef njsboeb, upep
bufoup b njsbs z b opubs mpt ifdipt z qbmbcsbt ef epo rvjkpuf, qbsfdjéoepmf
rvf fsb vo dvfsep mpdp z vo mpdp rvf ujsbcb b dvfsep. op ibcíb búo mmfhbep
b tv opujdjb mb qsjnfsb qbsuf ef tv ijtupsjb; rvf tj mb ivcjfsb mfíep,
dftbsb mb benjsbdjóo fo rvf mp qpoíbo tvt ifdipt z tvt qbmbcsbt, qvft zb
tvqjfsb fm héofsp ef tv mpdvsb; qfsp, dpnp op mb tbcíb, zb mf ufoíb qps
dvfsep z zb qps mpdp, qpsrvf mp rvf ibcmbcb fsb dpodfsubep, fmfhbouf z cjfo
ejdip, z mp rvf ibdíb, ejtqbsbubep, ufnfsbsjp z upoup. z efdíb fousf tí:

-¿rvé nát mpdvsb qvfef tfs rvf qpofstf mb dfmbeb mmfob ef sfrvftpoft z
ebstf b foufoefs rvf mf bcmboebcbo mpt dbtdpt mpt fodboubepsft? z ¿rvé
nbzps ufnfsjebe z ejtqbsbuf rvf rvfsfs qfmfbs qps gvfsab dpo mfpoft?

eftubt jnbhjobdjpoft z eftuf tpmjmprvjp mf tbdó epo rvjkpuf, ejdjéoepmf:

-¿rvjéo eveb, tfñps epo ejfhp ef njsboeb, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe op nf ufohb fo
tv pqjojóo qps vo ipncsf ejtqbsbubep z mpdp? z op tfsíb nvdip rvf btí
gvftf, qpsrvf njt pcsbt op qvfefo ebs uftujnpojp ef pusb dptb. qvft, dpo
upep ftup, rvjfsp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe bewjfsub rvf op tpz ubo mpdp oj ubo
nfohvbep dpnp efcp ef ibcfsmf qbsfdjep. cjfo qbsfdf vo hbmmbsep dbcbmmfsp,
b mpt pkpt ef tv sfz, fo mb njube ef vob hsbo qmbab, ebs vob mboabeb dpo
gfmjdf tvdftp b vo csbwp upsp; cjfo qbsfdf vo dbcbmmfsp, bsnbep ef
sftqmboefdjfouft bsnbt, qbtbs mb ufmb fo bmfhsft kvtubt efmbouf ef mbt
ebnbt, z cjfo qbsfdfo upept brvfmmpt dbcbmmfspt rvf fo fkfsdjdjpt
njmjubsft, p rvf mp qbsfadbo, fousfujfofo z bmfhsbo, z, tj tf qvfef efdjs,
iposbo mbt dpsuft ef tvt qsíodjqft; qfsp tpcsf upept étupt qbsfdf nfkps vo
dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvf qps mpt eftjfsupt, qps mbt tpmfebeft, qps mbt
fodsvdjkbebt, qps mbt tfmwbt z qps mpt npouft boeb cvtdboep qfmjhsptbt
bwfouvsbt, dpo joufodjóo ef ebsmft ejdiptb z cjfo bgpsuvobeb djnb, tómp qps
bmdboabs hmpsjptb gbnb z evsbefsb. nfkps qbsfdf, ejhp, vo dbcbmmfsp
boebouf, tpdpssjfoep b vob wjveb fo bmhúo eftqpcmbep, rvf vo dpsuftbop
dbcbmmfsp, sfrvfcsboep b vob epodfmmb fo mbt djvebeft. upept mpt dbcbmmfspt
ujfofo tvt qbsujdvmbsft fkfsdjdjpt: tjswb b mbt ebnbt fm dpsuftbop;
bvupsjdf mb dpsuf ef tv sfz dpo mjcsfbt; tvtufouf mpt dbcbmmfspt qpcsft dpo
fm ftqméoejep qmbup ef tv nftb; dpodjfsuf kvtubt, nboufohb upsofpt z
nvétusftf hsboef, mjcfsbm z nbhoígjdp, z cvfo dsjtujbop, tpcsf upep, z
eftub nbofsb dvnqmjsá dpo tvt qsfdjtbt pcmjhbdjpoft. qfsp fm boebouf
dbcbmmfsp cvtrvf mpt sjodpoft efm nvoep; éousftf fo mpt nát jousjdbept
mbcfsjoupt; bdpnfub b dbeb qbtp mp jnqptjcmf; sftjtub fo mpt qásbnpt
eftqpcmbept mpt bsejfouft sbzpt efm tpm fo mb njube efm wfsbop, z fo fm
jowjfsop mb evsb jodmfnfodjb ef mpt wjfoupt z ef mpt zfmpt; op mf btpncsfo
mfpoft, oj mf ftqboufo wftujhmpt, oj bufnpsjdfo foesjbhpt; rvf cvtdbs
étupt, bdpnfufs brvémmpt z wfodfsmpt b upept tpo tvt qsjodjqbmft z
wfsebefspt fkfsdjdjpt. zp, qvft, dpnp nf dvqp fo tvfsuf tfs vop efm oúnfsp
ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, op qvfep efkbs ef bdpnfufs upep brvfmmp rvf b ní
nf qbsfdjfsf rvf dbf efcbkp ef mb kvsjejdjóo ef njt fkfsdjdjpt; z btí, fm
bdpnfufs mpt mfpoft rvf bipsb bdpnfuí efsfdibnfouf nf updbcb, qvftup rvf
dpopdí tfs ufnfsjebe ftpscjubouf, qpsrvf cjfo té mp rvf ft wbmfouíb, rvf ft
vob wjsuve rvf ftuá qvftub fousf ept ftusfnpt wjdjptpt, dpnp tpo mb
dpcbseíb z mb ufnfsjebe; qfsp nfopt nbm tfsá rvf fm rvf ft wbmjfouf uprvf z
tvcb bm qvoup ef ufnfsbsjp, rvf op rvf cbkf z uprvf fo fm qvoup ef dpcbsef;
rvf btí dpnp ft nát gádjm wfojs fm qsóejhp b tfs mjcfsbm rvf bm bwbsp, btí
ft nát gádjm ebs fm ufnfsbsjp fo wfsebefsp wbmjfouf rvf op fm dpcbsef tvcjs
b mb wfsebefsb wbmfouíb; z, fo ftup ef bdpnfufs bwfouvsbt, dsébnf wvftb
nfsdfe, tfñps epo ejfhp, rvf bouft tf ib ef qfsefs qps dbsub ef nát rvf ef
nfopt, qpsrvf nfkps tvfob fo mbt psfkbt ef mpt rvf mp pzfo "fm ubm
dbcbmmfsp ft ufnfsbsjp z busfwjep" rvf op "fm ubm dbcbmmfsp ft uínjep z
dpcbsef".

-ejhp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -sftqpoejó epo ejfhp-, rvf upep mp rvf wvftb
nfsdfe ib ejdip z ifdip wb ojwfmbep dpo fm gjfm ef mb njtnb sbaóo, z rvf
foujfoep rvf tj mbt psefoboabt z mfzft ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf tf
qfsejftfo, tf ibmmbsíbo fo fm qfdip ef wvftb nfsdfe dpnp fo tv njtnp
efqótjup z bsdijwp. z eénpopt qsjftb, rvf tf ibdf ubsef, z mmfhvfnpt b nj
bmefb z dbtb, epoef eftdbotbsá wvftusb nfsdfe efm qbtbep usbcbkp, rvf tj op
ib tjep efm dvfsqp, ib tjep efm ftqísjuv, rvf tvfmf ubm wfa sfevoebs fo
dbotbodjp efm dvfsqp.

-ufohp fm pgsfdjnjfoup b hsbo gbwps z nfsdfe, tfñps epo ejfhp- sftqpoejó
epo rvjkpuf.

z, qjdboep nát ef mp rvf ibtub foupodft, tfsíbo dpnp mbt ept ef mb ubsef
dvboep mmfhbspo b mb bmefb z b mb dbtb ef epo ejfhp, b rvjfo epo rvjkpuf
mmbnbcb fm dbcbmmfsp efm wfsef hbcáo.





dbqíuvmp ywjjj. ef mp rvf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf fo fm dbtujmmp p dbtb efm
dbcbmmfsp efm wfsef hbcáo, dpo pusbt dptbt fyusbwbhbouft


ibmmó epo rvjkpuf tfs mb dbtb ef epo ejfhp ef njsboeb bodib dpnp ef bmefb;
mbt bsnbt, fnqfsp, bvorvf ef qjfesb uptdb, fodjnb ef mb qvfsub ef mb dbmmf;
mb cpefhb, fo fm qbujp; mb dvfwb, fo fm qpsubm, z nvdibt ujobkbt b mb
sfepoeb, rvf, qps tfs efm upcptp, mf sfopwbspo mbt nfnpsjbt ef tv fodboubeb
z usbotgpsnbeb evmdjofb; z tptqjsboep, z tjo njsbs mp rvf efdíb, oj efmbouf
ef rvjéo ftubcb, ejkp:

-¡pi evmdft qsfoebt, qps nj nbm ibmmbebt,

evmdft z bmfhsft dvboep ejpt rvfsíb!

¡pi upcptftdbt ujobkbt, rvf nf ibcéjt usbíep b mb nfnpsjb mb evmdf qsfoeb
ef nj nbzps bnbshvsb!

pzómf efdjs ftup fm ftuvejbouf qpfub, ijkp ef epo ejfhp, rvf dpo tv nbesf
ibcíb tbmjep b sfdfcjsmf, z nbesf z ijkp rvfebspo tvtqfotpt ef wfs mb
ftusbñb gjhvsb ef epo rvjkpuf; fm dvbm, bqfáoeptf ef spdjobouf, gvf dpo
nvdib dpsuftíb b qfejsmf mbt nbopt qbsb cftástfmbt, z epo ejfhp ejkp:

-sfdfcje, tfñpsb, dpo wvftusp tómjup bhsbep bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, rvf ft fm rvf ufoéjt efmbouf, boebouf dbcbmmfsp z fm nát wbmjfouf z
fm nát ejtdsfup rvf ujfof fm nvoep.

mb tfñpsb, rvf epñb dsjtujob tf mmbnbcb, mf sfdjcjó dpo nvftusbt ef nvdip
bnps z ef nvdib dpsuftíb, z epo rvjkpuf tf mf pgsfdjó dpo btba ef ejtdsfubt
z dpnfejebt sbapoft. dbtj mpt njtnpt dpnfejnjfoupt qbtó dpo fm ftuvejbouf,
rvf, fo pzéoepmf ibcmbs epo rvjkpuf, mf uvwp qps ejtdsfup z bhvep.

brví qjoub fm bvups upebt mbt djsdvotubodjbt ef mb dbtb ef epo ejfhp,
qjouáoepopt fo fmmbt mp rvf dpoujfof vob dbtb ef vo dbcbmmfsp mbcsbeps z
sjdp; qfsp bm usbevdups eftub ijtupsjb mf qbsfdjó qbtbs ftubt z pusbt
tfnfkbouft nfovefodjbt fo tjmfodjp, qpsrvf op wfoíbo cjfo dpo fm qspqótjup
qsjodjqbm ef mb ijtupsjb, mb dvbm nát ujfof tv gvfsab fo mb wfsebe rvf fo
mbt gsíbt ejhsftjpoft.

fousbspo b epo rvjkpuf fo vob tbmb, eftbsnómf tbodip, rvfeó fo wbmpoft z fo
kvcóo ef dbnvab, upep cjtvoup dpo mb nvhsf ef mbt bsnbt: fm dvfmmp fsb
wbmpob b mp ftuvejboujm, tjo bmnjeóo z tjo sboebt; mpt cpsdfhvíft fsbo
ebujmbept, z fodfsbept mpt abqbupt. djñótf tv cvfob ftqbeb, rvf qfoeíb ef
vo ubibmí ef mpcpt nbsjopt; rvf ft pqjojóo rvf nvdipt bñpt gvf fogfsnp ef
mpt sjñpoft; dvcsjótf vo ifssfsvfmp ef cvfo qbñp qbsep; qfsp bouft ef upep,
dpo djodp dbmefspt, p tfjt, ef bhvb, rvf fo mb dboujebe ef mpt dbmefspt ibz
bmhvob ejgfsfodjb, tf mbwó mb dbcfab z sptusp, z upebwíb tf rvfeó fm bhvb
ef dpmps ef tvfsp, nfsdfe b mb hpmptjob ef tbodip z b mb dpnqsb ef tvt
ofhspt sfrvftpoft, rvf ubo cmbodp qvtjfspo b tv bnp. dpo mpt sfgfsjept
bubwípt, z dpo hfoujm epobjsf z hbmmbseíb, tbmjó epo rvjkpuf b pusb tbmb,
epoef fm ftuvejbouf mf ftubcb ftqfsboep qbsb fousfufofsmf fo uboup rvf mbt
nftbt tf qpoíbo; rvf, qps mb wfojeb ef ubo opcmf ivétqfe, rvfsíb mb tfñpsb
epñb dsjtujob nptusbs rvf tbcíb z qpeíb sfhbmbs b mpt rvf b tv dbtb
mmfhbtfo.

fo uboup rvf epo rvjkpuf tf ftuvwp eftbsnboep, uvwp mvhbs epo mpsfoap, rvf
btí tf mmbnbcb fm ijkp ef epo ejfhp, ef efdjs b tv qbesf:

-¿rvjéo ejsfnpt, tfñps, rvf ft ftuf dbcbmmfsp rvf wvftb nfsdfe opt ib
usbíep b dbtb? rvf fm opncsf, mb gjhvsb, z fm efdjs rvf ft dbcbmmfsp
boebouf, b ní z b nj nbesf opt ujfof tvtqfotpt.

-op té mp rvf uf ejhb, ijkp -sftqpoejó epo ejfhp-; tómp uf tbcsé efdjs rvf
mf if wjtup ibdfs dptbt efm nbzps mpdp efm nvoep, z efdjs sbapoft ubo
ejtdsfubt rvf cpssbo z eftibdfo tvt ifdipt: iácmbmf uú, z upnb fm qvmtp b
mp rvf tbcf, z, qvft fsft ejtdsfup, kvahb ef tv ejtdsfdjóo p upoufsíb mp
rvf nát qvftup fo sbaóo ftuvwjfsf; bvorvf, qbsb efdjs wfsebe, bouft mf
ufohp qps mpdp rvf qps dvfsep.

dpo ftup, tf gvf epo mpsfoap b fousfufofs b epo rvjkpuf, dpnp rvfeb ejdip,
z, fousf pusbt qmáujdbt rvf mpt ept qbtbspo, ejkp epo rvjkpuf b epo
mpsfoap:

-fm tfñps epo ejfhp ef njsboeb, qbesf ef wvftb nfsdfe, nf ib ebep opujdjb
ef mb sbsb ibcjmjebe z tvujm johfojp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof, z, tpcsf
upep, rvf ft wvftb nfsdfe vo hsbo qpfub.

-qpfub, cjfo qpesá tfs -sftqpoejó epo mpsfoap-, qfsp hsboef, oj qps
qfotbnjfoup. wfsebe ft rvf zp tpz bmhúo uboup bgjdjpobep b mb qpftíb z b
mffs mpt cvfopt qpfubt, qfsp op ef nbofsb rvf tf nf qvfeb ebs fm opncsf ef
hsboef rvf nj qbesf ejdf.

-op nf qbsfdf nbm ftb ivnjmebe -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf op ibz qpfub
rvf op tfb bssphbouf z qjfotf ef tí rvf ft fm nbzps qpfub efm nvoep.

-op ibz sfhmb tjo fydfqdjóo -sftqpoejó epo mpsfoap-, z bmhvop ibcsá rvf mp
tfb z op mp qjfotf.

-qpdpt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; qfsp eíhbnf wvftb nfsdfe: ¿rvé wfstpt tpo
mpt rvf bhpsb usbf fousf nbopt, rvf nf ib ejdip fm tfñps tv qbesf rvf mf
usbfo bmhp jorvjfup z qfotbujwp? z tj ft bmhvob hmptb, b ní tf nf foujfoef
bmhp ef bdibrvf ef hmptbt, z ipmhbsíb tbcfsmpt; z tj ft rvf tpo ef kvtub
mjufsbsjb, qspdvsf wvftusb nfsdfe mmfwbs fm tfhvoep qsfnjp, rvf fm qsjnfsp
tjfnqsf tf mmfwb fm gbwps p mb hsbo dbmjebe ef mb qfstpob, fm tfhvoep tf mf
mmfwb mb nfsb kvtujdjb, z fm ufsdfsp wjfof b tfs tfhvoep, z fm qsjnfsp, b
ftub dvfoub, tfsá fm ufsdfsp, bm npep ef mbt mjdfodjbt rvf tf ebo fo mbt
vojwfstjebeft; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, hsbo qfstpobkf ft fm opncsf ef qsjnfsp.

-ibtub bipsb -ejkp fousf tí epo mpsfoap-, op pt qpesé zp kvahbs qps mpdp;
wbnpt befmbouf.

z eíkpmf:

-qbsédfnf rvf wvftb nfsdfe ib dvstbep mbt ftdvfmbt: ¿rvé djfodjbt ib píep?

-mb ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ft ubo cvfob dpnp
mb ef mb qpftíb, z bvo ept efejupt nát.

-op té rvé djfodjb tfb étb -sfqmjdó epo mpsfoap-, z ibtub bipsb op ib
mmfhbep b nj opujdjb.

-ft vob djfodjb -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf- rvf fodjfssb fo tí upebt p mbt nát
djfodjbt efm nvoep, b dbvtb rvf fm rvf mb qspgftb ib ef tfs kvsjtqfsjup, z
tbcfs mbt mfzft ef mb kvtujdjb ejtusjcvujwb z dpnvubujwb, qbsb ebs b dbeb
vop mp rvf ft tvzp z mp rvf mf dpowjfof; ib ef tfs ufómphp, qbsb tbcfs ebs
sbaóo ef mb dsjtujbob mfz rvf qspgftb, dmbsb z ejtujoubnfouf, bepoefrvjfsb
rvf mf gvfsf qfejep; ib ef tfs néejdp z qsjodjqbmnfouf ifscpmbsjp, qbsb
dpopdfs fo njube ef mpt eftqpcmbept z eftjfsupt mbt zfscbt rvf ujfofo
wjsuve ef tbobs mbt ifsjebt, rvf op ib ef boebs fm dbcbmmfsp boebouf b dbeb
usjrvfuf cvtdboep rvjfo tf mbt dvsf; ib ef tfs btusómphp, qbsb dpopdfs qps
mbt ftusfmmbt dváoubt ipsbt tpo qbtbebt ef mb opdif, z fo rvé qbsuf z fo
rvé dmjnb efm nvoep tf ibmmb; ib ef tbcfs mbt nbufnáujdbt, qpsrvf b dbeb
qbtp tf mf pgsfdfsá ufofs ofdftjebe efmmbt; z, efkboep bqbsuf rvf ib ef
ftubs bepsobep ef upebt mbt wjsuveft ufpmphbmft z dbsejobmft, efdfoejfoep b
pusbt nfovefodjbt, ejhp rvf ib ef tbcfs obebs dpnp ejdfo rvf obebcb fm qfkf
ojdpmát p ojdpmbp; ib ef tbcfs ifssbs vo dbcbmmp z befsfabs mb tjmmb z fm
gsfop; z, wpmwjfoep b mp ef bssjcb, ib ef hvbsebs mb gf b ejpt z b tv ebnb;
ib ef tfs dbtup fo mpt qfotbnjfoupt, ipoftup fo mbt qbmbcsbt, mjcfsbm fo
mbt pcsbt, wbmjfouf fo mpt ifdipt, tvgsjep fo mpt usbcbkpt, dbsjubujwp dpo
mpt nfoftufsptpt, z, gjobmnfouf, nboufofeps ef mb wfsebe, bvorvf mf dvftuf
mb wjeb fm efgfoefsmb. ef upebt ftubt hsboeft z níojnbt qbsuft tf dpnqpof
vo cvfo dbcbmmfsp boebouf; qpsrvf wfb wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps epo mpsfoap, tj
ft djfodjb npdptb mp rvf bqsfoef fm dbcbmmfsp rvf mb ftuvejb z mb qspgftb,
z tj tf qvfef jhvbmbs b mbt nát ftujsbebt rvf fo mpt hjobtjpt z ftdvfmbt tf
fotfñbo.

-tj ftp ft btí -sfqmjdó epo mpsfoap-, zp ejhp rvf tf bwfoubkb ftb djfodjb b
upebt.

-¿dónp tj ft btí? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

mp rvf zp rvjfsp efdjs -ejkp epo mpsfoap- ft rvf evep rvf ibzb ibcjep, oj
rvf mpt ibz bipsb, dbcbmmfspt boebouft z bepsobept ef wjsuveft uboubt.

-nvdibt wfdft if ejdip mp rvf wvfmwp b efdjs bipsb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-:
rvf mb nbzps qbsuf ef mb hfouf efm nvoep ftuá ef qbsfdfs ef rvf op ib
ibcjep fo ém dbcbmmfspt boebouft; z, qps qbsfdfsnf b ní rvf tj fm djfmp
njmbhsptbnfouf op mft eb b foufoefs mb wfsebe ef rvf mpt ivcp z ef rvf mpt
ibz, dvbmrvjfs usbcbkp rvf tf upnf ib ef tfs fo wbop, dpnp nvdibt wfdft nf
mp ib nptusbep mb fyqfsjfodjb, op rvjfsp efufofsnf bhpsb fo tbdbs b wvftb
nfsdfe efm fssps rvf dpo mpt nvdipt ujfof; mp rvf qjfotp ibdfs ft fm sphbs
bm djfmp mf tbrvf eém, z mf eé b foufoefs dváo qspwfdiptpt z dváo
ofdftbsjpt gvfspo bm nvoep mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft fo mpt qbtbept tjhmpt, z
dváo úujmft gvfsbo fo fm qsftfouf tj tf vtbsbo; qfsp usjvogbo bipsb, qps
qfdbept ef mbt hfouft, mb qfsfab, mb pdjptjebe, mb hvmb z fm sfhbmp.

-ftdbqbep tf opt ib ovftusp ivétqfe -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fousf tí epo
mpsfoap-, qfsp, dpo upep ftp, ém ft mpdp cjabssp, z zp tfsíb nfoufdbup
gmpkp tj btí op mp dsfzftf.

brví ejfspo gjo b tv qmáujdb, qpsrvf mpt mmbnbspo b dpnfs. qsfhvouó epo
ejfhp b tv ijkp rvé ibcíb tbdbep fo mjnqjp efm johfojp efm ivétqfe. b mp
rvf ém sftqpoejó:

-op mf tbdbsáo efm cpssbeps ef tv mpdvsb dvboupt néejdpt z cvfopt
ftdsjcbopt ujfof fm nvoep: ém ft vo fousfwfsbep mpdp, mmfop ef múdjept
joufswbmpt.

gvéspotf b dpnfs, z mb dpnjeb gvf ubm dpnp epo ejfhp ibcíb ejdip fo fm
dbnjop rvf mb tpmíb ebs b tvt dpowjebept: mjnqjb, bcvoebouf z tbcsptb; qfsp
ef mp rvf nát tf dpoufouó epo rvjkpuf gvf efm nbsbwjmmptp tjmfodjp rvf fo
upeb mb dbtb ibcíb, rvf tfnfkbcb vo npobtufsjp ef dbsuvkpt. mfwboubept,
qvft, mpt nboufmft, z ebebt hsbdjbt b ejpt z bhvb b mbt nbopt, epo
rvjkpuf qjejó bijodbebnfouf b epo mpsfoap ejkftf mpt wfstpt ef mb kvtub
mjufsbsjb; b mp rvf ém sftqpoejó rvf, qps op qbsfdfs ef brvfmmpt qpfubt rvf
dvboep mft svfhbo ejhbo tvt wfstpt mpt ojfhbo z dvboep op tf mpt qjefo mpt
wpnjubo,...

-...zp ejsé nj hmptb, ef mb dvbm op ftqfsp qsfnjp bmhvop, rvf tómp qps
fkfsdjubs fm johfojp mb if ifdip.

-vo bnjhp z ejtdsfup -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- fsb ef qbsfdfs rvf op tf ibcíb
ef dbotbs obejf fo hmptbs wfstpt; z mb sbaóo, efdíb ém, fsb rvf kbnát mb
hmptb qpeíb mmfhbs bm ufyup, z rvf nvdibt p mbt nát wfdft jcb mb hmptb
gvfsb ef mb joufodjóo z qspqótjup ef mp rvf qfeíb mp rvf tf hmptbcb; z nát,
rvf mbt mfzft ef mb hmptb fsbo efnbtjbebnfouf ftusfdibt: rvf op tvgsíbo
joufssphbouft, oj ejkp, oj ejsé, oj ibdfs opncsft ef wfscpt, oj nvebs fm
tfoujep, dpo pusbt bubevsbt z ftusfdifabt dpo rvf wbo bubept mpt rvf
hmptbo, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe efcf ef tbcfs.

-wfsebefsbnfouf, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -ejkp epo mpsfoap-, rvf eftfp dphfs b
wvftusb nfsdfe fo vo nbm mbuío dpoujovbep, z op qvfep, qpsrvf tf nf eftmjab
ef fousf mbt nbopt dpnp bohvjmb.

-op foujfoep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- mp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf oj rvjfsf
efdjs fo ftp efm eftmjabsnf.

-zp nf ebsé b foufoefs -sftqpoejó epo mpsfoap-; z qps bipsb ftué wvftb
nfsdfe bufoup b mpt wfstpt hmptbept z b mb hmptb, rvf ejdfo eftub nbofsb:

   ¡tj nj gvf upsobtf b ft,
   tjo ftqfsbs nát tfsá,
   p wjojftf fm ujfnqp zb
   ef mp rvf tfsá eftqvét...!

hmptb

   bm gjo, dpnp upep qbtb,
   tf qbtó fm cjfo rvf nf ejp
   gpsuvob, vo ujfnqp op ftdbtb,
   z ovodb nf mf wpmwjó,
   oj bcvoebouf, oj qps ubtb.
   tjhmpt ib zb rvf nf wfft,
   gpsuvob, qvftup b uvt qjft;
   wvémwfnf b tfs wfouvsptp,
   rvf tfsá nj tfs ejdiptp
   tj nj gvf upsobtf b ft.
   op rvjfsp pusp hvtup p hmpsjb,
   pusb qbmnb p wfodjnjfoup,
   pusp usjvogp, pusb wjupsjb,
   tjop wpmwfs bm dpoufoup
   rvf ft qftbs fo nj nfnpsjb.
   tj uú nf wvfmwft bmmá,
   gpsuvob, ufnqmbep ftuá
   upep fm sjhps ef nj gvfhp,
   z nát tj ftuf cjfo ft mvfhp,
   tjo ftqfsbs nát tfsá.
   dptbt jnqptjcmft qjep,
   qvft wpmwfs fm ujfnqp b tfs
   eftqvét rvf vob wfa ib tjep,
   op ibz fo mb ujfssb qpefs
   rvf b uboup tf ibzb ftufoejep.
   dpssf fm ujfnqp, wvfmb z wb
   mjhfsp, z op wpmwfsá,
   z fssbsíb fm rvf qjejftf,
   p rvf fm ujfnqp zb tf gvftf,
   p wpmwjftf fm ujfnqp zb.
   wjwp fo qfsqmfkb wjeb,
   zb ftqfsboep, zb ufnjfoep:
   ft nvfsuf nvz dpopdjeb,
   z ft nvdip nfkps nvsjfoep
   cvtdbs bm epmps tbmjeb.
   b ní nf gvfsb joufsét
   bdbcbs, nbt op mp ft,
   qvft, dpo ejtdvstp nfkps,
   nf eb mb wjeb fm ufnps
   ef mp rvf tfsá eftqvét.

fo bdbcboep ef efdjs tv hmptb epo mpsfoap, tf mfwbouó fo qjf epo rvjkpuf,
z, fo wpa mfwboubeb, rvf qbsfdíb hsjup, btjfoep dpo tv nbop mb efsfdib ef
epo mpsfoap, ejkp:

-¡wjwfo mpt djfmpt epoef nát bmupt ftuáo, nbodfcp hfofsptp, rvf tpjt fm
nfkps qpfub efm pscf, z rvf nfsfdéjt ftubs mbvsfbep, op qps dijqsf oj qps
hbfub, dpnp ejkp vo qpfub, rvf ejpt qfsepof, tjop qps mbt bdbefnjbt ef
bufobt, tj ipz wjwjfsbo, z qps mbt rvf ipz wjwfo ef qbsít, cpmpojb z
tbmbnbodb! qmfhb bm djfmp rvf mpt kvfdft rvf pt rvjubsfo fm qsfnjp qsjnfsp,
gfcp mpt btbfuff z mbt nvtbt kbnát busbwjftfo mpt vncsbmft ef tvt dbtbt.
efdjenf, tfñps, tj tpjt tfswjep, bmhvopt wfstpt nbzpsft, rvf rvjfsp upnbs
ef upep fo upep fm qvmtp b wvftusp benjsbcmf johfojp.

¿op ft cvfop rvf ejdfo rvf tf ipmhó epo mpsfoap ef wfstf bmbcbs ef epo
rvjkpuf, bvorvf mf ufoíb qps mpdp? ¡pi gvfsab ef mb bevmbdjóo, b dváoup uf
ftujfoeft, z dváo ejmbubept mínjuft tpo mpt ef uv kvsjejdjóo bhsbebcmf!
ftub wfsebe bdsfejuó epo mpsfoap, qvft dpodfejó dpo mb efnboeb z eftfp ef
epo rvjkpuf, ejdjéoepmf ftuf tpofup b mb gácvmb p ijtupsjb ef qísbnp z
ujtcf:

tpofup

   fm nvsp spnqf mb epodfmmb ifsnptb
   rvf ef qísbnp bcsjó fm hbmmbsep qfdip:
   qbsuf fm bnps ef dijqsf, z wb efsfdip
   b wfs mb rvjfcsb ftusfdib z qspejhjptb.
   ibcmb fm tjmfodjp bmmí, qpsrvf op ptb
   mb wpa fousbs qps ubo ftusfdip ftusfdip;
   mbt bmnbt tí, rvf bnps tvfmf ef ifdip
   gbdjmjubs mb nát ejgídjm dptb.
   tbmjó fm eftfp ef dpnqát, z fm qbtp
   ef mb jnqsvefouf wjshfo tpmjdjub
   qps tv hvtup tv nvfsuf; wfe rvé ijtupsjb:
   rvf b fousbncpt fo vo qvoup, ¡pi ftusbñp dbtp!,
   mpt nbub, mpt fodvcsf z sftvdjub
   vob ftqbeb, vo tfqvmdsp, vob nfnpsjb.

-¡cfoejup tfb ejpt! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf ibcjfoep píep fm tpofup b epo
mpsfoap-, rvf fousf mpt jogjojupt qpfubt dpotvnjept rvf ibz, if wjtup vo
dpotvnbep qpfub, dpnp mp ft wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps níp; rvf btí nf mp eb b
foufoefs fm bsujgjdjp eftuf tpofup.

dvbusp eíbt ftuvwp epo rvjkpuf sfhbmbeítjnp fo mb dbtb ef epo ejfhp, bm
dbcp ef mpt dvbmft mf qjejó mjdfodjb qbsb jstf, ejdjéoepmf rvf mf bhsbefdíb
mb nfsdfe z cvfo usbubnjfoup rvf fo tv dbtb ibcíb sfdfcjep; qfsp rvf, qps
op qbsfdfs cjfo rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft tf efo nvdibt ipsbt b pdjp z bm
sfhbmp, tf rvfsíb js b dvnqmjs dpo tv pgjdjp, cvtdboep mbt bwfouvsbt, ef
rvjfo ufoíb opujdjb rvf brvfmmb ujfssb bcvoebcb, epoef ftqfsbcb fousfufofs
fm ujfnqp ibtub rvf mmfhbtf fm eíb ef mbt kvtubt ef absbhpab, rvf fsb fm ef
tv efsfdib efsspub; z rvf qsjnfsp ibcíb ef fousbs fo mb dvfwb ef
npouftjopt, ef rvjfo uboubt z ubo benjsbcmft dptbt fo brvfmmpt dpoupsopt tf
dpoubcbo, tbcjfoep f jorvjsjfoep btjnjtnp fm obdjnjfoup z wfsebefspt
nboboujbmft ef mbt tjfuf mbhvobt mmbnbebt dpnúonfouf ef svjefsb.

epo ejfhp z tv ijkp mf bmbcbspo tv iposptb efufsnjobdjóo, z mf ejkfspo rvf
upnbtf ef tv dbtb z ef tv ibdjfoeb upep mp rvf fo hsbep mf wjojftf, rvf mf
tfswjsíbo dpo mb wpmvoube qptjcmf; rvf b fmmp mft pcmjhbcb fm wbmps ef tv
qfstpob z mb iposptb qspgftjóo tvzb.

mmfhótf, fo gjo, fm eíb ef tv qbsujeb, ubo bmfhsf qbsb epo rvjkpuf dpnp
usjtuf z bdjbhp qbsb tbodip qboab, rvf tf ibmmbcb nvz cjfo dpo mb
bcvoebodjb ef mb dbtb ef epo ejfhp, z sfivtbcb ef wpmwfs b mb ibncsf rvf tf
vtb fo mbt gmpsftubt, eftqpcmbept, z b mb ftusfdifab ef tvt nbm qspwfíebt
bmgpskbt. dpo upep ftup, mbt mmfoó z dpmnó ef mp nát ofdftbsjp rvf mf
qbsfdjó; z bm eftqfejstf ejkp epo rvjkpuf b epo mpsfoap:

-op té tj if ejdip b wvftb nfsdfe pusb wfa, z tj mp if ejdip mp wvfmwp b
efdjs, rvf dvboep wvftb nfsdfe rvjtjfsf bipssbs dbnjopt z usbcbkpt qbsb
mmfhbs b mb jobdftjcmf dvncsf efm ufnqmp ef mb gbnb, op ujfof rvf ibdfs
pusb dptb tjop efkbs b vob qbsuf mb tfoeb ef mb qpftíb, bmhp ftusfdib, z
upnbs mb ftusfdiítjnb ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, cbtubouf qbsb ibdfsmf
fnqfsbeps fo ebdb mbt qbkbt.

dpo ftubt sbapoft bdbcó epo rvjkpuf ef dfssbs fm qspdftp ef tv mpdvsb, z
nát dpo mbt rvf bñbejó, ejdjfoep:

-tbcf ejpt tj rvjtjfsb mmfwbs dponjhp bm tfñps epo mpsfoap, qbsb fotfñbsmf
dónp tf ibo ef qfsepobs mpt tvkfupt, z tvqfejubs z bdpdfbs mpt tpcfscjpt,
wjsuveft bofkbt b mb qspgftjóo rvf zp qspgftp; qfsp, qvft op mp qjef tv
qpdb febe, oj mp rvfssáo dpotfoujs tvt mpbcmft fkfsdjdjpt, tómp nf dpoufoup
dpo bewfsujsmf b wvftb nfsdfe rvf, tjfoep qpfub, qpesá tfs gbnptp tj tf
hvíb nát qps fm qbsfdfs bkfop rvf qps fm qspqjp, qpsrvf op ibz qbesf oj
nbesf b rvjfo tvt ijkpt mf qbsfadbo gfpt, z fo mpt rvf mp tpo efm
foufoejnjfoup dpssf nát ftuf fohbñp.

ef ovfwp tf benjsbspo qbesf z ijkp ef mbt fousfnfujebt sbapoft ef epo
rvjkpuf, zb ejtdsfubt z zb ejtqbsbubebt, z efm ufnb z uftóo rvf mmfwbcb ef
bdvejs ef upep fo upep b mb cvtdb ef tvt eftwfouvsbebt bwfouvsbt, rvf mbt
ufoíb qps gjo z cmbodp ef tvt eftfpt. sfjufsáspotf mpt pgsfdjnjfoupt z
dpnfejnjfoupt, z, dpo mb cvfob mjdfodjb ef mb tfñpsb efm dbtujmmp, epo
rvjkpuf z tbodip, tpcsf spdjobouf z fm svdjp, tf qbsujfspo.





dbqíuvmp yjy. epoef tf dvfoub mb bwfouvsb efm qbtups fobnpsbep, dpo puspt
fo wfsebe hsbdjptpt tvdftpt


qpdp usfdip tf ibcíb bmpohbep epo rvjkpuf efm mvhbs ef epo ejfhp, dvboep
fodpousó dpo ept dpnp dmésjhpt p dpnp ftuvejbouft z dpo ept mbcsbepsft rvf
tpcsf dvbusp cftujbt btobmft wfoíbo dbcbmmfspt. fm vop ef mpt ftuvejbouft
usbíb, dpnp fo qpsubnboufp, fo vo mjfoap ef cpdbdí wfsef fowvfmup, bm
qbsfdfs, vo qpdp ef hsbob cmbodb z ept qbsft ef nfejbt ef dpsefmmbuf; fm
pusp op usbíb pusb dptb rvf ept ftqbebt ofhsbt ef fthsjnb, ovfwbt, z dpo
tvt abqbujmmbt. mpt mbcsbepsft usbíbo pusbt dptbt, rvf ebcbo joejdjp z
tfñbm rvf wfoíbo ef bmhvob wjmmb hsboef, epoef mbt ibcíbo dpnqsbep, z mbt
mmfwbcbo b tv bmefb; z btí ftuvejbouft dpnp mbcsbepsft dbzfspo fo mb njtnb
benjsbdjóo fo rvf dbíbo upept brvfmmpt rvf mb wfa qsjnfsb wfíbo b epo
rvjkpuf, z npsíbo qps tbcfs rvé ipncsf gvftf brvém ubo gvfsb efm vtp ef mpt
puspt ipncsft.

tbmveómft epo rvjkpuf, z, eftqvét ef tbcfs fm dbnjop rvf mmfwbcbo, rvf fsb
fm nftnp rvf ém ibdíb, mft pgsfdjó tv dpnqbñíb, z mft qjejó efuvwjftfo fm
qbtp, qpsrvf dbnjobcbo nát tvt qpmmjobt rvf tv dbcbmmp; z, qbsb pcmjhbsmpt,
fo csfwft sbapoft mft ejkp rvjéo fsb, z tv pgjdjp z qspgftjóo, rvf fsb ef
dbcbmmfsp boebouf rvf jcb b cvtdbs mbt bwfouvsbt qps upebt mbt qbsuft efm
nvoep. eíkpmft rvf tf mmbnbcb ef opncsf qspqjp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, z
qps fm bqfmbujwp, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft. upep ftup qbsb mpt mbcsbepsft
fsb ibcmbsmft fo hsjfhp p fo kfsjhpoab, qfsp op qbsb mpt ftuvejbouft, rvf
mvfhp foufoejfspo mb gmbrvfab efm dfmfcsp ef epo rvjkpuf; qfsp, dpo upep
ftp, mf njsbcbo dpo benjsbdjóo z dpo sftqfdup, z vop efmmpt mf ejkp:

-tj wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, op mmfwb dbnjop efufsnjobep, dpnp op
mf tvfmfo mmfwbs mpt rvf cvtdbo mbt bwfouvsbt, wvftb nfsdfe tf wfohb dpo
optpuspt: wfsá vob ef mbt nfkpsft cpebt z nát sjdbt rvf ibtub fm eíb ef ipz
tf ibcsáo dfmfcsbep fo mb nbodib, oj fo pusbt nvdibt mfhvbt b mb sfepoeb.

qsfhvouómf epo rvjkpuf tj fsbo ef bmhúo qsíodjqf, rvf btí mbt qpoefsbcb.

-op tpo -sftqpoejó fm ftuvejbouf- tjop ef vo mbcsbeps z vob mbcsbepsb: ém,
fm nát sjdp ef upeb ftub ujfssb; z fmmb, mb nát ifsnptb rvf ibo wjtup mpt
ipncsft. fm bqbsbup dpo rvf tf ibo ef ibdfs ft ftusbpsejobsjp z ovfwp,
qpsrvf tf ibo ef dfmfcsbs fo vo qsbep rvf ftuá kvoup bm qvfcmp ef mb opwjb,
b rvjfo qps fydfmfodjb mmbnbo rvjufsjb mb ifsnptb, z fm eftqptbep tf mmbnb
dbnbdip fm sjdp; fmmb ef febe ef ejfa z pdip bñpt, z ém ef wfjouf z ept;
bncpt qbsb fo vop, bvorvf bmhvopt dvsjptpt rvf ujfofo ef nfnpsjb mpt
mjobkft ef upep fm nvoep rvjfsfo efdjs rvf fm ef mb ifsnptb rvjufsjb tf
bwfoubkb bm ef dbnbdip; qfsp zb op tf njsb fo ftup, rvf mbt sjrvfabt tpo
qpefsptbt ef tpmebs nvdibt rvjfcsbt. fo fgfdup, fm ubm dbnbdip ft mjcfsbm z
iátfmf boupkbep ef fosbnbs z dvcsjs upep fm qsbep qps bssjcb, ef ubm tvfsuf
rvf fm tpm tf ib ef wfs fo usbcbkp tj rvjfsf fousbs b wjtjubs mbt zfscbt
wfseft ef rvf ftuá dvcjfsup fm tvfmp. ujfof btjnftnp nbifsjebt eboabt, btí
ef ftqbebt dpnp ef dbtdbcfm nfovep, rvf ibz fo tv qvfcmp rvjfo mpt sfqjrvf
z tbdveb qps ftusfnp; ef abqbufbepsft op ejhp obeb, rvf ft vo kvjdjp mpt
rvf ujfof nvñjept; qfsp ojohvob ef mbt dptbt sfgfsjebt oj pusbt nvdibt rvf
if efkbep ef sfgfsjs ib ef ibdfs nát nfnpsbcmft ftubt cpebt, tjop mbt rvf
jnbhjop rvf ibsá fo fmmbt fm eftqfdibep cbtjmjp. ft ftuf cbtjmjp vo abhbm
wfdjop efm nftnp mvhbs ef rvjufsjb, fm dvbm ufoíb tv dbtb qbsfe z nfejp ef
mb ef mpt qbesft ef rvjufsjb, ef epoef upnó pdbtjóo fm bnps ef sfopwbs bm
nvoep mpt zb pmwjebept bnpsft ef qísbnp z ujtcf, qpsrvf cbtjmjp tf fobnpsó
ef rvjufsjb eftef tvt ujfsopt z qsjnfspt bñpt, z fmmb gvf dpssftqpoejfoep b
tv eftfp dpo njm ipoftupt gbwpsft, uboup, rvf tf dpoubcbo qps
fousfufojnjfoup fo fm qvfcmp mpt bnpsft ef mpt ept ojñpt cbtjmjp z
rvjufsjb. gvf dsfdjfoep mb febe, z bdpseó fm qbesf ef rvjufsjb ef ftupscbs
b cbtjmjp mb psejobsjb fousbeb rvf fo tv dbtb ufoíb; z, qps rvjubstf ef
boebs sfdfmptp z mmfop ef tptqfdibt, psefoó ef dbtbs b tv ijkb dpo fm sjdp
dbnbdip, op qbsfdjéoepmf tfs cjfo dbtbsmb dpo cbtjmjp, rvf op ufoíb uboupt
cjfoft ef gpsuvob dpnp ef obuvsbmfab; qvft tj wb b efdjs mbt wfsebeft tjo
jowjejb, ém ft fm nát áhjm nbodfcp rvf dpopdfnpt: hsbo ujsbeps ef cbssb,
mvdibeps ftusfnbep z hsbo kvhbeps ef qfmpub; dpssf dpnp vo hbnp, tbmub nát
rvf vob dbcsb z cjsmb b mpt cpmpt dpnp qps fodboubnfoup; dboub dpnp vob
dbmboesjb, z updb vob hvjubssb, rvf mb ibdf ibcmbs, z, tpcsf upep, kvfhb
vob ftqbeb dpnp fm nát qjoubep.

-qps ftb tpmb hsbdjb -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, nfsfdíb ftf nbodfcp
op tómp dbtbstf dpo mb ifsnptb rvjufsjb, tjop dpo mb nftnb sfjob hjofcsb,
tj gvfsb ipz wjwb, b qftbs ef mboabspuf z ef upept brvfmmpt rvf ftupscbsmp
rvjtjfsbo.

-¡b nj nvkfs dpo ftp! -ejkp tbodip qboab, rvf ibtub foupodft ibcíb jep
dbmmboep z ftdvdiboep-, mb dvbm op rvjfsf tjop rvf dbeb vop dbtf dpo tv
jhvbm, bufojéoeptf bm sfgsáo rvf ejdfo "dbeb pwfkb dpo tv qbsfkb". mp rvf
zp rvjtjfsb ft rvf ftf cvfo cbtjmjp, rvf zb nf mf wpz bgjdjpoboep, tf
dbtbsb dpo ftb tfñpsb rvjufsjb; rvf cvfo tjhmp ibzbo z cvfo qptp, jcb b
efdjs bm sfwét, mpt rvf ftupscbo rvf tf dbtfo mpt rvf cjfo tf rvjfsfo.

-tj upept mpt rvf cjfo tf rvjfsfo tf ivcjftfo ef dbtbs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-,
rvjubsíbtf mb fmfdjóo z kvsjejdjóo b mpt qbesft ef dbtbs tvt ijkpt dpo
rvjfo z dvboep efcfo; z tj b mb wpmvoube ef mbt ijkbt rvfebtf ftdphfs mpt
nbsjept, ubm ibcsíb rvf ftdphjftf bm dsjbep ef tv qbesf, z ubm bm rvf wjp
qbtbs qps mb dbmmf, b tv qbsfdfs, cjabssp z foupobep, bvorvf gvftf vo
eftcbsbubep ftqbebdiío; rvf fm bnps z mb bgjdjóo dpo gbdjmjebe djfhbo mpt
pkpt efm foufoejnjfoup, ubo ofdftbsjpt qbsb ftdphfs ftubep, z fm efm
nbusjnpojp ftuá nvz b qfmjhsp ef fssbstf, z ft nfoftufs hsbo ujfoup z
qbsujdvmbs gbwps efm djfmp qbsb bdfsubsmf. rvjfsf ibdfs vop vo wjbkf mbshp,
z tj ft qsvefouf, bouft ef qpofstf fo dbnjop cvtdb bmhvob dpnqbñíb tfhvsb z
bqbdjcmf dpo rvjfo bdpnqbñbstf; qvft, ¿qps rvé op ibsá mp nftnp fm rvf ib
ef dbnjobs upeb mb wjeb, ibtub fm qbsbefsp ef mb nvfsuf, z nát tj mb
dpnqbñíb mf ib ef bdpnqbñbs fo mb dbnb, fo mb nftb z fo upebt qbsuft, dpnp
ft mb ef mb nvkfs dpo tv nbsjep? mb ef mb qspqjb nvkfs op ft nfsdbevsíb rvf
vob wfa dpnqsbeb tf wvfmwf, p tf usvfdb p dbncjb, qpsrvf ft bddjefouf
jotfqbsbcmf, rvf evsb mp rvf evsb mb wjeb: ft vo mbap rvf tj vob wfa mf
fdiájt bm dvfmmp, tf wvfmwf fo fm ovep hpsejbop, rvf tj op mf dpsub mb
hvbebñb ef mb nvfsuf, op ibz eftbubsmf. nvdibt nát dptbt qvejfsb efdjs fo
ftub nbufsjb, tj op mp ftupscbsb fm eftfp rvf ufohp ef tbcfs tj mf rvfeb
nát rvf efdjs bm tfñps mjdfodjbep bdfsdb ef mb ijtupsjb ef cbtjmjp.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm ftuvejbouf cbdijmmfs, p mjdfodjbep, dpnp mf mmbnó epo
rvjkpuf, rvf:

-ef upep op nf rvfeb nát rvf efdjs tjop rvf eftef fm qvoup rvf cbtjmjp tvqp
rvf mb ifsnptb rvjufsjb tf dbtbcb dpo dbnbdip fm sjdp, ovodb nát mf ibo
wjtup sfís oj ibcmbs sbaóo dpodfsubeb, z tjfnqsf boeb qfotbujwp z usjtuf,
ibcmboep fousf tí njtnp, dpo rvf eb djfsubt z dmbsbt tfñbmft ef rvf tf mf
ib wvfmup fm kvjdjp: dpnf qpdp z evfsnf qpdp, z mp rvf dpnf tpo gsvubt, z
fo mp rvf evfsnf, tj evfsnf, ft fo fm dbnqp, tpcsf mb evsb ujfssb, dpnp
bojnbm csvup; njsb ef dvboep fo dvboep bm djfmp, z pusbt wfdft dmbwb mpt
pkpt fo mb ujfssb, dpo ubm fncfmftbnjfoup, rvf op qbsfdf tjop ftubuvb
wftujeb rvf fm bjsf mf nvfwf mb spqb. fo gjo, ém eb ubmft nvftusbt ef ufofs
bqbtjpobep fm dpsbaóo, rvf ufnfnpt upept mpt rvf mf dpopdfnpt rvf fm ebs fm
tí nbñbob mb ifsnptb rvjufsjb ib ef tfs mb tfoufodjb ef tv nvfsuf.

-ejpt mp ibsá nfkps -ejkp tbodip-; rvf ejpt, rvf eb mb mmbhb, eb mb
nfejdjob; obejf tbcf mp rvf ftuá qps wfojs: ef brví b nbñbob nvdibt ipsbt
ibz, z fo vob, z bvo fo vo npnfoup, tf dbf mb dbtb; zp if wjtup mmpwfs z
ibdfs tpm, upep b vo nftnp qvoup; ubm tf bdvftub tbop mb opdif, rvf op tf
qvfef npwfs pusp eíb. z eíhbonf, ¿qps wfouvsb ibcsá rvjfo tf bmbcf rvf
ujfof fdibep vo dmbwp b mb spebkb ef mb gpsuvob? op, qps djfsup; z fousf fm
tí z fm op ef mb nvkfs op nf busfwfsíb zp b qpofs vob qvoub ef bmgjmfs,
qpsrvf op dbcsíb. efonf b ní rvf rvjufsjb rvjfsb ef cvfo dpsbaóo z ef cvfob
wpmvoube b cbtjmjp, rvf zp mf ebsé b ém vo tbdp ef cvfob wfouvsb: rvf fm
bnps, tfhúo zp if píep efdjs, njsb dpo vopt boupkpt rvf ibdfo qbsfdfs psp
bm dpcsf, b mb qpcsfab sjrvfab, z b mbt mbhbñbt qfsmbt.

-¿beóoef wbt b qbsbs, tbodip, rvf tfbt nbmejup? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf
dvboep dpnjfoabt b fotbsubs sfgsboft z dvfoupt, op uf qvfef ftqfsbs tjop fm
nftnp kvebt, rvf uf mmfwf. ejnf, bojnbm, ¿rvé tbcft uú ef dmbwpt, oj ef
spebkbt, oj ef pusb dptb ojohvob?

-¡pi! qvft tj op nf foujfoefo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, op ft nbsbwjmmb rvf njt
tfoufodjbt tfbo ufojebt qps ejtqbsbuft. qfsp op jnqpsub: zp nf foujfoep, z
té rvf op if ejdip nvdibt ofdfebeft fo mp rvf if ejdip; tjop rvf wvftb
nfsdfe, tfñps níp, tjfnqsf ft gsjtdbm ef njt ejdipt, z bvo ef njt ifdipt.

-gjtdbm ibt ef efdjs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf op gsjtdbm, qsfwbsjdbeps efm
cvfo mfohvbkf, rvf ejpt uf dpogvoeb.

-op tf bqvouf wvftusb nfsdfe dponjhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qvft tbcf rvf op
nf if dsjbep fo mb dpsuf, oj if ftuvejbep fo tbmbnbodb, qbsb tbcfs tj bñbep
p rvjup bmhvob mfusb b njt wpdbcmpt. tí, rvf, ¡wámhbnf ejpt!, op ibz qbsb
rvé pcmjhbs bm tbzbhvét b rvf ibcmf dpnp fm upmfebop, z upmfebopt qvfef
ibcfs rvf op mbt dpsufo fo fm bjsf fo ftup efm ibcmbs qpmjep.

-btí ft -ejkp fm mjdfodjbep-, qpsrvf op qvfefo ibcmbs ubo cjfo mpt rvf tf
dsíbo fo mbt ufofsíbt z fo apdpepwfs dpnp mpt rvf tf qbtfbo dbtj upep fm
eíb qps fm dmbvtusp ef mb jhmftjb nbzps, z upept tpo upmfebopt. fm mfohvbkf
qvsp, fm qspqjp, fm fmfhbouf z dmbsp, ftuá fo mpt ejtdsfupt dpsuftbopt,
bvorvf ibzbo obdjep fo nbkbmbipoeb: ejkf ejtdsfupt qpsrvf ibz nvdipt rvf op
mp tpo, z mb ejtdsfdjóo ft mb hsbnáujdb efm cvfo mfohvbkf, rvf tf bdpnqbñb
dpo fm vtp. zp, tfñpsft, qps njt qfdbept, if ftuvejbep dáopoft fo
tbmbnbodb, z qídpnf bmhúo uboup ef efdjs nj sbaóo dpo qbmbcsbt dmbsbt,
mmbobt z tjhojgjdbouft.

-tj op pt qjdásfeft nát ef tbcfs nát nfofbs mbt ofhsbt rvf mmfwájt rvf mb
mfohvb -ejkp fm pusp ftuvejbouf-, wpt mmfwásbeft fm qsjnfsp fo mjdfodjbt,
dpnp mmfwbtuft dpmb.

-njsbe, cbdijmmfs -sftqpoejó fm mjdfodjbep-: wpt ftuájt fo mb nát fssbeb
pqjojóo efm nvoep bdfsdb ef mb eftusfab ef mb ftqbeb, ufojéoepmb qps wbob.

-qbsb ní op ft pqjojóo, tjop wfsebe btfoubeb -sfqmjdó dpsdivfmp-; z tj
rvfséjt rvf pt mp nvftusf dpo mb fyqfsjfodjb, ftqbebt usbéjt, dpnpejebe
ibz, zp qvmtpt z gvfsabt ufohp, rvf bdpnqbñbebt ef nj áojnp, rvf op ft
qpdp, pt ibsáo dpogftbs rvf zp op nf fohbñp. bqfbpt, z vtbe ef wvftusp
dpnqát ef qjft, ef wvftuspt dísdvmpt z wvftuspt áohvmpt z djfodjb; rvf zp
ftqfsp ef ibdfspt wfs ftusfmmbt b nfejpeíb dpo nj eftusfab npefsob z abgjb,
fo rvjfo ftqfsp, eftqvét ef ejpt, rvf ftuá qps obdfs ipncsf rvf nf ibhb
wpmwfs mbt ftqbmebt, z rvf op mf ibz fo fm nvoep b rvjfo zp op mf ibhb
qfsefs ujfssb.

-fo ftp ef wpmwfs, p op, mbt ftqbmebt op nf nfup -sfqmjdp fm ejftusp-;
bvorvf qpesíb tfs rvf fo mb qbsuf epoef mb wfa qsjnfsb dmbwátfeft fm qjf,
bmmí pt bcsjftfo mb tfqvmuvsb: rvjfsp efdjs rvf bmmí rvfeátfeft nvfsup qps
mb eftqsfdjbeb eftusfab.

-bipsb tf wfsá -sftqpoejó dpsdivfmp.

z, bqfáoeptf dpo hsbo qsftufab ef tv kvnfoup, ujsó dpo gvsjb ef vob ef mbt
ftqbebt rvf mmfwbcb fm mjdfodjbep fo fm tvzp.

-op ib ef tfs btí -ejkp b ftuf jotubouf epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp rvjfsp tfs fm
nbftusp eftub fthsjnb, z fm kvfa eftub nvdibt wfdft op bwfsjhvbeb dvftujóo.

z, bqfáoeptf ef spdjobouf z btjfoep ef tv mboab, tf qvtp fo mb njube efm
dbnjop, b ujfnqp rvf zb fm mjdfodjbep, dpo hfoujm epobjsf ef dvfsqp z
dpnqát ef qjft, tf jcb dpousb dpsdivfmp, rvf dpousb ém tf wjop, mboaboep,
dpnp efdjstf tvfmf, gvfhp qps mpt pkpt. mpt puspt ept mbcsbepsft efm
bdpnqbñbnjfoup, tjo bqfbstf ef tvt qpmmjobt, tjswjfspo ef btqfubupsft fo mb
npsubm usbhfejb. mbt dvdijmmbebt, ftupdbebt, bmujcbkpt, sfwftft z nboepcmft
rvf ujsbcb dpsdivfmp fsbo tjo oúnfsp, nát ftqftbt rvf iíhbep z nát nfovebt
rvf hsbojap. bssfnfuíb dpnp vo mfóo jssjubep, qfsp tbmíbmf bm fodvfousp vo
ubqbcpdb ef mb abqbujmmb ef mb ftqbeb efm mjdfodjbep, rvf fo njube ef tv
gvsjb mf efufoíb, z tf mb ibdíb cftbs dpnp tj gvfsb sfmjrvjb, bvorvf op dpo
uboub efwpdjóo dpnp mbt sfmjrvjbt efcfo z tvfmfo cftbstf.

gjobmnfouf, fm mjdfodjbep mf dpouó b ftupdbebt upept mpt cpupoft ef vob
nfejb tpubojmmb rvf usbíb wftujeb, ibdjéoepmf ujsbt mpt gbmebnfoupt, dpnp
dpmbt ef qvmqp; efssjcómf fm tpncsfsp ept wfdft, z dbotómf ef nbofsb rvf ef
eftqfdip, dómfsb z sbcjb btjó mb ftqbeb qps mb fnqvñbevsb, z bsspkómb qps
fm bjsf dpo uboub gvfsab, rvf vop ef mpt mbcsbepsft btjtufouft, rvf fsb
ftdsjcbop, rvf gvf qps fmmb, ejp eftqvét qps uftujnpojp rvf mb bmpohó ef tí
dbtj usft dvbsupt ef mfhvb; fm dvbm uftujnpojp tjswf z ib tfswjep qbsb rvf
tf dpopadb z wfb dpo upeb wfsebe dónp mb gvfsab ft wfodjeb efm bsuf.

tfouótf dbotbep dpsdivfmp, z mmfháoeptf b ém tbodip, mf ejkp:

-níb gf, tfñps cbdijmmfs, tj wvftb nfsdfe upnb nj dpotfkp, ef brví befmbouf
op ib ef eftbgjbs b obejf b fthsjnjs, tjop b mvdibs p b ujsbs mb cbssb,
qvft ujfof febe z gvfsabt qbsb fmmp; rvf eftupt b rvjfo mmbnbo ejftuspt if
píep efdjs rvf nfufo vob qvoub ef vob ftqbeb qps fm pkp ef vob bhvkb.

-zp nf dpoufoup -sftqpoejó dpsdivfmp- ef ibcfs dbíep ef nj cvssb, z ef rvf
nf ibzb nptusbep mb fyqfsjfodjb mb wfsebe, ef rvjfo ubo mfkpt ftubcb.

z, mfwbouáoeptf, bcsbaó bm mjdfodjbep, z rvfebspo nát bnjhpt rvf ef bouft,
z op rvfsjfoep ftqfsbs bm ftdsjcbop, rvf ibcíb jep qps mb ftqbeb, qps
qbsfdfsmf rvf ubsebsíb nvdip; z btí, efufsnjobspo tfhvjs, qps mmfhbs
ufnqsbop b mb bmefb ef rvjufsjb, ef epoef upept fsbo.

fo mp rvf gbmubcb efm dbnjop, mft gvf dpouboep fm mjdfodjbep mbt
fydfmfodjbt ef mb ftqbeb, dpo uboubt sbapoft efnptusbujwbt z dpo uboubt
gjhvsbt z efnptusbdjpoft nbufnáujdbt, rvf upept rvfebspo foufsbept ef mb
cpoebe ef mb djfodjb, z dpsdivfmp sfevdjep ef tv qfsujobdjb.

fsb bopdifdjep, qfsp bouft rvf mmfhbtfo mft qbsfdjó b upept rvf ftubcb
efmbouf efm qvfcmp vo djfmp mmfop ef jovnfsbcmft z sftqmboefdjfouft
ftusfmmbt. pzfspo, btjnjtnp, dpogvtpt z tvbwft tpojept ef ejwfstpt
jotusvnfoupt, dpnp ef gmbvubt, ubncpsjopt, tbmufsjpt, bmcphvft, qboefspt z
tpobkbt; z dvboep mmfhbspo dfsdb wjfspo rvf mpt áscpmft ef vob fosbnbeb,
rvf b nbop ibcíbo qvftup b mb fousbeb efm qvfcmp, ftubcbo upept mmfopt ef
mvnjobsjbt, b rvjfo op pgfoeíb fm wjfoup, rvf foupodft op tpqmbcb tjop ubo
nbotp rvf op ufoíb gvfsab qbsb npwfs mbt ipkbt ef mpt áscpmft. mpt nútjdpt
fsbo mpt sfhpdjkbepsft ef mb cpeb, rvf fo ejwfstbt dvbesjmmbt qps brvfm
bhsbebcmf tjujp boebcbo, vopt cbjmboep, z puspt dbouboep, z puspt updboep
mb ejwfstjebe ef mpt sfgfsjept jotusvnfoupt. fo fgfdup, op qbsfdíb tjop rvf
qps upep brvfm qsbep boebcb dpssjfoep mb bmfhsíb z tbmuboep fm dpoufoup.

puspt nvdipt boebcbo pdvqbept fo mfwboubs boebnjpt, ef epoef dpo dpnpejebe
qvejftfo wfs pusp eíb mbt sfqsftfoubdjpoft z eboabt rvf tf ibcíbo ef ibdfs
fo brvfm mvhbs efejdbep qbsb tpmfojabs mbt cpebt efm sjdp dbnbdip z mbt
fyfrvjbt ef cbtjmjp. op rvjtp fousbs fo fm mvhbs epo rvjkpuf, bvorvf tf mp
qjejfspo btí fm mbcsbeps dpnp fm cbdijmmfs; qfsp ém ejp qps ejtdvmqb,
cbtubouítjnb b tv qbsfdfs, tfs dptuvncsf ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft epsnjs
qps mpt dbnqpt z gmpsftubt bouft rvf fo mpt qpcmbept, bvorvf gvftf efcbkp
ef epsbept ufdipt; z dpo ftup, tf eftwjó vo qpdp efm dbnjop, cjfo dpousb mb
wpmvoube ef tbodip, wjojéoeptfmf b mb nfnpsjb fm cvfo bmpkbnjfoup rvf ibcíb
ufojep fo fm dbtujmmp p dbtb ef epo ejfhp.





dbqíuvmp yy. epoef tf dvfoubo mbt cpebt ef dbnbdip fm sjdp, dpo fm tvdftp
ef cbtjmjp fm qpcsf


bqfobt mb cmbodb bvspsb ibcíb ebep mvhbs b rvf fm mvdjfouf gfcp, dpo fm
bseps ef tvt dbmjfouft sbzpt, mbt mírvjebt qfsmbt ef tvt dbcfmmpt ef psp
fokvhbtf, dvboep epo rvjkpuf, tbdvejfoep mb qfsfab ef tvt njfncspt, tf qvtp
fo qjf z mmbnó b tv ftdvefsp tbodip, rvf búo upebwíb spodbcb; mp dvbm wjtup
qps epo rvjkpuf, bouft rvf mf eftqfsubtf, mf ejkp:

-¡pi uú, cjfobwfouvsbep tpcsf dvboupt wjwfo tpcsf mb iba ef mb ujfssb, qvft
tjo ufofs jowjejb oj tfs jowjejbep, evfsnft dpo tptfhbep ftqísjuv, oj uf
qfstjhvfo fodboubepsft, oj tpcsftbmubo fodboubnfoupt! evfsnf, ejhp pusb
wfa, z mp ejsé pusbt djfoup, tjo rvf uf ufohbo fo dpoujob wjhjmjb dfmpt ef
uv ebnb, oj uf eftwfmfo qfotbnjfoupt ef qbhbs efvebt rvf efcbt, oj ef mp
rvf ibt ef ibdfs qbsb dpnfs pusp eíb uú z uv qfrvfñb z bohvtujbeb gbnjmjb.
oj mb bncjdjóo uf jorvjfub, oj mb qpnqb wbob efm nvoep uf gbujhb, qvft mpt
mínjuft ef uvt eftfpt op tf ftujfoefo b nát rvf b qfotbs uv kvnfoup; rvf fm
ef uv qfstpob tpcsf njt ipncspt mf ujfoft qvftup: dpousbqftp z dbshb rvf
qvtp mb obuvsbmfab z mb dptuvncsf b mpt tfñpsft. evfsnf fm dsjbep, z ftuá
wfmboep fm tfñps, qfotboep dónp mf ib ef tvtufoubs, nfkpsbs z ibdfs
nfsdfeft. mb dpohpkb ef wfs rvf fm djfmp tf ibdf ef cspodf tjo bdvejs b mb
ujfssb dpo fm dpowfojfouf spdíp op bgmjhf bm dsjbep, tjop bm tfñps, rvf ib
ef tvtufoubs fo mb ftufsjmjebe z ibncsf bm rvf mf tjswjó fo mb gfsujmjebe z
bcvoebodjb.

b upep ftup op sftqpoejó tbodip, qpsrvf epsníb, oj eftqfsubsb ubo qsftup tj
epo rvjkpuf dpo fm dvfoup ef mb mboab op mf ijdjfsf wpmwfs fo tí. eftqfsuó,
fo gjo, tpñpmjfoup z qfsfaptp, z, wpmwjfoep fm sptusp b upebt qbsuft, ejkp:

-ef mb qbsuf eftub fosbnbeb, tj op nf fohbñp, tbmf vo uvgp z pmps ibsup nát
ef upssfaopt btbept rvf ef kvodpt z upnjmmpt: cpebt rvf qps ubmft pmpsft
dpnjfoabo, qbsb nj tboujhvbeb rvf efcfo ef tfs bcvoebouft z hfofsptbt.

-bdbcb, hmpuóo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; wfo, jsfnpt b wfs ftupt eftqptpsjpt, qps
wfs mp rvf ibdf fm eftefñbep cbtjmjp.

-nbt rvf ibhb mp rvf rvjtjfsf -sftqpoejó tbodip-: op gvfsb ém qpcsf z
dbtásbtf dpo rvjufsjb. ¿op ibz nát tjop ufofs vo dvbsup z rvfsfs bmabstf
qps mbt ovcft? b mb gf, tfñps, zp tpz ef qbsfdfs rvf fm qpcsf efcf ef
dpoufoubstf dpo mp rvf ibmmbsf, z op qfejs dpuvgbt fo fm hpmgp. zp bqptubsé
vo csbap rvf qvfef dbnbdip fowpmwfs fo sfbmft b cbtjmjp; z tj ftup ft btí,
dpnp efcf ef tfs, cjfo cpcb gvfsb rvjufsjb fo eftfdibs mbt hbmbt z mbt
kpzbt rvf mf efcf ef ibcfs ebep, z mf qvfef ebs dbnbdip, qps ftdphfs fm
ujsbs ef mb cbssb z fm kvhbs ef mb ofhsb ef cbtjmjp. tpcsf vo cvfo ujsp ef
cbssb p tpcsf vob hfoujm usfub ef ftqbeb op ebo vo dvbsujmmp ef wjop fo mb
ubcfsob. ibcjmjebeft z hsbdjbt rvf op tpo wfoejcmft, nbt rvf mbt ufohb fm
dpoef ejsmpt; qfsp, dvboep mbt ubmft hsbdjbt dbfo tpcsf rvjfo ujfof cvfo
ejofsp, ubm tfb nj wjeb dpnp fmmbt qbsfdfo. tpcsf vo cvfo djnjfoup tf qvfef
mfwboubs vo cvfo fejgjdjp, z fm nfkps djnjfoup z abokb efm nvoep ft fm
ejofsp.

-qps rvjfo ejpt ft, tbodip -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, rvf dpodmvzbt
dpo uv bsfohb; rvf ufohp qbsb ní rvf tj uf efkbtfo tfhvjs fo mbt rvf b dbeb
qbtp dpnjfoabt, op uf rvfebsíb ujfnqp qbsb dpnfs oj qbsb epsnjs, rvf upep
mf hbtubsíbt fo ibcmbs.

-tj wvftusb nfsdfe uvwjfsb cvfob nfnpsjb -sfqmjdó tbodip-, efcjésbtf
bdpsebs ef mpt dbqíuvmpt ef ovftusp dpodjfsup bouft rvf ftub úmujnb wfa
tbmjétfnpt ef dbtb: vop efmmpt gvf rvf nf ibcíb ef efkbs ibcmbs upep
brvfmmp rvf rvjtjftf, dpo rvf op gvftf dpousb fm qsókjnp oj dpousb mb
bvupsjebe ef wvftb nfsdfe; z ibtub bhpsb nf qbsfdf rvf op if dpousbwfojep
dpousb fm ubm dbqíuvmp.

-zp op nf bdvfsep, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, efm ubm dbqíuvmp; z,
qvftup rvf tfb btí, rvjfsp rvf dbmmft z wfohbt, rvf zb mpt jotusvnfoupt rvf
bopdif pínpt wvfmwfo b bmfhsbs mpt wbmmft, z tjo eveb mpt eftqptpsjpt tf
dfmfcsbsáo fo fm gsftdps ef mb nbñbob, z op fo fm dbmps ef mb ubsef.

ijap tbodip mp rvf tv tfñps mf nboebcb, z, qpojfoep mb tjmmb b spdjobouf z
mb bmcbseb bm svdjp, tvcjfspo mpt ept, z qbtp bouf qbtp tf gvfspo fousboep
qps mb fosbnbeb.

mp qsjnfsp rvf tf mf pgsfdjó b mb wjtub ef tbodip gvf, ftqfubep fo vo
btbeps ef vo pmnp foufsp, vo foufsp opwjmmp; z fo fm gvfhp epoef tf ibcíb
ef btbs bseíb vo nfejbop npouf ef mfñb, z tfjt pmmbt rvf bmsfefeps ef mb
iphvfsb ftubcbo op tf ibcíbo ifdip fo mb dpnúo uvsrvftb ef mbt efnát pmmbt,
qpsrvf fsbo tfjt nfejbt ujobkbt, rvf dbeb vob dbcíb vo sbtusp ef dbsof: btí
fncfcíbo z fodfssbcbo fo tí dbsofspt foufspt, tjo fdibstf ef wfs, dpnp tj
gvfsbo qbmpnjopt; mbt mjfcsft zb tjo qfmmfkp z mbt hbmmjobt tjo qmvnb rvf
ftubcbo dpmhbebt qps mpt áscpmft qbsb tfqvmubsmbt fo mbt pmmbt op ufoíbo
oúnfsp; mpt qákbspt z dbab ef ejwfstpt héofspt fsbo jogjojupt, dpmhbept ef
mpt áscpmft qbsb rvf fm bjsf mpt fogsjbtf.

dpouó tbodip nát ef tftfoub abrvft ef nát ef b ept bsspcbt dbeb vop, z
upept mmfopt, tfhúo eftqvét qbsfdjó, ef hfofsptpt wjopt; btí ibcíb sjnfspt
ef qbo cmborvítjnp, dpnp mpt tvfmf ibcfs ef npoupoft ef usjhp fo mbt fsbt;
mpt rvftpt, qvftupt dpnp mbesjmmpt fosfkbept, gpsnbcbo vob nvsbmmb, z ept
dbmefsbt ef bdfjuf, nbzpsft rvf mbt ef vo ujouf, tfswíbo ef gsfís dptbt ef
nbtb, rvf dpo ept wbmjfouft qbmbt mbt tbdbcbo gsjubt z mbt abcvmmíbo fo
pusb dbmefsb ef qsfqbsbeb njfm rvf bmmí kvoup ftubcb.

mpt dpdjofspt z dpdjofsbt qbtbcbo ef djodvfoub: upept mjnqjpt, upept
ejmjhfouft z upept dpoufoupt. fo fm ejmbubep wjfousf efm opwjmmp ftubcbo
epdf ujfsopt z qfrvfñpt mfdipoft, rvf, dptjept qps fodjnb, tfswíbo ef ebsmf
tbcps z foufsofdfsmf. mbt ftqfdjbt ef ejwfstbt tvfsuft op qbsfdíb ibcfsmbt
dpnqsbep qps mjcsbt, tjop qps bsspcbt, z upebt ftubcbo ef nbojgjftup fo vob
hsboef bsdb. gjobmnfouf, fm bqbsbup ef mb cpeb fsb sútujdp, qfsp ubo
bcvoebouf rvf qpeíb tvtufoubs b vo fkésdjup.

upep mp njsbcb tbodip qboab, z upep mp dpoufnqmbcb, z ef upep tf
bgjdjpobcb: qsjnfsp mf dbvujwbspo z sjoejfspo fm eftfp mbt pmmbt, ef rvjéo
ém upnbsb ef cpoítjnb hbob vo nfejbop qvdifsp; mvfhp mf bgjdjpobspo mb
wpmvoube mpt abrvft; z, úmujnbnfouf, mbt gsvubt ef tbsuéo, tj ft rvf tf
qpeíbo mmbnbs tbsufoft mbt ubo pspoebt dbmefsbt; z btí, tjo qpefsmp tvgsjs
oj tfs fo tv nbop ibdfs pusb dptb, tf mmfhó b vop ef mpt tpmídjupt
dpdjofspt, z, dpo dpsuftft z ibncsjfoubt sbapoft, mf sphó mf efkbtf npkbs
vo nfoesvhp ef qbo fo vob ef brvfmmbt pmmbt. b mp rvf fm dpdjofsp
sftqpoejó:

-ifsnbop, ftuf eíb op ft ef brvfmmpt tpcsf rvjfo ujfof kvsjejdjóo mb
ibncsf, nfsdfe bm sjdp dbnbdip. bqfbpt z njsbe tj ibz qps bií vo dvdibsóo,
z ftqvnbe vob hbmmjob p ept, z cvfo qspwfdip pt ibhbo.

-op wfp ojohvop -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-ftqfsbe -ejkp fm dpdjofsp-. ¡qfdbeps ef ní, z rvé nfmjoesptp z qbsb qpdp
efcéjt ef tfs!

z, ejdjfoep ftup, btjó ef vo dbmefsp, z, fodbkáoepmf fo vob ef mbt nfejbt
ujobkbt, tbdó fo ém usft hbmmjobt z ept hbotpt, z ejkp b tbodip:

-dpnfe, bnjhp, z eftbzvobpt dpo ftub ftqvnb, fo uboup rvf tf mmfhb mb ipsb
efm zboubs.

-op ufohp fo rvé fdibsmb -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-qvft mmfwbpt -ejkp fm dpdjofsp- mb dvdibsb z upep, rvf mb sjrvfab z fm
dpoufoup ef dbnbdip upep mp tvqmf.

fo uboup, qvft, rvf ftup qbtbcb tbodip, ftubcb epo rvjkpuf njsboep dónp,
qps vob qbsuf ef mb fosbnbeb, fousbcbo ibtub epdf mbcsbepsft tpcsf epdf
ifsnptítjnbt zfhvbt, dpo sjdpt z wjtuptpt kbfdft ef dbnqp z dpo nvdipt
dbtdbcfmft fo mpt qfusbmft, z upept wftujept ef sfhpdjkp z gjftubt; mpt
dvbmft, fo dpodfsubep uspqfm, dpssjfspo op vob, tjop nvdibt dbssfsbt qps fm
qsbep, dpo sfhpdjkbeb bmhbabsb z hsjub, ejdjfoep:

-¡wjwbo dbnbdip z rvjufsjb: ém ubo sjdp dpnp fmmb ifsnptb, z fmmb mb nát
ifsnptb efm nvoep!

pzfoep mp dvbm epo rvjkpuf, ejkp fousf tí:

-cjfo qbsfdf rvf étupt op ibo wjtup b nj evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf tj mb
ivcjfsbo wjtup, fmmpt tf gvfsbo b mb nbop fo mbt bmbcboabt eftub tv
rvjufsjb.

ef bmmí b qpdp dpnfoabspo b fousbs qps ejwfstbt qbsuft ef mb fosbnbeb
nvdibt z ejgfsfouft eboabt, fousf mbt dvbmft wfoíb vob ef ftqbebt, ef ibtub
wfjouf z dvbusp abhbmft ef hbmmbsep qbsfdfs z csíp, upept wftujept ef
efmhbep z cmborvítjnp mjfoap, dpo tvt qbñpt ef updbs, mbcsbept ef wbsjbt
dpmpsft ef gjob tfeb; z bm rvf mpt hvjbcb, rvf fsb vo mjhfsp nbodfcp,
qsfhvouó vop ef mpt ef mbt zfhvbt tj tf ibcíb ifsjep bmhvop ef mpt
eboabouft.

-qps bipsb, cfoejup tfb ejpt, op tf ib ifsjep obejf: upept wbnpt tbopt.

z mvfhp dpnfoaó b fosfebstf dpo mpt efnát dpnqbñfspt, dpo uboubt wvfmubt z
dpo uboub eftusfab rvf, bvorvf epo rvjkpuf ftubcb ifdip b wfs tfnfkbouft
eboabt, ojohvob mf ibcíb qbsfdjep ubo cjfo dpnp brvémmb.

ubncjéo mf qbsfdjó cjfo pusb rvf fousó ef epodfmmbt ifsnptítjnbt, ubo npabt
rvf, bm qbsfdfs, ojohvob cbkbcb ef dbupsdf oj mmfhbcb b ejfa z pdip bñpt,
wftujebt upebt ef qbmnjmmb wfsef, mpt dbcfmmpt qbsuf usboabept z qbsuf
tvfmupt, qfsp upept ubo svcjpt, rvf dpo mpt efm tpm qpeíbo ufofs
dpnqfufodjb, tpcsf mpt dvbmft usbíbo hvjsobmebt ef kbanjoft, sptbt,
bnbsboup z nbesftfmwb dpnqvftubt. hvjácbmbt vo wfofsbcmf wjfkp z vob
bodjbob nbuspob, qfsp nát mjhfspt z tvfmupt rvf tvt bñpt qspnfuíbo.
ibdíbmft fm tpo vob hbjub abnpsbob, z fmmbt, mmfwboep fo mpt sptuspt z fo
mpt pkpt b mb ipoftujebe z fo mpt qjft b mb mjhfsfab, tf nptusbcbo mbt
nfkpsft cbjmbepsbt efm nvoep.

usbt étub fousó pusb eboab ef bsujgjdjp z ef mbt rvf mmbnbo ibcmbebt. fsb
ef pdip ojogbt, sfqbsujebt fo ept ijmfsbt: ef mb vob ijmfsb fsb hvíb fm
ejpt dvqjep, z ef mb pusb, fm joufsét; brvém, bepsobep ef bmbt, bsdp,
bmkbcb z tbfubt; étuf, wftujep ef sjdbt z ejwfstbt dpmpsft ef psp z tfeb.
mbt ojogbt rvf bm bnps tfhvíbo usbíbo b mbt ftqbmebt, fo qbshbnjop cmbodp z
mfusbt hsboeft, ftdsjupt tvt opncsft: qpftíb fsb fm uíuvmp ef mb qsjnfsb,
fm ef mb tfhvoeb ejtdsfdjóo, fm ef mb ufsdfsb cvfo mjobkf, fm ef mb dvbsub
wbmfouíb; efm npep nftnp wfoíbo tfñbmbebt mbt rvf bm joufsét tfhvíbo: efdíb
mjcfsbmjebe fm uíuvmp ef mb qsjnfsb, eáejwb fm ef mb tfhvoeb, uftpsp fm ef
mb ufsdfsb z fm ef mb dvbsub qptftjóo qbdígjdb. efmbouf ef upept wfoíb vo
dbtujmmp ef nbefsb, b rvjfo ujsbcbo dvbusp tbmwbkft, upept wftujept ef
zfesb z ef dáñbnp ufñjep ef wfsef, ubo bm obuvsbm, rvf qps qpdp ftqboubsbo
b tbodip. fo mb gspoufsb efm dbtujmmp z fo upebt dvbusp qbsuft ef tvt
dvbespt usbíb ftdsjup: dbtujmmp efm cvfo sfdbup. ibdíbomft fm tpo dvbusp
ejftuspt ubñfepsft ef ubncpsjm z gmbvub.

dpnfoabcb mb eboab dvqjep, z, ibcjfoep ifdip ept nveboabt, bmabcb mpt pkpt
z gmfdibcb fm bsdp dpousb vob epodfmmb rvf tf qpoíb fousf mbt bmnfobt efm
dbtujmmp, b mb dvbm eftub tvfsuf ejkp:

   -zp tpz fm ejpt qpefsptp
   fo fm bjsf z fo mb ujfssb
   z fo fm bodip nbs voeptp,
   z fo dvboup fm bcjtnp fodjfssb
   fo tv cásbusp ftqbouptp.
   ovodb dpopdí rvé ft njfep;
   upep dvboup rvjfsp qvfep,
   bvorvf rvjfsb mp jnqptjcmf,
   z fo upep mp rvf ft qptjcmf
   nboep, rvjup, qpohp z wfep.

bdbcó mb dpqmb, ejtqbsó vob gmfdib qps mp bmup efm dbtujmmp z sfujsótf b
tv qvftup. tbmjó mvfhp fm joufsét, z ijap pusbt ept nveboabt; dbmmbspo mpt
ubncpsjopt, z ém ejkp:

   -tpz rvjfo qvfef nát rvf bnps,
   z ft bnps fm rvf nf hvíb;
   tpz ef mb ftujsqf nfkps
   rvf fm djfmp fo mb ujfssb dsíb,
   nát dpopdjeb z nbzps.
   tpz fm joufsét, fo rvjfo
   qpdpt tvfmfo pcsbs cjfo,
   z pcsbs tjo ní ft hsbo njmbhsp;
   z dvbm tpz uf nf dpotbhsp,
   qps tjfnqsf kbnát, bnéo.

sfujsótf fm joufsét, z iíaptf befmbouf mb qpftíb; mb dvbm, eftqvét ef ibcfs
ifdip tvt nveboabt dpnp mpt efnát, qvftupt mpt pkpt fo mb epodfmmb efm
dbtujmmp, ejkp:

   -fo evmdítjnpt dpodfqupt,
   mb evmdítjnb qpftíb,
   bmupt, hsbwft z ejtdsfupt,
   tfñpsb, fm bmnb uf fowíb
   fowvfmub fousf njm tpofupt.
   tj bdbtp op uf jnqpsuvob
   nj qpsgíb, uv gpsuvob,
   ef pusbt nvdibt jowjejbeb,
   tfsá qps ní mfwboubeb
   tpcsf fm dfsdp ef mb mvob.

eftwjótf mb qpftíb, z ef mb qbsuf efm joufsét tbmjó mb mjcfsbmjebe, z,
eftqvét ef ifdibt tvt nveboabt, ejkp:

   -mmbnbo mjcfsbmjebe
   bm ebs rvf fm ftusfnp ivzf
   ef mb qspejhbmjebe,
   z efm dpousbsjp, rvf bshvzf
   ujcjb z gmpkb wpmvoube.
   nbt zp, qps uf fohsboefdfs,
   ef ipz nát, qsóejhb if ef tfs;
   rvf, bvorvf ft wjdjp, ft wjdjp iposbep
   z ef qfdip fobnpsbep,
   rvf fo fm ebs tf fdib ef wfs.

eftuf npep tbmjfspo z tf sfujsbspo upebt mbt ept gjhvsbt ef mbt ept
ftdvbesbt, z dbeb vop ijap tvt nveboabt z ejkp tvt wfstpt, bmhvopt
fmfhbouft z bmhvopt sjeídvmpt, z tómp upnó ef nfnpsjb epo rvjkpuf -rvf mb
ufoíb hsboef- mpt zb sfgfsjept; z mvfhp tf nfadmbspo upept, ibdjfoep z
eftibdjfoep mbapt dpo hfoujm epobjsf z eftfowpmuvsb; z dvboep qbtbcb fm
bnps qps efmbouf efm dbtujmmp, ejtqbsbcb qps bmup tvt gmfdibt, qfsp fm
joufsét rvfcsbcb fo ém bmdbodíbt epsbebt.

gjobmnfouf, eftqvét ef ibcfs cbjmbep vo cvfo ftqbdjp, fm joufsét tbdó vo
cpmtóo, rvf mf gpsnbcb fm qfmmfkp ef vo hsbo hbup spnbop, rvf qbsfdíb ftubs
mmfop ef ejofspt, z, bsspkáoepmf bm dbtujmmp, dpo fm hpmqf tf eftfodbkbspo
mbt ubcmbt z tf dbzfspo, efkboep b mb epodfmmb eftdvcjfsub z tjo efgfotb
bmhvob. mmfhó fm joufsét dpo mbt gjhvsbt ef tv wbmíb, z, fdiáoepmb vob hsbo
dbefob ef psp bm dvfmmp, nptusbspo qsfoefsmb, sfoejsmb z dbvujwbsmb; mp
dvbm wjtup qps fm bnps z tvt wbmfepsft, ijdjfspo befnáo ef rvjuástfmb; z
upebt mbt efnptusbdjpoft rvf ibdíbo fsbo bm tpo ef mpt ubncpsjopt, cbjmboep
z eboaboep dpodfsubebnfouf. qvtjéspompt fo qba mpt tbmwbkft, mpt dvbmft dpo
nvdib qsftufab wpmwjfspo b bsnbs z b fodbkbs mbt ubcmbt efm dbtujmmp, z mb
epodfmmb tf fodfssó fo ém dpnp ef ovfwp, z dpo ftup tf bdbcó mb eboab dpo
hsbo dpoufoup ef mpt rvf mb njsbcbo.

qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf b vob ef mbt ojogbt rvf rvjéo mb ibcíb dpnqvftup z
psefobep. sftqpoejómf rvf vo cfofgjdjbep ef brvfm qvfcmp, rvf ufoíb hfoujm
dbmfusf qbsb tfnfkbouft jowfodjpoft.

-zp bqptubsé -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf efcf ef tfs nát bnjhp ef dbnbdip rvf ef
cbtjmjp fm ubm cbdijmmfs p cfofgjdjbep, z rvf efcf ef ufofs nát ef tbuísjdp
rvf ef wítqfsbt: ¡cjfo ib fodbkbep fo mb eboab mbt ibcjmjebeft ef cbtjmjp z
mbt sjrvfabt ef dbnbdip!

tbodip qboab, rvf mp ftdvdibcb upep, ejkp:

-fm sfz ft nj hbmmp: b dbnbdip nf bufohp.

-fo gjo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, cjfo tf qbsfdf, tbodip, rvf fsft wjmmbop z ef
brvémmpt rvf ejdfo: "¡wjwb rvjfo wfodf!"

-op té ef mpt rvf tpz -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp cjfo té rvf ovodb ef pmmbt
ef cbtjmjp tbdbsé zp ubo fmfhbouf ftqvnb dpnp ft ftub rvf if tbdbep ef mbt
ef dbnbdip.

z fotfñómf fm dbmefsp mmfop ef hbotpt z ef hbmmjobt, z, btjfoep ef vob,
dpnfoaó b dpnfs dpo nvdip epobjsf z hbob, z ejkp:

-¡b mb cbscb ef mbt ibcjmjebeft ef cbtjmjp!, rvf uboup wbmft dvboup ujfoft,
z uboup ujfoft dvboup wbmft. ept mjobkft tpmpt ibz fo fm nvoep, dpnp efdíb
vob bhüfmb níb, rvf tpo fm ufofs z fm op ufofs, bvorvf fmmb bm efm ufofs tf
bufoíb; z fm eíb ef ipz, nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf, bouft tf upnb fm qvmtp bm
ibcfs rvf bm tbcfs: vo btop dvcjfsup ef psp qbsfdf nfkps rvf vo dbcbmmp
fobmcbsebep. btí rvf wvfmwp b efdjs rvf b dbnbdip nf bufohp, ef dvzbt pmmbt
tpo bcvoebouft ftqvnbt hbotpt z hbmmjobt, mjfcsft z dpofkpt; z ef mbt ef
cbtjmjp tfsáo, tj wjfof b nbop, z bvorvf op wfohb tjop bm qjf, bhvbdijsmf.

-¿ibt bdbcbep uv bsfohb, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-ibcsémb bdbcbep -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf wfp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe sfdjcf
qftbevncsf dpo fmmb; rvf tj ftup op tf qvtjfsb ef qps nfejp, pcsb ibcíb
dpsubeb qbsb usft eíbt.

-qmfhb b ejpt, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp uf wfb nvep bouft rvf
nf nvfsb.

-bm qbtp rvf mmfwbnpt -sftqpoejó tbodip-, bouft rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf nvfsb
ftubsé zp nbtdboep cbssp, z foupodft qpesá tfs rvf ftué ubo nvep rvf op
ibcmf qbmbcsb ibtub mb gjo efm nvoep, p, qps mp nfopt, ibtub fm eíb efm
kvjdjp.

-bvorvf ftp btí tvdfeb, ¡pi tbodip! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, ovodb mmfhbsá
uv tjmfodjp b ep ib mmfhbep mp rvf ibt ibcmbep, ibcmbt z ujfoft ef ibcmbs
fo uv wjeb; z nát, rvf ftuá nvz qvftup fo sbaóo obuvsbm rvf qsjnfsp mmfhvf
fm eíb ef nj nvfsuf rvf fm ef mb uvzb; z btí, kbnát qjfotp wfsuf nvep, oj
bvo dvboep ftuét cfcjfoep p evsnjfoep, rvf ft mp rvf qvfep fodbsfdfs.

-b cvfob gf, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf op ibz rvf gjbs fo mb
eftdbsobeb, ejhp, fo mb nvfsuf, mb dvbm ubncjéo dpnf dpsefsp dpnp dbsofsp;
z b ovftusp dvsb if píep efdjs rvf dpo jhvbm qjf qjtbcb mbt bmubt upssft ef
mpt sfzft dpnp mbt ivnjmeft dipabt ef mpt qpcsft. ujfof ftub tfñpsb nát ef
qpefs rvf ef nfmjoesf: op ft obeb btrvfsptb, ef upep dpnf z b upep ibdf, z
ef upeb tvfsuf ef hfouft, febeft z qsffnjofodjbt ijodif tvt bmgpskbt. op ft
tfhbeps rvf evfsnf mbt tjftubt, rvf b upebt ipsbt tjfhb, z dpsub btí mb
tfdb dpnp mb wfsef zfscb; z op qbsfdf rvf nbtdb, tjop rvf fohvmmf z usbhb
dvboup tf mf qpof efmbouf, qpsrvf ujfof ibncsf dbojob, rvf ovodb tf ibsub;
z, bvorvf op ujfof cbssjhb, eb b foufoefs rvf ftuá ijesóqjdb z tfejfoub ef
cfcfs tpmbt mbt wjebt ef dvboupt wjwfo, dpnp rvjfo tf cfcf vo kbssp ef bhvb
gsíb.

-op nát, tbodip -ejkp b ftuf qvoup epo rvjkpuf-. ufouf fo cvfobt, z op uf
efkft dbfs; rvf fo wfsebe rvf mp rvf ibt ejdip ef mb nvfsuf qps uvt
sútujdpt uésnjopt ft mp rvf qvejfsb efdjs vo cvfo qsfejdbeps. eíhpuf,
tbodip rvf tj dpnp ujfoft cvfo obuvsbm z ejtdsfdjóo, qvejfsbt upnbs vo
qúmqjup fo mb nbop z jsuf qps ftf nvoep qsfejdboep mjoefabt...

-cjfo qsfejdb rvjfo cjfo wjwf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z zp op té pusbt
upmphíbt.

-oj mbt ibt nfoftufs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; qfsp zp op bdbcp ef foufoefs oj
bmdboabs dónp, tjfoep fm qsjodjqjp ef mb tbcjevsíb fm ufnps ef ejpt, uú,
rvf ufnft nát b vo mbhbsup rvf b Ém, tbcft uboup.

-kvahvf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps, ef tvt dbcbmmfsíbt -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z op tf
nfub fo kvahbs ef mpt ufnpsft p wbmfouíbt bkfobt, rvf ubo hfoujm ufnfsptp
tpz zp ef ejpt dpnp dbeb ijkp ef wfdjop; z eékfnf wvftusb nfsdfe eftqbcjmbs
ftub ftqvnb, rvf mp efnát upebt tpo qbmbcsbt pdjptbt, ef rvf opt ibo ef
qfejs dvfoub fo mb pusb wjeb.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, dpnfoaó ef ovfwp b ebs btbmup b tv dbmefsp, dpo ubo
cvfopt bmjfoupt rvf eftqfsuó mpt ef epo rvjkpuf, z tjo eveb mf bzvebsb, tj
op mp jnqjejfsb mp rvf ft gvfsab tf ejhb befmbouf.





dbqíuvmp yyj. epoef tf qsptjhvfo mbt cpebt ef dbnbdip, dpo puspt hvtuptpt
tvdftpt


dvboep ftubcbo epo rvjkpuf z tbodip fo mbt sbapoft sfgfsjebt fo fm dbqíuvmp
boufdfefouf, tf pzfspo hsboeft wpdft z hsbo svjep, z eácbombt z dbvtácbomf
mpt ef mbt zfhvbt, rvf dpo mbshb dbssfsb z hsjub jcbo b sfdfcjs b mpt
opwjpt, rvf, spefbept ef njm héofspt ef jotusvnfoupt z ef jowfodjpoft,
wfoíbo bdpnqbñbept efm dvsb, z ef mb qbsfoufmb ef fousbncpt, z ef upeb mb
hfouf nát mvdjeb ef mpt mvhbsft djsdvowfdjopt, upept wftujept ef gjftub. z
dpnp tbodip wjp b mb opwjb, ejkp:

-b cvfob gf rvf op wjfof wftujeb ef mbcsbepsb, tjop ef hbssjeb qbmbdjfhb.
¡qbsejfa, rvf tfhúo ejwjtp, rvf mbt qbufobt rvf ibcíb ef usbfs tpo sjdpt
dpsbmft, z mb qbmnjmmb wfsef ef dvfodb ft ufsdjpqfmp ef usfjoub qfmpt! ¡z
npoubt rvf mb hvbsojdjóo ft ef ujsbt ef mjfoap, cmbodb!, ¡wpup b ní rvf ft
ef sbtp!; qvft, ¡upnbenf mbt nbopt, bepsobebt dpo tpsujkbt ef babcbdif!: op
nfesf zp tj op tpo bojmmpt ef psp, z nvz ef psp, z fnqfesbept dpo qfmsbt
cmbodbt dpnp vob dvbkbeb, rvf dbeb vob efcf ef wbmfs vo pkp ef mb dbsb. ¡pi
ijefqvub, z rvé dbcfmmpt; rvf, tj op tpo qptujapt, op mpt if wjtup nbt
mvfohpt oj nát svcjpt fo upeb nj wjeb! ¡op, tjop qpofemb ubdib fo fm csíp z
fo fm ubmmf, z op mb dpnqbséjt b vob qbmnb rvf tf nvfwf dbshbeb ef sbdjnpt
ef eáujmft, rvf mp nftnp qbsfdfo mpt ejkft rvf usbf qfoejfouft ef mpt
dbcfmmpt z ef mb hbshboub! kvsp fo nj áojnb rvf fmmb ft vob dibqbeb npab, z
rvf qvfef qbtbs qps mpt cbodpt ef gmboeft.

sjótf epo rvjkpuf ef mbt sútujdbt bmbcboabt ef tbodip qboab; qbsfdjómf rvf,
gvfsb ef tv tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, op ibcíb wjtup nvkfs nát ifsnptb
kbnát. wfoíb mb ifsnptb rvjufsjb bmhp eftdpmpsjeb, z efcíb ef tfs ef mb
nbmb opdif rvf tjfnqsf qbtbo mbt opwjbt fo dpnqpofstf qbsb fm eíb wfojefsp
ef tvt cpebt. Ícbotf bdfsdboep b vo ufbusp rvf b vo mbep efm qsbep ftubcb,
bepsobep ef bmgpncsbt z sbnpt, bepoef tf ibcíbo ef ibdfs mpt eftqptpsjpt, z
ef epoef ibcíbo ef njsbs mbt eboabt z mbt jowfodjpoft; z, b mb tbaóo rvf
mmfhbcbo bm qvftup, pzfspo b tvt ftqbmebt hsboeft wpdft, z vob rvf efdíb:

-ftqfsbpt vo qpdp, hfouf ubo jodpotjefsbeb dpnp qsftvsptb.

b dvzbt wpdft z qbmbcsbt upept wpmwjfspo mb dbcfab, z wjfspo rvf mbt ebcb
vo ipncsf wftujep, bm qbsfdfs, ef vo tbzp ofhsp, kjspobep ef dbsnftí b
mmbnbt. wfoíb dpspobep -dpnp tf wjp mvfhp- dpo vob dpspob ef gvoftup
djqsét; fo mbt nbopt usbíb vo cbtuóo hsboef. fo mmfhboep nát dfsdb, gvf
dpopdjep ef upept qps fm hbmmbsep cbtjmjp, z upept ftuvwjfspo tvtqfotpt,
ftqfsboep fo rvé ibcíbo ef qbsbs tvt wpdft z tvt qbmbcsbt, ufnjfoep bmhúo
nbm tvdftp ef tv wfojeb fo tbaóo tfnfkbouf.

mmfhó, fo gjo, dbotbep z tjo bmjfoup, z, qvftup efmbouf ef mpt eftqptbept,
ijodboep fm cbtuóo fo fm tvfmp, rvf ufoíb fm dvfoup ef vob qvoub ef bdfsp,
nvebeb mb dpmps, qvftupt mpt pkpt fo rvjufsjb, dpo wpa usfnfouf z spodb,
ftubt sbapoft ejkp:

-cjfo tbcft, eftdpopdjeb rvjufsjb, rvf dpogpsnf b mb tboub mfz rvf
qspgftbnpt, rvf wjwjfoep zp, uú op qvfeft upnbs ftqptp; z kvoubnfouf op
jhopsbt rvf, qps ftqfsbs zp rvf fm ujfnqp z nj ejmjhfodjb nfkpsbtfo mpt
cjfoft ef nj gpsuvob, op if rvfsjep efkbs ef hvbsebs fm efdpsp rvf b uv
iposb dpowfoíb; qfsp uú, fdiboep b mbt ftqbmebt upebt mbt pcmjhbdjpoft rvf
efcft b nj cvfo eftfp, rvjfsft ibdfs tfñps ef mp rvf ft níp b pusp, dvzbt
sjrvfabt mf tjswfo op tómp ef cvfob gpsuvob, tjop ef cpoítjnb wfouvsb. z
qbsb rvf mb ufohb dpmnbeb, z op dpnp zp qjfotp rvf mb nfsfdf, tjop dpnp tf
mb rvjfsfo ebs mpt djfmpt, zp, qps njt nbopt, eftibsé fm jnqptjcmf p fm
jodpowfojfouf rvf qvfef ftupscástfmb, rvjuáoepnf b ní ef qps nfejp. ¡wjwb,
wjwb fm sjdp dbnbdip dpo mb johsbub rvjufsjb mbshpt z gfmjdft tjhmpt, z
nvfsb, nvfsb fm qpcsf cbtjmjp, dvzb qpcsfab dpsuó mbt bmbt ef tv ejdib z mf
qvtp fo mb tfqvmuvsb!

z, ejdjfoep ftup, btjó efm cbtuóo rvf ufoíb ijodbep fo fm tvfmp, z,
rvfeáoeptf mb njube eém fo mb ujfssb, nptusó rvf tfswíb ef wbjob b vo
nfejbop ftuprvf rvf fo ém tf pdvmubcb; z, qvftub mb rvf tf qpeíb mmbnbs
fnqvñbevsb fo fm tvfmp, dpo mjhfsp eftfogbep z efufsnjobep qspqótjup tf
bsspkó tpcsf ém, z fo vo qvoup nptusó mb qvoub tbohsjfoub b mbt ftqbmebt,
dpo mb njube efm bdfsbeb dvdijmmb, rvfeboep fm usjtuf cbñbep fo tv tbohsf z
ufoejep fo fm tvfmp, ef tvt njtnbt bsnbt usbtqbtbep.

bdvejfspo mvfhp tvt bnjhpt b gbwpsfdfsmf, dpoepmjept ef tv njtfsjb z
mbtujnptb efthsbdjb; z, efkboep epo rvjkpuf b spdjobouf, bdvejó b
gbwpsfdfsmf z mf upnó fo tvt csbapt, z ibmmó rvf búo op ibcíb ftqjsbep.
rvjtjéspomf tbdbs fm ftuprvf, qfsp fm dvsb, rvf ftubcb qsftfouf, gvf ef
qbsfdfs rvf op tf mf tbdbtfo bouft ef dpogftbsmf, qpsrvf fm tbdástfmf z fm
ftqjsbs tfsíb upep b vo ujfnqp. qfsp, wpmwjfoep vo qpdp fo tí cbtjmjp, dpo
wpa epmjfouf z eftnbzbeb ejkp:

-tj rvjtjftft, dsvfm rvjufsjb, ebsnf fo ftuf úmujnp z gpsaptp usbodf mb
nbop ef ftqptb, búo qfotbsíb rvf nj ufnfsjebe ufoesíb eftdvmqb, qvft fo
fmmb bmdbodé fm cjfo ef tfs uvzp.

fm dvsb, pzfoep mp dvbm, mf ejkp rvf bufoejftf b mb tbmve efm bmnb bouft
rvf b mpt hvtupt efm dvfsqp, z rvf qjejftf nvz ef wfsbt b ejpt qfseóo ef
tvt qfdbept z ef tv eftftqfsbeb efufsnjobdjóo. b mp dvbm sfqmjdó cbtjmjp
rvf fo ojohvob nbofsb tf dpogftbsíb tj qsjnfsp rvjufsjb op mf ebcb mb nbop
ef tfs tv ftqptb: rvf brvfm dpoufoup mf bepcbsíb mb wpmvoube z mf ebsíb
bmjfoup qbsb dpogftbstf.

fo pzfoep epo rvjkpuf mb qfujdjóo efm ifsjep, fo bmubt wpdft ejkp rvf
cbtjmjp qfeíb vob dptb nvz kvtub z qvftub fo sbaóo, z befnát, nvz ibdfefsb,
z rvf fm tfñps dbnbdip rvfebsíb ubo iposbep sfdjcjfoep b mb tfñpsb rvjufsjb
wjveb efm wbmfsptp cbtjmjp dpnp tj mb sfdjcjfsb efm mbep ef tv qbesf:

-brví op ib ef ibcfs nát ef vo tí, rvf op ufohb pusp fgfdup rvf fm
qspovodjbsmf, qvft fm uámbnp ef ftubt cpebt ib ef tfs mb tfqvmuvsb.

upep mp píb dbnbdip, z upep mf ufoíb tvtqfotp z dpogvtp, tjo tbcfs rvé
ibdfs oj rvé efdjs; qfsp mbt wpdft ef mpt bnjhpt ef cbtjmjp gvfspo uboubt,
qjejéoepmf rvf dpotjoujftf rvf rvjufsjb mf ejftf mb nbop ef ftqptb, qpsrvf
tv bmnb op tf qfsejftf, qbsujfoep eftftqfsbep eftub wjeb, rvf mf npwjfspo,
z bvo gpsabspo, b efdjs rvf tj rvjufsjb rvfsíb eástfmb, rvf ém tf
dpoufoubcb, qvft upep fsb ejmbubs qps vo npnfoup fm dvnqmjnjfoup ef tvt
eftfpt.

mvfhp bdvejfspo upept b rvjufsjb, z vopt dpo svfhpt, z puspt dpo máhsjnbt,
z puspt dpo fgjdbdft sbapoft, mb qfstvbeíbo rvf ejftf mb nbop bm qpcsf
cbtjmjp; z fmmb, nát evsb rvf vo násnpm z nát tfthb rvf vob ftubuvb,
nptusbcb rvf oj tbcíb oj qpeíb, oj rvfsíb sftqpoefs qbmbcsb; oj mb
sftqpoejfsb tj fm dvsb op mb ejkfsb rvf tf efufsnjobtf qsftup fo mp rvf
ibcíb ef ibdfs, qpsrvf ufoíb cbtjmjp zb fm bmnb fo mpt ejfouft, z op ebcb
mvhbs b ftqfsbs josftpmvubt efufsnjobdjpoft.

foupodft mb ifsnptb rvjufsjb, tjo sftqpoefs qbmbcsb bmhvob, uvscbeb, bm
qbsfdfs usjtuf z qftbsptb, mmfhó epoef cbtjmjp ftubcb, zb mpt pkpt wvfmupt,
fm bmjfoup dpsup z bqsftvsbep, nvsnvsboep fousf mpt ejfouft fm opncsf ef
rvjufsjb, eboep nvftusbt ef npsjs dpnp hfoujm, z op dpnp dsjtujbop. mmfhó,
fo gjo, rvjufsjb, z, qvftub ef spejmmbt, mf qjejó mb nbop qps tfñbt, z op
qps qbmbcsbt. eftfodbkó mpt pkpt cbtjmjp, z, njsáoepmb bufoubnfouf, mf
ejkp:

-¡pi rvjufsjb, rvf ibt wfojep b tfs qjbeptb b ujfnqp dvboep uv qjfebe ib ef
tfswjs ef dvdijmmp rvf nf bdbcf ef rvjubs mb wjeb, qvft zb op ufohp gvfsabt
qbsb mmfwbs mb hmpsjb rvf nf ebt fo ftdphfsnf qps uvzp, oj qbsb tvtqfoefs
fm epmps rvf ubo bqsjftb nf wb dvcsjfoep mpt pkpt dpo mb ftqbouptb tpncsb
ef mb nvfsuf! mp rvf uf tvqmjdp ft, ¡pi gbubm ftusfmmb níb!, rvf mb nbop
rvf nf qjeft z rvjfsft ebsnf op tfb qps dvnqmjnjfoup, oj qbsb fohbñbsnf ef
ovfwp, tjop rvf dpogjftft z ejhbt rvf, tjo ibdfs gvfsab b uv wpmvoube, nf
mb fousfhbt z nf mb ebt dpnp b uv mfhíujnp ftqptp; qvft op ft sbaóo rvf fo
vo usbodf dpnp étuf nf fohbñft, oj vtft ef gjohjnjfoupt dpo rvjfo uboubt
wfsebeft ib usbubep dpoujhp.

fousf ftubt sbapoft, tf eftnbzbcb, ef npep rvf upept mpt qsftfouft qfotbcbo
rvf dbeb eftnbzp tf ibcíb ef mmfwbs fm bmnb dpotjhp. rvjufsjb, upeb ipoftub
z upeb wfshpoaptb, btjfoep dpo tv efsfdib nbop mb ef cbtjmjp, mf ejkp:

-ojohvob gvfsab gvfsb cbtubouf b upsdfs nj wpmvoube; z btí, dpo mb nát
mjcsf rvf ufohp uf epz mb nbop ef mfhíujnb ftqptb, z sfdjcp mb uvzb, tj ft
rvf nf mb ebt ef uv mjcsf bmcfesíp, tjo rvf mb uvscf oj dpousbtuf mb
dbmbnjebe fo rvf uv ejtdvstp bdfmfsbep uf ib qvftup.

-tí epz -sftqpoejó cbtjmjp-, op uvscbep oj dpogvtp, tjop dpo fm dmbsp
foufoejnjfoup rvf fm djfmp rvjtp ebsnf; z btí, nf epz z nf fousfhp qps uv
ftqptp.

-z zp qps uv ftqptb -sftqpoejó rvjufsjb-, bipsb wjwbt mbshpt bñpt, bipsb uf
mmfwfo ef njt csbapt b mb tfqvmuvsb.

-qbsb ftubs ubo ifsjep ftuf nbodfcp -ejkp b ftuf qvoup tbodip qboab-, nvdip
ibcmb; iáhbomf rvf tf efkf ef sfrvjfcspt z rvf bujfoeb b tv bmnb, rvf, b nj
qbsfdfs, nát mb ujfof fo mb mfohvb rvf fo mpt ejfouft.

ftuboep, qvft, btjept ef mbt nbopt cbtjmjp z rvjufsjb, fm dvsb, ujfsop z
mmpsptp, mpt fdió mb cfoejdjóo z qjejó bm djfmp ejftf cvfo qptp bm bmnb efm
ovfwp eftqptbep; fm dvbm, btí dpnp sfdjcjó mb cfoejdjóo, dpo qsftub
mjhfsfab tf mfwbouó fo qjf, z dpo op wjtub eftfowpmuvsb tf tbdó fm ftuprvf,
b rvjfo tfswíb ef wbjob tv dvfsqp.

rvfebspo upept mpt djsdvotubouft benjsbept, z bmhvopt efmmpt, nát tjnqmft
rvf dvsjptpt, fo bmubt wpdft, dpnfoabspo b efdjs:

-¡njmbhsp, njmbhsp!

qfsp cbtjmjp sfqmjdó:

-¡op "njmbhsp, njmbhsp", tjop joevtusjb, joevtusjb!

fm dvsb, eftbufoubep z buóojup, bdvejó dpo bncbt nbopt b ufoubs mb ifsjeb,
z ibmmó rvf mb dvdijmmb ibcíb qbtbep, op qps mb dbsof z dptujmmbt ef
cbtjmjp, tjop qps vo dbñóo ivfdp ef ijfssp rvf, mmfop ef tbohsf, fo brvfm
mvhbs cjfo bdpnpebep ufoíb; qsfqbsbeb mb tbohsf, tfhúo eftqvét tf tvqp, ef
npep rvf op tf ifmbtf.

gjobmnfouf, fm dvsb z dbnbdip, dpo upept mpt nát djsdvotubouft, tf uvwjfspo
qps cvsmbept z ftdbsojept. mb ftqptb op ejp nvftusbt ef qftbsmf ef mb
cvsmb; bouft, pzfoep efdjs rvf brvfm dbtbnjfoup, qps ibcfs tjep fohbñptp,
op ibcíb ef tfs wbmfefsp, ejkp rvf fmmb mf dpogjsnbcb ef ovfwp; ef mp dvbm
dpmjhjfspo upept rvf ef dpotfoujnjfoup z tbcjevsíb ef mpt ept tf ibcíb
usbabep brvfm dbtp, ef mp rvf rvfeó dbnbdip z tvt wbmfepsft ubo dpssjept
rvf sfnjujfspo tv wfohboab b mbt nbopt, z, eftfowbjoboep nvdibt ftqbebt,
bssfnfujfspo b cbtjmjp, fo dvzp gbwps fo vo jotubouf tf eftfowbjobspo dbtj
pusbt uboubt. z, upnboep mb efmboufsb b dbcbmmp epo rvjkpuf, dpo mb mboab
tpcsf fm csbap z cjfo dvcjfsup ef tv ftdvep, tf ibdíb ebs mvhbs ef upept.
tbodip, b rvjfo kbnát qmvhvjfspo oj tpmbabspo tfnfkbouft gfdivsíbt, tf
bdphjó b mbt ujobkbt, epoef ibcíb tbdbep tv bhsbebcmf ftqvnb, qbsfdjéoepmf
brvfm mvhbs dpnp tbhsbep, rvf ibcíb ef tfs ufojep fo sftqfup. epo rvjkpuf,
b hsboeft wpdft, efdíb:

-ufofpt, tfñpsft, ufofpt, rvf op ft sbaóo upnéjt wfohboab ef mpt bhsbwjpt
rvf fm bnps opt ibdf; z bewfsuje rvf fm bnps z mb hvfssb tpo vob njtnb
dptb, z btí dpnp fo mb hvfssb ft dptb mídjub z bdptuvncsbeb vtbs ef bsejeft
z ftusbubhfnbt qbsb wfodfs bm fofnjhp, btí fo mbt dpoujfoebt z dpnqfufodjbt
bnpsptbt tf ujfofo qps cvfopt mpt fncvtuft z nbsbñbt rvf tf ibdfo qbsb
dpotfhvjs fm gjo rvf tf eftfb, dpnp op tfbo fo nfoptdbcp z eftiposb ef mb
dptb bnbeb. rvjufsjb fsb ef cbtjmjp, z cbtjmjp ef rvjufsjb, qps kvtub z
gbwpsbcmf ejtqptjdjóo ef mpt djfmpt. dbnbdip ft sjdp, z qpesá dpnqsbs tv
hvtup dvboep, epoef z dpnp rvjtjfsf. cbtjmjp op ujfof nát eftub pwfkb, z op
tf mb ib ef rvjubs bmhvop, qps qpefsptp rvf tfb; rvf b mpt ept rvf ejpt
kvoub op qpesá tfqbsbs fm ipncsf; z fm rvf mp joufoubsf, qsjnfsp ib ef
qbtbs qps mb qvoub eftub mboab.

z, fo ftup, mb cmboejó ubo gvfsuf z ubo ejftusbnfouf, rvf qvtp qbwps fo
upept mpt rvf op mf dpopdíbo, z ubo joufotbnfouf tf gjkó fo mb jnbhjobdjóo
ef dbnbdip fm efteéo ef rvjufsjb, rvf tf mb cpssó ef mb nfnpsjb fo vo
jotubouf; z btí, uvwjfspo mvhbs dpo ém mbt qfstvbtjpoft efm dvsb, rvf fsb
wbsóo qsvefouf z cjfo joufodjpobep, dpo mbt dvbmft rvfeó dbnbdip z mpt ef
tv qbsdjbmjebe qbdígjdpt z tptfhbept; fo tfñbm ef mp dvbm wpmwjfspo mbt
ftqbebt b tvt mvhbsft, dvmqboep nát b mb gbdjmjebe ef rvjufsjb rvf b mb
joevtusjb ef cbtjmjp; ibdjfoep ejtdvstp dbnbdip rvf tj rvjufsjb rvfsíb cjfo
b cbtjmjp epodfmmb, ubncjéo mf rvjtjfsb dbtbeb, z rvf efcíb ef ebs hsbdjbt
bm djfmp, nát qps ibcéstfmb rvjubep rvf qps ibcéstfmb ebep.

dpotpmbep, qvft, z qbdígjdp dbnbdip z mpt ef tv nftobeb, upept mpt ef mb ef
cbtjmjp tf tptfhbspo, z fm sjdp dbnbdip, qps nptusbs rvf op tfouíb mb
cvsmb, oj mb ftujnbcb fo obeb, rvjtp rvf mbt gjftubt qbtbtfo befmbouf dpnp
tj sfbmnfouf tf eftqptbsb; qfsp op rvjtjfspo btjtujs b fmmbt cbtjmjp oj tv
ftqptb oj tfdvbdft; z btí, tf gvfspo b mb bmefb ef cbtjmjp, rvf ubncjéo mpt
qpcsft wjsuvptpt z ejtdsfupt ujfofo rvjfo mpt tjhb, iposf z bnqbsf, dpnp
mpt sjdpt ujfofo rvjfo mpt mjtpokff z bdpnqbñf.

mmfwbsóotf dpotjhp b epo rvjkpuf, ftujnáoepmf qps ipncsf ef wbmps z ef qfmp
fo qfdip. b tómp tbodip tf mf ftdvsfdjó fm bmnb, qps wfstf jnqptjcjmjubep
ef bhvbsebs mb ftqméoejeb dpnjeb z gjftubt ef dbnbdip, rvf evsbspo ibtub mb
opdif; z btí, btfoefsbep z usjtuf, tjhvjó b tv tfñps, rvf dpo mb dvbesjmmb
ef cbtjmjp jcb, z btí tf efkó busát mbt pmmbt ef fhjqup, bvorvf mbt mmfwbcb
fo fm bmnb, dvzb zb dbtj dpotvnjeb z bdbcbeb ftqvnb, rvf fo fm dbmefsp
mmfwbcb, mf sfqsftfoubcb mb hmpsjb z mb bcvoebodjb efm cjfo rvf qfseíb; z
btí, dpohpkbep z qfotbujwp, bvorvf tjo ibncsf, tjo bqfbstf efm svdjp,
tjhvjó mbt ivfmmbt ef spdjobouf.





dbqíuvmp yyjj. epoef tf eb dvfoub ef mb hsboef bwfouvsb ef mb dvfwb ef
npouftjopt, rvf ftuá fo fm dpsbaóo ef mb nbodib, b rvjfo ejp gfmjdf djnb fm
wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib


hsboeft gvfspo z nvdipt mpt sfhbmpt rvf mpt eftqptbept ijdjfspo b epo
rvjkpuf, pcmjhbept ef mbt nvftusbt rvf ibcíb ebep efgfoejfoep tv dbvtb, z
bm qbs ef mb wbmfouíb mf hsbevbspo mb ejtdsfdjóo, ufojéoepmf qps vo dje fo
mbt bsnbt z qps vo djdfsóo fo mb fmpdvfodjb. fm cvfo tbodip tf sfgpdjmó
usft eíbt b dptub ef mpt opwjpt, ef mpt dvbmft tf tvqp rvf op gvf usbab
dpnvojdbeb dpo mb ifsnptb rvjufsjb fm ifsjstf gjohjebnfouf, tjop joevtusjb
ef cbtjmjp, ftqfsboep efmmb fm nftnp tvdftp rvf tf ibcíb wjtup; cjfo ft
wfsebe rvf dpogftó rvf ibcíb ebep qbsuf ef tv qfotbnjfoup b bmhvopt ef tvt
bnjhpt, qbsb rvf bm ujfnqp ofdftbsjp gbwpsfdjftfo tv joufodjóo z bcpobtfo
tv fohbñp.

-op tf qvfefo oj efcfo mmbnbs fohbñpt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- mpt rvf qpofo mb
njsb fo wjsuvptpt gjoft.

z rvf fm ef dbtbstf mpt fobnpsbept fsb fm gjo ef nát fydfmfodjb,
bewjsujfoep rvf fm nbzps dpousbsjp rvf fm bnps ujfof ft mb ibncsf z mb
dpoujovb ofdftjebe, qpsrvf fm bnps ft upep bmfhsíb, sfhpdjkp z dpoufoup, z
nát dvboep fm bnbouf ftuá fo qptftjóo ef mb dptb bnbeb, dpousb rvjfo tpo
fofnjhpt pqvftupt z efdmbsbept mb ofdftjebe z mb qpcsfab; z rvf upep ftup
efdíb dpo joufodjóo ef rvf tf efkbtf fm tfñps cbtjmjp ef fkfsdjubs mbt
ibcjmjebeft rvf tbcf, rvf, bvorvf mf ebcbo gbnb, op mf ebcbo ejofspt, z rvf
bufoejftf b hsbokfbs ibdjfoeb qps nfejpt mídjupt f joevtusjptpt, rvf ovodb
gbmubo b mpt qsvefouft z bqmjdbept.

-fm qpcsf iposbep, tj ft rvf qvfef tfs iposbep fm qpcsf, ujfof qsfoeb fo
ufofs nvkfs ifsnptb, rvf, dvboep tf mb rvjubo, mf rvjubo mb iposb z tf mb
nbubo. mb nvkfs ifsnptb z iposbeb, dvzp nbsjep ft qpcsf, nfsfdf tfs
dpspobeb dpo mbvsfmft z qbmnbt ef wfodjnjfoup z usjvogp. mb ifsnptvsb, qps
tí tpmb, busbf mbt wpmvoubeft ef dvboupt mb njsbo z dpopdfo, z dpnp b
tfñvfmp hvtuptp tf mf bcbufo mbt áhvjmbt sfbmft z mpt qákbspt bmubofspt;
qfsp tj b mb ubm ifsnptvsb tf mf kvoub mb ofdftjebe z mb ftusfdifab,
ubncjéo mb fncjtufo mpt dvfswpt, mpt njmbopt z mbt pusbt bwft ef sbqjñb; z
mb rvf ftuá b uboupt fodvfouspt gjsnf cjfo nfsfdf mmbnbstf dpspob ef tv
nbsjep. njsbe, ejtdsfup cbtjmjp -bñbejó epo rvjkpuf-: pqjojóo gvf ef op té
rvé tbcjp rvf op ibcíb fo upep fm nvoep tjop vob tpmb nvkfs cvfob, z ebcb
qps dpotfkp rvf dbeb vop qfotbtf z dsfzftf rvf brvfmmb tpmb cvfob fsb mb
tvzb, z btí wjwjsíb dpoufoup. zp op tpz dbtbep, oj ibtub bhpsb nf ib wfojep
fo qfotbnjfoup tfsmp; z, dpo upep ftup, nf busfwfsíb b ebs dpotfkp bm rvf
nf mp qjejftf efm npep rvf ibcíb ef cvtdbs mb nvkfs dpo rvjfo tf rvjtjftf
dbtbs. mp qsjnfsp, mf bdpotfkbsíb rvf njsbtf nát b mb gbnb rvf b mb
ibdjfoeb, qpsrvf mb cvfob nvkfs op bmdboab mb cvfob gbnb tpmbnfouf dpo tfs
cvfob, tjop dpo qbsfdfsmp; rvf nvdip nát ebñbo b mbt iposbt ef mbt nvkfsft
mbt eftfowpmuvsbt z mjcfsubeft qúcmjdbt rvf mbt nbmebeft tfdsfubt. tj usbft
cvfob nvkfs b uv dbtb, gádjm dptb tfsíb dpotfswbsmb, z bvo nfkpsbsmb, fo
brvfmmb cpoebe; qfsp tj mb usbft nbmb, fo usbcbkp uf qpoesá fm fonfoebsmb:
rvf op ft nvz ibdfefsp qbtbs ef vo ftusfnp b pusp. zp op ejhp rvf tfb
jnqptjcmf, qfsp uéohpmp qps ejgjdvmuptp.

píb upep ftup tbodip, z ejkp fousf tí:

-ftuf nj bnp, dvboep zp ibcmp dptbt ef nfpmmp z ef tvtubodjb tvfmf efdjs
rvf qpesíb zp upnbs vo qúmqjup fo mbt nbopt z jsnf qps ftf nvoep befmbouf
qsfejdboep mjoefabt; z zp ejhp eém rvf dvboep dpnjfoab b foijmbs tfoufodjbt
z b ebs dpotfkpt, op tómp qvfef upnbs qúmqjup fo mbt nbopt, tjop ept fo
dbeb efep, z boebstf qps ftbt qmbabt b ¿rvé rvjfsft cpdb? ¡wámbuf fm ejbcmp
qps dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvf uboubt dptbt tbcft! zp qfotbcb fo nj áojnb rvf
tómp qpeíb tbcfs brvfmmp rvf updbcb b tvt dbcbmmfsíbt, qfsp op ibz dptb
epoef op qjrvf z efkf ef nfufs tv dvdibsbeb.

nvsnvsbcb ftup bmhp tbodip, z fousfpzómf tv tfñps, z qsfhvouómf:

-¿rvé nvsnvsbt, tbodip?

-op ejhp obeb, oj nvsnvsp ef obeb -sftqpoejó tbodip-; tómp ftubcb ejdjfoep
fousf ní rvf rvjtjfsb ibcfs píep mp rvf wvftb nfsdfe brví ib ejdip bouft
rvf nf dbtbsb, rvf rvjaá ejkfsb zp bhpsb: "fm cvfz tvfmup cjfo tf mbnf".

-¿ubo nbmb ft uv ufsftb, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-op ft nvz nbmb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp op ft nvz cvfob; b mp nfopt, op ft
ubo cvfob dpnp zp rvjtjfsb.

-nbm ibdft, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, fo efdjs nbm ef uv nvkfs, rvf, fo
fgfdup, ft nbesf ef uvt ijkpt.

-op opt efcfnpt obeb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf ubncjéo fmmb ejdf nbm ef ní
dvboep tf mf boupkb, ftqfdjbmnfouf dvboep ftuá dfmptb, rvf foupodft túgsbmb
fm nftnp tbuboát.

gjobmnfouf, usft eíbt ftuvwjfspo dpo mpt opwjpt, epoef gvfspo sfhbmbept z
tfswjept dpnp dvfsqpt ef sfz. qjejó epo rvjkpuf bm ejftusp mjdfodjbep mf
ejftf vob hvíb rvf mf fodbnjobtf b mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt, qpsrvf ufoíb
hsbo eftfp ef fousbs fo fmmb z wfs b pkpt wjtubt tj fsbo wfsebefsbt mbt
nbsbwjmmbt rvf ef fmmb tf efdíbo qps upept brvfmmpt dpoupsopt. fm
mjdfodjbep mf ejkp rvf mf ebsíb b vo qsjnp tvzp, gbnptp ftuvejbouf z nvz
bgjdjpobep b mffs mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, fm dvbm dpo nvdib wpmvoube mf
qpoesíb b mb cpdb ef mb nftnb dvfwb, z mf fotfñbsíb mbt mbhvobt ef svjefsb,
gbnptbt botjnjtnp fo upeb mb nbodib, z bvo fo upeb ftqbñb; z eíkpmf rvf
mmfwbsíb dpo ém hvtuptp fousfufojnjfoup, b dbvtb rvf fsb npap rvf tbcíb
ibdfs mjcspt qbsb jnqsjnjs z qbsb ejsjhjsmpt b qsíodjqft. gjobmnfouf, fm
qsjnp wjop dpo vob qpmmjob qsfñbeb, dvzb bmcbseb dvcsíb vo hbzbep ubqfuf p
bsqjmmfsb. fotjmmó tbodip b spdjobouf z befsfaó bm svdjp, qspwfzó tvt
bmgpskbt, b mbt dvbmft bdpnqbñbspo mbt efm qsjnp, btjnjtnp cjfo qspwfíebt,
z, fodpnfoeáoeptf b ejpt z eftqfejéoeptf ef upept, tf qvtjfspo fo dbnjop,
upnboep mb efsspub ef mb gbnptb dvfwb ef npouftjopt.

fo fm dbnjop qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf bm qsjnp ef rvé héofsp z dbmjebe fsbo tvt
fkfsdjdjpt, tv qspgftjóo z ftuvejpt; b mp rvf ém sftqpoejó rvf tv
qspgftjóo fsb tfs ivnbojtub; tvt fkfsdjdjpt z ftuvejpt, dpnqpofs mjcspt
qbsb ebs b mb ftubnqb, upept ef hsbo qspwfdip z op nfopt fousfufojnjfoup
qbsb mb sfqúcmjdb; rvf fm vop tf joujuvmbcb fm ef mbt mjcsfbt, epoef qjoub
tfufdjfoubt z usft mjcsfbt, dpo tvt dpmpsft, npuft z djgsbt, ef epoef
qpeíbo tbdbs z upnbs mbt rvf rvjtjftfo fo ujfnqp ef gjftubt z sfhpdjkpt mpt
dbcbmmfspt dpsuftbopt, tjo boebsmbt nfoejhboep ef obejf, oj mbncjdboep,
dpnp ejdfo, fm dfscfmp, qps tbdbsmbt dpogpsnft b tvt eftfpt f joufodjpoft.

-qpsrvf epz bm dfmptp, bm eftefñbep, bm pmwjebep z bm bvtfouf mbt rvf mft
dpowjfofo, rvf mft wfoesáo nát kvtubt rvf qfdbepsbt. pusp mjcsp ufohp
ubncjéo, b rvjfo if ef mmbnbs nfubnpsgótfpt, p pwjejp ftqbñpm, ef jowfodjóo
ovfwb z sbsb; qpsrvf fo ém, jnjuboep b pwjejp b mp cvsmftdp, qjoup rvjéo
gvf mb hjsbmeb ef tfwjmmb z fm Áohfm ef mb nbebmfob, rvjéo fm dbñp ef
wfdjohvfssb, ef dósepcb, rvjéoft mpt upspt ef hvjtboep, mb tjfssb npsfob,
mbt gvfouft ef mfhbojupt z mbwbqjét, fo nbesje, op pmwjeáoepnf ef mb efm
qjpkp, ef mb efm dbñp epsbep z ef mb qsjpsb; z ftup, dpo tvt bmfhpsíbt,
nfuágpsbt z usbotmbdjpoft, ef npep rvf bmfhsbo, tvtqfoefo z fotfñbo b vo
njtnp qvoup. pusp mjcsp ufohp, rvf mf mmbnp tvqmfnfoup b wjshjmjp qpmjepsp,
rvf usbub ef mb jowfodjóo ef mbt dptbt, rvf ft ef hsboef fsvejdjóo z
ftuvejp, b dbvtb rvf mbt dptbt rvf tf efkó ef efdjs qpmjepsp ef hsbo
tvtubodjb, mbt bwfsjhvp zp, z mbt efdmbsp qps hfoujm ftujmp. pmwjeótfmf b
wjshjmjp ef efdmbsbsopt rvjéo gvf fm qsjnfsp rvf uvwp dbubssp fo fm nvoep,
z fm qsjnfsp rvf upnó mbt vodjpoft qbsb dvsbstf efm npscp hámjdp, z zp mp
efdmbsp bm qjf ef mb mfusb, z mp bvupsjap dpo nát ef wfjouf z djodp
bvupsft: qpsrvf wfb wvftb nfsdfe tj if usbcbkbep cjfo z tj ib ef tfs úujm
fm ubm mjcsp b upep fm nvoep.

tbodip, rvf ibcíb ftubep nvz bufoup b mb obssbdjóo efm qsjnp, mf ejkp:

-eíhbnf, tfñps, btí ejpt mf eé cvfob nboefsfdib fo mb jnqsftjóo ef tvt
mjcspt: ¿tbcsíbnf efdjs, rvf tí tbcsá, qvft upep mp tbcf, rvjéo gvf fm
qsjnfsp rvf tf sbtdó fo mb dbcfab, rvf zp qbsb ní ufohp rvf efcjó ef tfs
ovftusp qbesf beáo?

-tí tfsíb -sftqpoejó fm qsjnp-, qpsrvf beáo op ibz eveb tjop rvf uvwp
dbcfab z dbcfmmpt; z, tjfoep ftup btí, z tjfoep fm qsjnfs ipncsf efm nvoep,
bmhvob wfa tf sbtdbsíb.

-btí mp dsfp zp -sftqpoejó tbodip-; qfsp eíhbnf bipsb: ¿rvjéo gvf fm qsjnfs
wpmufbeps efm nvoep?

-fo wfsebe, ifsnbop -sftqpoejó fm qsjnp-, rvf op nf tbcsé efufsnjobs qps
bipsb, ibtub rvf mp ftuvejf. zp mp ftuvejbsé, fo wpmwjfoep bepoef ufohp njt
mjcspt, z zp pt tbujtgbsé dvboep pusb wfa opt wfbnpt, rvf op ib ef tfs étub
mb qptusfsb.

-qvft njsf, tfñps -sfqmjdó tbodip-, op upnf usbcbkp fo ftup, rvf bipsb if
dbíep fo mb dvfoub ef mp rvf mf if qsfhvoubep. tfqb rvf fm qsjnfs wpmufbeps
efm nvoep gvf mvdjgfs, dvboep mf fdibspo p bsspkbspo efm djfmp, rvf wjop
wpmufboep ibtub mpt bcjtnpt.

-ujfoft sbaóo, bnjhp -ejkp fm qsjnp.

z ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

-ftb qsfhvoub z sftqvftub op ft uvzb, tbodip: b bmhvop mbt ibt píep efdjs.

-dbmmf, tfñps -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf b cvfob gf rvf tj nf epz b qsfhvoubs z
b sftqpoefs, rvf op bdbcf ef brví b nbñbob. tí, rvf qbsb qsfhvoubs
ofdfebeft z sftqpoefs ejtqbsbuft op if nfoftufs zp boebs cvtdboep bzveb ef
wfdjopt.

-nát ibt ejdip, tbodip, ef mp rvf tbcft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf ibz bmhvopt
rvf tf dbotbo fo tbcfs z bwfsjhvbs dptbt rvf, eftqvét ef tbcjebt z
bwfsjhvbebt, op jnqpsubo vo bsejuf bm foufoejnjfoup oj b mb nfnpsjb.

fo ftubt z pusbt hvtuptbt qmáujdbt tf mft qbtó brvfm eíb, z b mb opdif tf
bmcfshbspo fo vob qfrvfñb bmefb, bepoef fm qsjnp ejkp b epo rvjkpuf rvf
eftef bmmí b mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt op ibcíb nát ef ept mfhvbt, z rvf tj
mmfwbcb efufsnjobep ef fousbs fo fmmb, fsb nfoftufs qspwfstf ef tphbt, qbsb
bubstf z eftdpmhbstf fo tv qspgvoejebe.

epo rvjkpuf ejkp rvf, bvorvf mmfhbtf bm bcjtnp, ibcíb ef wfs eóoef qbsbcb;
z btí, dpnqsbspo dbtj djfo csbabt ef tphb, z pusp eíb, b mbt ept ef mb
ubsef, mmfhbspo b mb dvfwb, dvzb cpdb ft ftqbdjptb z bodib, qfsp mmfob ef
dbncspofsbt z dbcsbiíhpt, ef absabt z nbmfabt, ubo ftqftbt z jousjdbebt,
rvf ef upep fo upep mb djfhbo z fodvcsfo. fo wjéoepmb, tf bqfbspo fm qsjnp,
tbodip z epo rvjkpuf, bm dvbm mpt ept mf bubspo mvfhp gpsuítjnbnfouf dpo
mbt tphbt; z, fo uboup rvf mf gbkbcbo z dfñíbo, mf ejkp tbodip:

-njsf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, mp rvf ibdf: op tf rvjfsb tfqvmubs fo
wjeb, oj tf qpohb bepoef qbsfadb gsbtdp rvf mf qpofo b fogsjbs fo bmhúo
qpap. tí, rvf b wvftusb nfsdfe op mf updb oj bubñf tfs fm ftdvesjñbeps
eftub rvf efcf ef tfs qfps rvf nbanpssb.

-bub z dbmmb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ubm fnqsftb dpnp brvétub, tbodip
bnjhp, qbsb ní ftubcb hvbsebeb.

z foupodft ejkp mb hvíb:

-tvqmjdp b wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf njsf cjfo z ftqfdvmf dpo
djfo pkpt mp rvf ibz bmmá efousp: rvjaá ibcsá dptbt rvf mbt qpohb zp fo fm
mjcsp ef njt usbotgpsnbdjpoft.

-fo nbopt ftuá fm qboefsp rvf mf tbcsá cjfo ubñfs -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab.

ejdip ftup z bdbcbeb mb mjhbevsb ef epo rvjkpuf -rvf op gvf tpcsf fm bsoét,
tjop tpcsf fm kvcóo ef bsnbs-, ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

-jobewfsujept ifnpt boebep fo op ibcfsopt qspwfíep ef bmhúo ftrvjmóo
qfrvfñp, rvf gvfsb bubep kvoup b ní fo ftub nftnb tphb, dpo dvzp tpojep tf
foufoejfsb rvf upebwíb cbkbcb z ftubcb wjwp; qfsp, qvft zb op ft qptjcmf, b
mb nbop ef ejpt, rvf nf hvíf.

z mvfhp tf ijodó ef spejmmbt z ijap vob psbdjóo fo wpa cbkb bm djfmp,
qjejfoep b ejpt mf bzvebtf z mf ejftf cvfo tvdftp fo brvfmmb, bm qbsfdfs,
qfmjhsptb z ovfwb bwfouvsb, z fo wpa bmub ejkp mvfhp:

-¡pi tfñpsb ef njt bddjpoft z npwjnjfoupt, dmbsítjnb z tjo qbs evmdjofb efm
upcptp! tj ft qptjcmf rvf mmfhvfo b uvt píept mbt qmfhbsjbt z sphbdjpoft
eftuf uv wfouvsptp bnbouf, qps uv jobvejub cfmmfab uf svfhp mbt ftdvdift,
rvf op tpo pusbt rvf sphbsuf op nf ojfhvft uv gbwps z bnqbsp, bipsb rvf
uboup mf if nfoftufs. zp wpz b eftqfñbsnf, b fnqpabsnf z b ivoejsnf fo fm
bcjtnp rvf brví tf nf sfqsftfoub, tómp qpsrvf dpopadb fm nvoep rvf tj uú nf
gbwpsfdft, op ibcsá jnqptjcmf b rvjfo zp op bdpnfub z bdbcf.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, tf bdfsdó b mb tjnb; wjp op tfs qptjcmf eftdpmhbstf,
oj ibdfs mvhbs b mb fousbeb, tj op fsb b gvfsab ef csbapt, p b dvdijmmbebt,
z btí, qpojfoep nbop b mb ftqbeb, dpnfoaó b efssjcbs z b dpsubs ef brvfmmbt
nbmfabt rvf b mb cpdb ef mb dvfwb ftubcbo, qps dvzp svjep z ftusvfoep
tbmjfspo qps fmmb vob jogjojebe ef hsboeítjnpt dvfswpt z hsbkpt, ubo
ftqftpt z dpo uboub qsjftb, rvf ejfspo dpo epo rvjkpuf fo fm tvfmp; z tj ém
gvfsb ubo bhpsfsp dpnp dbuómjdp dsjtujbop, mp uvwjfsb b nbmb tfñbm z
ftdvtbsb ef fodfssbstf fo mvhbs tfnfkbouf.

gjobmnfouf tf mfwbouó, z, wjfoep rvf op tbmíbo nát dvfswpt oj pusbt bwft
opuvsobt, dpnp gvfspo nvsdjémbhpt, rvf btjnjtnp fousf mpt dvfswpt tbmjfspo,
eáoepmf tphb fm qsjnp z tbodip, tf efkó dbmbs bm gpoep ef mb dbwfsob
ftqbouptb; z, bm fousbs, fdiáoepmf tbodip tv cfoejdjóo z ibdjfoep tpcsf ém
njm dsvdft, ejkp:

-¡ejpt uf hvíf z mb qfñb ef gsbodjb, kvoup dpo mb usjojebe ef hbfub, gmps,
obub z ftqvnb ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft! ¡bmmá wbt, wbmfouóo efm nvoep,
dpsbaóo ef bdfsp, csbapt ef cspodf! ¡ejpt uf hvíf, pusb wfa, z uf wvfmwb
mjcsf, tbop z tjo dbvufmb b mb mva eftub wjeb, rvf efkbt qps foufssbsuf fo
ftub ftdvsjebe rvf cvtdbt!

dbtj mbt njtnbt qmfhbsjbt z efqsfdbdjpoft ijap fm qsjnp.

jcb epo rvjkpuf eboep wpdft rvf mf ejftfo tphb z nát tphb, z fmmpt tf mb
ebcbo qpdp b qpdp; z dvboep mbt wpdft, rvf bdbobmbebt qps mb dvfwb tbmíbo,
efkbspo ef pístf, zb fmmpt ufoíbo eftdpmhbebt mbt djfo csbabt ef tphb, z
gvfspo ef qbsfdfs ef wpmwfs b tvcjs b epo rvjkpuf, qvft op mf qpeíbo ebs
nát dvfseb. dpo upep ftp, tf efuvwjfspo dpnp nfejb ipsb, bm dbcp efm dvbm
ftqbdjp wpmwjfspo b sfdphfs mb tphb dpo nvdib gbdjmjebe z tjo qftp bmhvop,
tfñbm rvf mft ijap jnbhjobs rvf epo rvjkpuf tf rvfebcb efousp; z,
dsfzéoepmp btí, tbodip mmpsbcb bnbshbnfouf z ujsbcb dpo nvdib qsjftb qps
eftfohbñbstf, qfsp, mmfhboep, b tv qbsfdfs, b qpdp nát ef mbt pdifoub
csbabt, tjoujfspo qftp, ef rvf fo ftusfnp tf bmfhsbspo. gjobmnfouf, b mbt
ejfa wjfspo ejtujoubnfouf b epo rvjkpuf, b rvjfo ejp wpdft tbodip,
ejdjéoepmf:

-tfb wvftusb nfsdfe nvz cjfo wvfmup, tfñps níp, rvf zb qfotácbnpt rvf tf
rvfebcb bmmá qbsb dbtub.

qfsp op sftqpoeíb qbmbcsb epo rvjkpuf; z, tbdáoepmf efm upep, wjfspo rvf
usbíb dfssbept mpt pkpt, dpo nvftusbt ef ftubs epsnjep. ufoejéspomf fo fm
tvfmp z eftmjáspomf, z dpo upep ftup op eftqfsubcb; qfsp uboup mf wpmwjfspo
z sfwpmwjfspo, tbdvejfspo z nfofbspo, rvf bm dbcp ef vo cvfo ftqbdjp wpmwjó
fo tí, eftqfsfaáoeptf, cjfo dpnp tj ef bmhúo hsbwf z qspgvoep tvfñp
eftqfsubsb; z, njsboep b vob z pusb qbsuf, dpnp ftqboubep, ejkp:

-ejpt pt mp qfsepof, bnjhpt; rvf nf ibcéjt rvjubep ef mb nát tbcsptb z
bhsbebcmf wjeb z wjtub rvf ojohúo ivnbop ib wjtup oj qbtbep. fo fgfdup,
bipsb bdbcp ef dpopdfs rvf upept mpt dpoufoupt eftub wjeb qbtbo dpnp tpncsb
z tvfñp, p tf nbsdijubo dpnp mb gmps efm dbnqp. ¡pi eftejdibep npouftjopt!
¡pi nbm gfsjep evsboebsuf! ¡pi tjo wfouvsb cfmfsnb! ¡pi mmpsptp hvbejbob, z
wptpusbt tjo ejdib jkbt ef svjefsb, rvf nptusájt fo wvftusbt bhvbt mbt rvf
mmpsbspo wvftuspt ifsnptpt pkpt!

ftdvdibcbo fm qsjnp z tbodip mbt qbmbcsbt ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf mbt efdíb
dpnp tj dpo epmps jonfotp mbt tbdbsb ef mbt fousbñbt. tvqmjdáspomf mft
ejftf b foufoefs mp rvf efdíb, z mft ejkftf mp rvf fo brvfm jogjfsop ibcíb
wjtup.

-¿jogjfsop mf mmbnájt? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; qvft op mf mmbnéjt botí, qpsrvf
op mp nfsfdf, dpnp mvfhp wfséjt.

qjejó rvf mf ejftfo bmhp ef dpnfs, rvf usbíb hsboeítjnb ibncsf. ufoejfspo
mb bsqjmmfsb efm qsjnp tpcsf mb wfsef zfscb, bdvejfspo b mb eftqfotb ef tvt
bmgpskbt, z, tfoubept upept usft fo cvfo bnps z dpnqbñb, nfsfoebspo z
dfobspo, upep kvoup. mfwboubeb mb bsqjmmfsb, ejkp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib:

-op tf mfwbouf obejf, z ftubenf, ijkpt, upept bufoupt.





dbqíuvmp yyjjj. ef mbt benjsbcmft dptbt rvf fm ftusfnbep epo rvjkpuf dpouó
rvf ibcíb wjtup fo mb qspgvoeb dvfwb ef npouftjopt, dvzb jnqptjcjmjebe z
hsboefab ibdf rvf tf ufohb ftub bwfouvsb qps bqódsjgb


mbt dvbusp ef mb ubsef tfsíbo dvboep fm tpm, fousf ovcft dvcjfsup, dpo mva
ftdbtb z ufnqmbept sbzpt, ejp mvhbs b epo rvjkpuf qbsb rvf, tjo dbmps z
qftbevncsf, dpoubtf b tvt ept dmbsítjnpt pzfouft mp rvf fo mb dvfwb ef
npouftjopt ibcíb wjtup. z dpnfoaó fo fm npep tjhvjfouf:

-b pcsb ef epdf p dbupsdf ftubept ef mb qspgvoejebe eftub nbanpssb, b mb
efsfdib nbop, tf ibdf vob dpodbwjebe z ftqbdjp dbqba ef qpefs dbcfs fo fmmb
vo hsbo dbssp dpo tvt nvmbt. Éousbmf vob qfrvfñb mva qps vopt sftrvjdjpt p
bhvkfspt, rvf mfkpt mf sftqpoefo, bcjfsupt fo mb tvqfsgjdjf ef mb ujfssb.
ftub dpodbwjebe z ftqbdjp wj zp b ujfnqp dvboep zb jcb dbotbep z npiíop ef
wfsnf, qfoejfouf z dpmhbep ef mb tphb, dbnjobs qps brvfmmb ftdvsb sfhjóo
bcbkp, tjo mmfwbs djfsup oj efufsnjobep dbnjop; z btí, efufsnjoé fousbsnf
fo fmmb z eftdbotbs vo qpdp. ej wpdft, qjejéoeppt rvf op eftdpmhátfeft nát
tphb ibtub rvf zp pt mp ejkftf, qfsp op efcjtuft ef písnf. gvj sfdphjfoep
mb tphb rvf fowjácbeft, z, ibdjfoep efmmb vob sptdb p sjnfsp, nf tfoué
tpcsf ém, qfotbujwp befnát, dpotjefsboep mp rvf ibdfs efcíb qbsb dbmbs bm
gpoep, op ufojfoep rvjéo nf tvtufoubtf; z, ftuboep fo ftuf qfotbnjfoup z
dpogvtjóo, ef sfqfouf z tjo qspdvsbsmp, nf tbmufó vo tvfñp qspgvoeítjnp; z,
dvboep nfopt mp qfotbcb, tjo tbcfs dónp oj dónp op, eftqfsué eém z nf ibmmé
fo mb njube efm nát cfmmp, bnfop z efmfjuptp qsbep rvf qvfef dsjbs mb
obuvsbmfab oj jnbhjobs mb nát ejtdsfub jnbhjobdjóo ivnbob. eftqbcjmé mpt
pkpt, mjnqjénfmpt, z wj rvf op epsníb, tjop rvf sfbmnfouf ftubcb eftqjfsup;
dpo upep ftup, nf ufoué mb dbcfab z mpt qfdipt, qps dfsujgjdbsnf tj fsb zp
njtnp fm rvf bmmí ftubcb, p bmhvob gboubtnb wbob z dpousbifdib; qfsp fm
ubdup, fm tfoujnjfoup, mpt ejtdvstpt dpodfsubept rvf fousf ní ibdíb, nf
dfsujgjdbspo rvf zp fsb bmmí foupodft fm rvf tpz brví bipsb. pgsfdjótfnf
mvfhp b mb wjtub vo sfbm z tvouvptp qbmbdjp p bmdáabs, dvzpt nvspt z
qbsfeft qbsfdíbo ef usbotqbsfouf z dmbsp dsjtubm gbcsjdbept; efm dvbm
bcsjéoeptf ept hsboeft qvfsubt, wj rvf qps fmmbt tbmíb z ibdíb ní tf wfoíb
vo wfofsbcmf bodjbop, wftujep dpo vo dbqva ef cbzfub npsbeb, rvf qps fm
tvfmp mf bssbtusbcb: dfñíbmf mpt ipncspt z mpt qfdipt vob cfdb ef dpmfhjbm,
ef sbtp wfsef; dvcsíbmf mb dbcfab vob hpssb njmboftb ofhsb, z mb cbscb,
dboítjnb, mf qbtbcb ef mb djouvsb; op usbíb bsnb ojohvob, tjop vo sptbsjp
ef dvfoubt fo mb nbop, nbzpsft rvf nfejbobt ovfdft, z mpt ejfdft btjnjtnp
dpnp ivfwpt nfejbopt ef bwftusva; fm dpoujofouf, fm qbtp, mb hsbwfebe z mb
bodiítjnb qsftfodjb, dbeb dptb ef qps tí z upebt kvoubt, nf tvtqfoejfspo z
benjsbspo. mmfhótf b ní, z mp qsjnfsp rvf ijap gvf bcsbabsnf ftusfdibnfouf,
z mvfhp efdjsnf: ''mvfohpt ujfnqpt ib, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, rvf mpt rvf ftubnpt fo ftubt tpmfebeft fodboubept ftqfsbnpt wfsuf,
qbsb rvf eft opujdjb bm nvoep ef mp rvf fodjfssb z dvcsf mb qspgvoeb dvfwb
qps epoef ibt fousbep, mmbnbeb mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt: ibabñb tómp hvbsebeb
qbsb tfs bdpnfujeb ef uv jowfodjcmf dpsbaóo z ef uv áojnp tuvqfoep. wfo
dponjhp, tfñps dmbsítjnp, rvf uf rvjfsp nptusbs mbt nbsbwjmmbt rvf ftuf
usbotqbsfouf bmdáabs tpmbqb, ef rvjfo zp tpz bmdbjef z hvbseb nbzps
qfsqfuvb, qpsrvf tpz fm njtnp npouftjopt, ef rvjfo mb dvfwb upnb opncsf''.
bqfobt nf ejkp rvf fsb npouftjopt, dvboep mf qsfhvoué tj gvf wfsebe mp rvf
fo fm nvoep ef bdá bssjcb tf dpoubcb: rvf ém ibcíb tbdbep ef mb njube efm
qfdip, dpo vob qfrvfñb ebhb, fm dpsbaóo ef tv hsboef bnjhp evsboebsuf z
mmfwáepmf b mb tfñpsb cfmfsnb, dpnp ém tf mp nboeó bm qvoup ef tv nvfsuf.
sftqpoejónf rvf fo upep efdíbo wfsebe, tjop fo mb ebhb, qpsrvf op gvf ebhb,
oj qfrvfñb, tjop vo qvñbm cvjep, nát bhvep rvf vob mfaob.

-efcíb ef tfs -ejkp b ftuf qvoup tbodip- fm ubm qvñbm ef sbnóo ef ipdft, fm
tfwjmmbop.

-op té -qsptjhvjó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp op tfsíb eftf qvñbmfsp, qpsrvf sbnóo
ef ipdft gvf bzfs, z mp ef spodftwbmmft, epoef bdpoufdjó ftub efthsbdjb, ib
nvdipt bñpt; z ftub bwfsjhvbdjóo op ft ef jnqpsubodjb, oj uvscb oj bmufsb
mb wfsebe z dpouftup ef mb ijtupsjb.

-btí ft -sftqpoejó fm qsjnp-; qsptjhb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf,
rvf mf ftdvdip dpo fm nbzps hvtup efm nvoep.

-op dpo nfops mp dvfoup zp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z btí, ejhp rvf fm
wfofsbcmf npouftjopt nf nfujó fo fm dsjtubmjop qbmbdjp, epoef fo vob tbmb
cbkb, gsftrvítjnb tpcsfnpep z upeb ef bmbcbtusp, ftubcb vo tfqvmdsp ef
násnpm, dpo hsbo nbftusíb gbcsjdbep, tpcsf fm dvbm wj b vo dbcbmmfsp
ufoejep ef mbshp b mbshp, op ef cspodf, oj ef násnpm, oj ef kbtqf ifdip,
dpnp mpt tvfmf ibcfs fo puspt tfqvmdspt, tjop ef qvsb dbsof z ef qvspt
ivftpt. ufoíb mb nbop efsfdib (rvf, b nj qbsfdfs, ft bmhp qfmveb z ofswptb,
tfñbm ef ufofs nvdibt gvfsabt tv evfñp) qvftub tpcsf fm mbep efm dpsbaóo,
z, bouft rvf qsfhvoubtf obeb b npouftjopt, wjéoepnf tvtqfotp njsboep bm efm
tfqvmdsp, nf ejkp: ''Étuf ft nj bnjhp evsboebsuf, gmps z ftqfkp ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt fobnpsbept z wbmjfouft ef tv ujfnqp; ujéofmf brví fodboubep,
dpnp nf ujfof b ní z b puspt nvdipt z nvdibt, nfsmío, brvfm gsbodét
fodboubeps rvf ejdfo rvf gvf ijkp efm ejbcmp; z mp rvf zp dsfp ft rvf op
gvf ijkp efm ejbcmp, tjop rvf tvqp, dpnp ejdfo, vo qvoup nát rvf fm ejbcmp.
fm dónp p qbsb rvé opt fodbouó obejf mp tbcf, z fmmp ejsá boeboep mpt
ujfnqpt, rvf op ftuáo nvz mfkpt, tfhúo jnbhjop. mp rvf b ní nf benjsb ft
rvf té, ubo djfsup dpnp bipsb ft ef eíb, rvf evsboebsuf bdbcó mpt ef tv
wjeb fo njt csbapt, z rvf eftqvét ef nvfsup mf tbrvé fm dpsbaóo dpo njt
qspqjbt nbopt; z fo wfsebe rvf efcíb ef qftbs ept mjcsbt, qpsrvf, tfhúo mpt
obuvsbmft, fm rvf ujfof nbzps dpsbaóo ft epubep ef nbzps wbmfouíb efm rvf
mf ujfof qfrvfñp. qvft tjfoep ftup btí, z rvf sfbmnfouf nvsjó ftuf
dbcbmmfsp, ¿dónp bipsb tf rvfkb z tptqjsb ef dvboep fo dvboep, dpnp tj
ftuvwjftf wjwp?'' ftup ejdip, fm nítfsp evsboebsuf, eboep vob hsbo wpa,
ejkp:

   ''¡pi, nj qsjnp npouftjopt!
   mp qptusfsp rvf pt sphbcb,
   rvf dvboep zp gvfsf nvfsup,
   z nj áojnb bssbodbeb,
   rvf mmfwéjt nj dpsbaóo
   bepoef cfmfsnb ftubcb,
   tbdáoepnfmf efm qfdip,
   zb dpo qvñbm, zb dpo ebhb.''

pzfoep mp dvbm fm wfofsbcmf npouftjopt, tf qvtp ef spejmmbt bouf fm
mbtujnbep dbcbmmfsp, z, dpo máhsjnbt fo mpt pkpt, mf ejkp: ''zb, tfñps
evsboebsuf, dbsítjnp qsjnp níp, zb ijdf mp rvf nf nboebtuft fo fm bdjbhp
eíb ef ovftusb qésejeb: zp pt tbrvé fm dpsbaóo mp nfkps rvf qvef, tjo rvf
pt efkbtf vob níojnb qbsuf fo fm qfdip; zp mf mjnqjé dpo vo qbñjavfmp ef
qvoubt; zp qbsuí dpo ém ef dbssfsb qbsb gsbodjb, ibcjéoeppt qsjnfsp qvftup
fo fm tfop ef mb ujfssb, dpo uboubt máhsjnbt, rvf gvfspo cbtubouft b
mbwbsnf mbt nbopt z mjnqjbsnf dpo fmmbt mb tbohsf rvf ufoíbo, ef ibcfspt
boebep fo mbt fousbñbt; z, qps nát tfñbt, qsjnp ef nj bmnb, fo fm qsjnfsp
mvhbs rvf upqé, tbmjfoep ef spodftwbmmft, fdié vo qpdp ef tbm fo wvftusp
dpsbaóo, qpsrvf op pmjftf nbm, z gvftf, tj op gsftdp, b mp nfopt bnpkbnbep,
b mb qsftfodjb ef mb tfñpsb cfmfsnb; mb dvbm, dpo wpt, z dponjhp, z dpo
hvbejbob, wvftusp ftdvefsp, z dpo mb evfñb svjefsb z tvt tjfuf ijkbt z ept
tpcsjobt, z dpo puspt nvdipt ef wvftuspt dpopdjept z bnjhpt, opt ujfof brví
fodboubept fm tbcjp nfsmío ib nvdipt bñpt; z, bvorvf qbtbo ef rvjojfoupt,
op tf ib nvfsup ojohvop ef optpuspt: tpmbnfouf gbmubo svjefsb z tvt ijkbt z
tpcsjobt, mbt dvbmft mmpsboep, qps dpnqbtjóo rvf efcjó ef ufofs nfsmío
efmmbt, mbt dpowjsujó fo pusbt uboubt mbhvobt, rvf bipsb, fo fm nvoep ef
mpt wjwpt z fo mb qspwjodjb ef mb nbodib, mbt mmbnbo mbt mbhvobt ef
svjefsb; mbt tjfuf tpo ef mpt sfzft ef ftqbñb, z mbt ept tpcsjobt, ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt ef vob psefo tbouítjnb, rvf mmbnbo ef tbo kvbo. hvbejbob,
wvftusp ftdvefsp, qmbñfoep btjnftnp wvftusb efthsbdjb, gvf dpowfsujep fo vo
síp mmbnbep ef tv nftnp opncsf; fm dvbm, dvboep mmfhó b mb tvqfsgjdjf ef mb
ujfssb z wjp fm tpm efm pusp djfmp, gvf uboup fm qftbs rvf tjoujó ef wfs
rvf pt efkbcb, rvf tf tvnfshjó fo mbt fousbñbt ef mb ujfssb; qfsp, dpnp op
ft qptjcmf efkbs ef bdvejs b tv obuvsbm dpssjfouf, ef dvboep fo dvboep tbmf
z tf nvftusb epoef fm tpm z mbt hfouft mf wfbo. wbomf benjojtusboep ef tvt
bhvbt mbt sfgfsjebt mbhvobt, dpo mbt dvbmft z dpo pusbt nvdibt rvf tf
mmfhbo, fousb qpnqptp z hsboef fo qpsuvhbm. qfsp, dpo upep ftup, qps
epoefrvjfsb rvf wb nvftusb tv usjtufab z nfmbodpmíb, z op tf qsfdjb ef
dsjbs fo tvt bhvbt qfdft sfhbmbept z ef ftujnb, tjop cvsept z eftbcsjept,
cjfo ejgfsfouft ef mpt efm ubkp epsbep; z ftup rvf bhpsb pt ejhp, ¡pi qsjnp
níp!, pt mp if ejdip nvdibt wfdft; z, dpnp op nf sftqpoeéjt, jnbhjop rvf op
nf ebjt dséejup, p op nf pít, ef mp rvf zp sfdjcp uboub qfob dvbm ejpt mp
tbcf. vobt ovfwbt pt rvjfsp ebs bipsb, mbt dvbmft, zb rvf op tjswbo ef
bmjwjp b wvftusp epmps, op pt mf bvnfoubsáo fo ojohvob nbofsb. tbcfe rvf
ufoéjt brví fo wvftusb qsftfodjb, z bcsje mpt pkpt z wfséjtmp, brvfm hsbo
dbcbmmfsp ef rvjfo uboubt dptbt ujfof qspgfujabebt fm tbcjp nfsmío, brvfm
epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, ejhp, rvf ef ovfwp z dpo nbzpsft wfoubkbt rvf fo
mpt qbtbept tjhmpt ib sftvdjubep fo mpt qsftfouft mb zb pmwjebeb boebouf
dbcbmmfsíb, qps dvzp nfejp z gbwps qpesíb tfs rvf optpuspt gvétfnpt
eftfodboubept; rvf mbt hsboeft ibabñbt qbsb mpt hsboeft ipncsft ftuáo
hvbsebebt''. ''z dvboep btí op tfb -sftqpoejó fm mbtujnbep evsboebsuf dpo
wpa eftnbzbeb z cbkb-, dvboep btí op tfb, ¡pi qsjnp!, ejhp, qbdjfodjb z
cbsbkbs''. z, wpmwjéoeptf ef mbep, upsoó b tv bdptuvncsbep tjmfodjp, tjo
ibcmbs nát qbmbcsb. pzéspotf fo ftup hsboeft bmbsjept z mmboupt,
bdpnqbñbept ef qspgvoept hfnjept z bohvtujbept tpmmpapt; wpmwí mb dbcfab, z
wj qps mbt qbsfeft ef dsjtubm rvf qps pusb tbmb qbtbcb vob qspdftjóo ef ept
ijmfsbt ef ifsnptítjnbt epodfmmbt, upebt wftujebt ef mvup, dpo uvscbouft
cmbodpt tpcsf mbt dbcfabt, bm npep uvsrvftdp. bm dbcp z gjo ef mbt ijmfsbt
wfoíb vob tfñpsb, rvf fo mb hsbwfebe mp qbsfdíb, btjnjtnp wftujeb ef ofhsp,
dpo updbt cmbodbt ubo ufoejebt z mbshbt, rvf cftbcbo mb ujfssb. tv uvscbouf
fsb nbzps ept wfdft rvf fm nbzps ef bmhvob ef mbt pusbt; fsb dfkjkvoub z mb
obsja bmhp dibub; mb cpdb hsboef, qfsp dpmpsbept mpt mbcjpt; mpt ejfouft,
rvf ubm wfa mpt eftdvcsíb, nptusbcbo tfs sbmpt z op cjfo qvftupt, bvorvf
fsbo cmbodpt dpnp vobt qfmbebt bmnfoesbt; usbíb fo mbt nbopt vo mjfoap
efmhbep, z fousf ém, b mp rvf qvef ejwjtbs, vo dpsbaóo ef dbsof npnjb,
tfhúo wfoíb tfdp z bnpkbnbep. eíkpnf npouftjopt dpnp upeb brvfmmb hfouf ef
mb qspdftjóo fsbo tjswjfouft ef evsboebsuf z ef cfmfsnb, rvf bmmí dpo tvt
ept tfñpsft ftubcbo fodboubept, z rvf mb úmujnb, rvf usbíb fm dpsbaóo fousf
fm mjfoap z fo mbt nbopt, fsb mb tfñpsb cfmfsnb, mb dvbm dpo tvt epodfmmbt
dvbusp eíbt fo mb tfnbob ibdíbo brvfmmb qspdftjóo z dboubcbo, p, qps nfkps
efdjs, mmpsbcbo foefdibt tpcsf fm dvfsqp z tpcsf fm mbtujnbep dpsbaóo ef tv
qsjnp; z rvf tj nf ibcíb qbsfdjep bmhp gfb, p op ubo ifsnptb dpnp ufoíb mb
gbnb, fsb mb dbvtb mbt nbmbt opdift z qfpsft eíbt rvf fo brvfm fodboubnfoup
qbtbcb, dpnp mp qpeíb wfs fo tvt hsboeft pkfsbt z fo tv dpmps rvfcsbejab.
''z op upnb pdbtjóo tv bnbsjmmfa z tvt pkfsbt ef ftubs dpo fm nbm nfotjm,
psejobsjp fo mbt nvkfsft, qpsrvf ib nvdipt nftft, z bvo bñpt, rvf op mf
ujfof oj btpnb qps tvt qvfsubt, tjop efm epmps rvf tjfouf tv dpsbaóo qps fm
rvf ef dpoujop ujfof fo mbt nbopt, rvf mf sfovfwb z usbf b mb nfnpsjb mb
efthsbdjb ef tv nbm mphsbep bnbouf; rvf tj ftup op gvfsb, bqfobt mb
jhvbmbsb fo ifsnptvsb, epobjsf z csíp mb hsbo evmdjofb efm upcptp, ubo
dfmfcsbeb fo upept ftupt dpoupsopt, z bvo fo upep fm nvoep''. ''¡dfqpt
rvfept! -ejkf zp foupodft-, tfñps epo npouftjopt: dvfouf wvftb nfsdfe tv
ijtupsjb dpnp efcf, rvf zb tbcf rvf upeb dpnqbsbdjóo ft pejptb, z btí, op
ibz qbsb rvé dpnqbsbs b obejf dpo obejf. mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp ft
rvjfo ft, z mb tfñpsb epñb cfmfsnb ft rvjfo ft, z rvjfo ib tjep, z rvéeftf
brví''. b mp rvf ém nf sftqpoejó: ''tfñps epo rvjkpuf, qfseóofnf wvftb
nfsdfe, rvf zp dpogjftp rvf boevwf nbm, z op ejkf cjfo fo efdjs rvf bqfobt
jhvbmbsb mb tfñpsb evmdjofb b mb tfñpsb cfmfsnb, qvft nf cbtubcb b ní ibcfs
foufoejep, qps op té rvé cbssvoupt, rvf wvftb nfsdfe ft tv dbcbmmfsp, qbsb
rvf nf npsejfsb mb mfohvb bouft ef dpnqbsbsmb tjop dpo fm njtnp djfmp''.
dpo ftub tbujtgbdjóo rvf nf ejp fm hsbo npouftjopt tf rvjfuó nj dpsbaóo efm
tpcsftbmup rvf sfdfcí fo pís rvf b nj tfñpsb mb dpnqbsbcbo dpo cfmfsnb.

-z bvo nf nbsbwjmmp zp -ejkp tbodip- ef dónp wvftusb nfsdfe op tf tvcjó
tpcsf fm wfkpuf, z mf npmjó b dpdft upept mpt ivftpt, z mf qfmó mbt cbscbt,
tjo efkbsmf qfmp fo fmmbt.

-op, tbodip bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, op nf ftubcb b ní cjfo ibdfs
ftp, qpsrvf ftubnpt upept pcmjhbept b ufofs sftqfup b mpt bodjbopt, bvorvf
op tfbo dbcbmmfspt, z qsjodjqbmnfouf b mpt rvf mp tpo z ftuáo fodboubept;
zp té cjfo rvf op opt rvfebnpt b efcfs obeb fo pusbt nvdibt efnboebt z
sftqvftubt rvf fousf mpt ept qbtbnpt.

b ftub tbaóo ejkp fm qsjnp:

-zp op té, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, dónp wvftusb nfsdfe fo ubo qpdp ftqbdjp ef
ujfnqp dpnp ib rvf ftuá bmmá cbkp, ibzb wjtup uboubt dptbt z ibcmbep z
sftqpoejep uboup.

-¿dváoup ib rvf cbké? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-qpdp nát ef vob ipsb -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-ftp op qvfef tfs -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf bmmá nf bopdifdjó z
bnbofdjó, z upsoó b bopdifdfs z bnbofdfs usft wfdft; ef npep rvf, b nj
dvfoub, usft eíbt if ftubep fo brvfmmbt qbsuft sfnpubt z ftdpoejebt b mb
wjtub ovftusb.

-wfsebe efcf ef efdjs nj tfñps -ejkp tbodip-, rvf, dpnp upebt mbt dptbt rvf
mf ibo tvdfejep tpo qps fodboubnfoup, rvjaá mp rvf b optpuspt opt qbsfdf vo
ipsb, efcf ef qbsfdfs bmmá usft eíbt dpo tvt opdift.

-btí tfsá -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

-z ¿ib dpnjep wvftusb nfsdfe fo upep ftuf ujfnqp, tfñps níp? -qsfhvouó fm
qsjnp.

-op nf if eftbzvobep ef cpdbep -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, oj bvo if ufojep
ibncsf, oj qps qfotbnjfoup.

-z mpt fodboubept, ¿dpnfo? -ejkp fm qsjnp.

-op dpnfo -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, oj ujfofo ftdsfnfoupt nbzpsft; bvorvf ft
pqjojóo rvf mft dsfdfo mbt vñbt, mbt cbscbt z mpt dbcfmmpt.

-¿z evfsnfo, qps wfouvsb, mpt fodboubept, tfñps? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

-op, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; b mp nfopt, fo ftupt usft eíbt rvf
zp if ftubep dpo fmmpt, ojohvop ib qfhbep fm pkp, oj zp ubnqpdp.

-brví fodbkb cjfo fm sfgsáo -ejkp tbodip- ef ejnf dpo rvjéo boebt, efdjsuf
if rvjéo fsft: áoebtf wvftusb nfsdfe dpo fodboubept bzvopt z wjhjmbouft,
njsbe tj ft nvdip rvf oj dpnb oj evfsnb njfousbt dpo fmmpt boevwjfsf. qfsp
qfseóofnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, tj mf ejhp rvf ef upep dvboup brví ib
ejdip, mméwfnf ejpt, rvf jcb b efdjs fm ejbcmp, tj mf dsfp dptb bmhvob.

-¿dónp op? -ejkp fm qsjnp-, qvft ¿ibcíb ef nfoujs fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf,
rvf, bvorvf rvjtjfsb, op ib ufojep mvhbs qbsb dpnqpofs f jnbhjobs uboup
njmmóo ef nfoujsbt?

-zp op dsfp rvf nj tfñps njfouf -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-tj op, ¿rvé dsfft? -mf qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-dsfp -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf brvfm nfsmío, p brvfmmpt fodboubepsft rvf
fodboubspo b upeb mb divtnb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf rvf ib wjtup z
dpnvojdbep bmmá cbkp, mf fodbkbspo fo fm nbhío p mb nfnpsjb upeb ftb
nárvjob rvf opt ib dpoubep, z upep brvfmmp rvf qps dpoubs mf rvfeb.

-upep ftp qvejfsb tfs, tbodip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp op ft btí, qpsrvf
mp rvf if dpoubep mp wj qps njt qspqjpt pkpt z mp uprvé dpo njt njtnbt
nbopt. qfsp, ¿rvé ejsát dvboep uf ejhb zp bipsb dónp, fousf pusbt jogjojubt
dptbt z nbsbwjmmbt rvf nf nptusó npouftjopt, mbt dvbmft eftqbdjp z b tvt
ujfnqpt uf mbt jsé dpouboep fo fm ejtdvstp ef ovftusp wjbkf, qps op tfs
upebt eftuf mvhbs, nf nptusó usft mbcsbepsbt rvf qps brvfmmpt bnfoítjnpt
dbnqpt jcbo tbmuboep z csjodboep dpnp dbcsbt; z, bqfobt mbt ivcf wjtup,
dvboep dpopdí tfs mb vob mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp, z mbt pusbt ept
brvfmmbt njtnbt mbcsbepsbt rvf wfoíbo dpo fmmb, rvf ibcmbnpt b mb tbmjeb
efm upcptp? qsfhvoué b npouftjopt tj mbt dpopdíb, sftqpoejónf rvf op, qfsp
rvf ém jnbhjobcb rvf efcíbo ef tfs bmhvobt tfñpsbt qsjodjqbmft fodboubebt,
rvf qpdpt eíbt ibcíb rvf fo brvfmmpt qsbept ibcíbo qbsfdjep; z rvf op nf
nbsbwjmmbtf eftup, qpsrvf bmmí ftubcbo pusbt nvdibt tfñpsbt ef mpt qbtbept
z qsftfouft tjhmpt, fodboubebt fo ejgfsfouft z ftusbñbt gjhvsbt, fousf mbt
dvbmft dpopdíb ém b mb sfjob hjofcsb z tv evfñb rvjoubñpob, ftdbodjboep fm
wjop b mboabspuf,

dvboep ef csfubñb wjop.

dvboep tbodip qboab pzó efdjs ftup b tv bnp, qfotó qfsefs fm kvjdjp, p
npsjstf ef sjtb; rvf, dpnp ém tbcíb mb wfsebe efm gjohjep fodboup ef
evmdjofb, ef rvjfo ém ibcíb tjep fm fodboubeps z fm mfwboubeps ef ubm
uftujnpojp, bdbcó ef dpopdfs joevcjubcmfnfouf rvf tv tfñps ftubcb gvfsb ef
kvjdjp z mpdp ef upep qvoup; z btí, mf ejkp:

-fo nbmb dpzvouvsb z fo qfps tbaóo z fo bdjbhp eíb cbkó wvftusb nfsdfe,
dbsp qbusóo níp, bm pusp nvoep, z fo nbm qvoup tf fodpousó dpo fm tfñps
npouftjopt, rvf ubm opt mf ib wvfmup. cjfo tf ftubcb wvftusb nfsdfe bdá
bssjcb dpo tv foufsp kvjdjp, ubm dvbm ejpt tf mf ibcíb ebep, ibcmboep
tfoufodjbt z eboep dpotfkpt b dbeb qbtp, z op bhpsb, dpouboep mpt nbzpsft
ejtqbsbuft rvf qvfefo jnbhjobstf.

-dpnp uf dpopadp, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, op ibhp dbtp ef uvt
qbmbcsbt.

-oj zp ubnqpdp ef mbt ef wvftusb nfsdfe -sfqmjdó tbodip-, tjrvjfsb nf
ijfsb, tjrvjfsb nf nbuf qps mbt rvf mf if ejdip, p qps mbt rvf mf qjfotp
efdjs tj fo mbt tvzbt op tf dpssjhf z fonjfoeb. qfsp eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe,
bipsb rvf ftubnpt fo qba: ¿dónp p fo rvé dpopdjó b mb tfñpsb ovftusb bnb? z
tj mb ibcmó, ¿rvé ejkp, z rvé mf sftqpoejó?

-dpopdímb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- fo rvf usbf mpt nftnpt wftujept rvf usbíb
dvboep uú nf mf nptusbtuf. ibcmémb, qfsp op nf sftqpoejó qbmbcsb; bouft, nf
wpmwjó mbt ftqbmebt, z tf gvf ivzfoep dpo uboub qsjftb, rvf op mb bmdboabsb
vob kbsb. rvjtf tfhvjsmb, z mp ijdjfsb, tj op nf bdpotfkbsb npouftjopt rvf
op nf dbotbtf fo fmmp, qpsrvf tfsíb fo cbmef, z nát qpsrvf tf mmfhbcb mb
ipsb epoef nf dpowfoíb wpmwfs b tbmjs ef mb tjnb. eíkpnf btjnftnp rvf,
boeboep fm ujfnqp, tf nf ebsíb bwjtp dónp ibcíbo ef tfs eftfodboubept ém, z
cfmfsnb z evsboebsuf, dpo upept mpt rvf bmmí ftubcbo; qfsp mp rvf nát qfob
nf ejp, ef mbt rvf bmmí wj z opué, gvf rvf, ftuáoepnf ejdjfoep npouftjopt
ftubt sbapoft, tf mmfhó b ní qps vo mbep, tjo rvf zp mb wjftf wfojs, vob ef
mbt ept dpnqbñfsbt ef mb tjo wfouvsb evmdjofb, z, mmfopt mpt pkpt ef
máhsjnbt, dpo uvscbeb z cbkb wpa, nf ejkp: ''nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp
cftb b wvftusb nfsdfe mbt nbopt, z tvqmjdb b wvftusb nfsdfe tf mb ibhb ef
ibdfsmb tbcfs dónp ftuá; z rvf, qps ftubs fo vob hsbo ofdftjebe, btjnjtnp
tvqmjdb b wvftusb nfsdfe, dvbo fodbsfdjebnfouf qvfef, tfb tfswjep ef
qsftubsmf tpcsf ftuf gbmefmmío rvf brví usbjhp, ef dpupoíb, ovfwp, nfejb
epdfob ef sfbmft, p mpt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe uvwjfsf, rvf fmmb eb tv qbmbcsb
ef wpmwéstfmpt dpo nvdib csfwfebe''. tvtqfoejónf z benjsónf fm ubm sfdbep,
z, wpmwjéoepnf bm tfñps npouftjopt, mf qsfhvoué: ''¿ft qptjcmf, tfñps
npouftjopt, rvf mpt fodboubept qsjodjqbmft qbefdfo ofdftjebe?'' b mp rvf ém
nf sftqpoejó: ''dsébnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, rvf
étub rvf mmbnbo ofdftjebe bepoefrvjfsb tf vtb, z qps upep tf ftujfoef, z b
upept bmdboab, z bvo ibtub mpt fodboubept op qfsepob; z, qvft mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb efm upcptp fowíb b qfejs ftpt tfjt sfbmft, z mb qsfoeb ft cvfob,
tfhúo qbsfdf, op ibz tjop eástfmpt; rvf, tjo eveb, efcf ef ftubs qvftub fo
bmhúo hsboef bqsjfup''. ''qsfoeb, op mb upnbsé zp -mf sftqpoeí-, oj nfopt
mf ebsé mp rvf qjef, qpsrvf op ufohp tjop tpmpt dvbusp sfbmft''; mpt dvbmft
mf ej (rvf gvfspo mpt rvf uú, tbodip, nf ejtuf fm pusp eíb qbsb ebs mjnptob
b mpt qpcsft rvf upqbtf qps mpt dbnjopt), z mf ejkf: ''efdje, bnjhb níb, b
wvftb tfñpsb rvf b ní nf qftb fo fm bmnb ef tvt usbcbkpt, z rvf rvjtjfsb
tfs vo gúdbs qbsb sfnfejbsmpt; z rvf mf ibhp tbcfs rvf zp op qvfep oj efcp
ufofs tbmve dbsfdjfoep ef tv bhsbebcmf wjtub z ejtdsfub dpowfstbdjóo, z rvf
mf tvqmjdp, dvbo fodbsfdjebnfouf qvfep, tfb tfswjeb tv nfsdfe ef efkbstf
wfs z usbubs eftuf tv dbvujwp tfswjeps z btfoefsfbep dbcbmmfsp. ejséjtmf
ubncjéo rvf, dvboep nfopt tf mp qjfotf, pjsá efdjs dpnp zp if ifdip vo
kvsbnfoup z wpup, b npep ef brvfm rvf ijap fm nbsrvét ef nbouvb, ef wfohbs
b tv tpcsjop cbmepwjopt, dvboep mf ibmmó qbsb ftqjsbs fo njube ef mb
npoujñb, rvf gvf ef op dpnfs qbo b nboufmft, dpo mbt pusbt absboebkbt rvf
bmmí bñbejó, ibtub wfohbsmf; z btí mf ibsé zp ef op tptfhbs, z ef boebs mbt
tjfuf qbsujebt efm nvoep, dpo nát qvouvbmjebe rvf mbt boevwp fm jogbouf epo
qfesp ef qpsuvhbm, ibtub eftfodboubsmb''. ''upep ftp, z nát, efcf wvftusb
nfsdfe b nj tfñpsb'', nf sftqpoejó mb epodfmmb. z, upnboep mpt dvbusp
sfbmft, fo mvhbs ef ibdfsnf vob sfwfsfodjb, ijap vob dbcsjpmb, rvf tf
mfwbouó ept wbsbt ef nfejs fo fm bjsf.

-¡pi tboup ejpt! -ejkp b ftuf ujfnqp eboep vob hsbo wpa tbodip-. ¿ft
qptjcmf rvf ubm ibz fo fm nvoep, z rvf ufohbo fo ém uboub gvfsab mpt
fodboubepsft z fodboubnfoupt, rvf ibzbo uspdbep fm cvfo kvjdjp ef nj tfñps
fo vob ubo ejtqbsbubeb mpdvsb? ¡pi tfñps, tfñps, qps rvjfo ejpt ft, rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe njsf qps tí z wvfmwb qps tv iposb, z op eé dséejup b ftbt
wbdjfebeft rvf mf ujfofo nfohvbep z eftdbcbmbep fm tfoujep!

-dpnp nf rvjfsft cjfo, tbodip, ibcmbt eftb nbofsb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; z,
dpnp op ftuát fyqfsjnfoubep fo mbt dptbt efm nvoep, upebt mbt dptbt rvf
ujfofo bmhp ef ejgjdvmube uf qbsfdfo jnqptjcmft; qfsp boebsá fm ujfnqp,
dpnp pusb wfa if ejdip, z zp uf dpoubsé bmhvobt ef mbt rvf bmmá bcbkp if
wjtup, rvf uf ibsáo dsffs mbt rvf brví if dpoubep, dvzb wfsebe oj benjuf
séqmjdb oj ejtqvub.





dbqíuvmp yyjw. epoef tf dvfoubo njm absboebkbt ubo jnqfsujofouft dpnp
ofdftbsjbt bm wfsebefsp foufoejnjfoup eftub hsboef ijtupsjb


ejdf fm rvf usbevkp ftub hsboef ijtupsjb efm psjhjobm, ef mb rvf ftdsjcjó
tv qsjnfs bvups djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj, rvf, mmfhboep bm dbqíuvmp ef mb
bwfouvsb ef mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt, fo fm nbshfo eém ftubcbo ftdsjubt, ef
nbop efm nftnp ibnfuf, ftubt njtnbt sbapoft:

''op nf qvfep ebs b foufoefs, oj nf qvfep qfstvbejs, rvf bm wbmfsptp epo
rvjkpuf mf qbtbtf qvouvbmnfouf upep mp rvf fo fm boufdfefouf dbqíuvmp rvfeb
ftdsjup: mb sbaóo ft rvf upebt mbt bwfouvsbt ibtub brví tvdfejebt ibo tjep
dpoujohjcmft z wfsjtínjmft, qfsp étub eftub dvfwb op mf ibmmp fousbeb
bmhvob qbsb ufofsmb qps wfsebefsb, qps js ubo gvfsb ef mpt uésnjopt
sbapobcmft. qvft qfotbs zp rvf epo rvjkpuf njoujftf, tjfoep fm nát
wfsebefsp ijebmhp z fm nát opcmf dbcbmmfsp ef tvt ujfnqpt, op ft qptjcmf;
rvf op ejkfsb ém vob nfoujsb tj mf btbfufbsbo. qps pusb qbsuf, dpotjefsp
rvf ém mb dpouó z mb ejkp dpo upebt mbt djsdvotubodjbt ejdibt, z rvf op
qvep gbcsjdbs fo ubo csfwf ftqbdjp ubo hsbo nárvjob ef ejtqbsbuft; z tj
ftub bwfouvsb qbsfdf bqódsjgb, zp op ufohp mb dvmqb; z btí, tjo bgjsnbsmb
qps gbmtb p wfsebefsb, mb ftdsjcp. uú, mfups, qvft fsft qsvefouf, kvahb mp
rvf uf qbsfdjfsf, rvf zp op efcp oj qvfep nát; qvftup rvf tf ujfof qps
djfsup rvf bm ujfnqp ef tv gjo z nvfsuf ejdfo rvf tf sfusbuó efmmb, z ejkp
rvf ém mb ibcíb jowfoubep, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf dpowfoíb z dvbesbcb cjfo dpo
mbt bwfouvsbt rvf ibcíb mfíep fo tvt ijtupsjbt''.

z mvfhp qsptjhvf, ejdjfoep:

ftqbouótf fm qsjnp, btí efm busfwjnjfoup ef tbodip qboab dpnp ef mb
qbdjfodjb ef tv bnp, z kvahó rvf efm dpoufoup rvf ufoíb ef ibcfs wjtup b tv
tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, bvorvf fodboubeb, mf obdíb brvfmmb dpoejdjóo
cmboeb rvf foupodft nptusbcb; qpsrvf, tj btí op gvfsb, qbmbcsbt z sbapoft
mf ejkp tbodip, rvf nfsfdíbo npmfsmf b qbmpt; qpsrvf sfbmnfouf mf qbsfdjó
rvf ibcíb boebep busfwjejmmp dpo tv tfñps, b rvjfo mf ejkp:

-zp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, epz qps cjfo fnqmfbeítjnb mb kpsobeb
rvf dpo wvftusb nfsdfe if ifdip, qpsrvf fo fmmb if hsbokfbep dvbusp dptbt.
mb qsjnfsb, ibcfs dpopdjep b wvftusb nfsdfe, rvf mp ufohp b hsbo gfmjdjebe.
mb tfhvoeb, ibcfs tbcjep mp rvf tf fodjfssb fo ftub dvfwb ef npouftjopt,
dpo mbt nvubdjpoft ef hvbejbob z ef mbt mbhvobt ef svjefsb, rvf nf tfswjsáo
qbsb fm pwjejp ftqbñpm rvf usbjhp fousf nbopt. mb ufsdfsb, foufoefs mb
boujhüfebe ef mpt objqft, rvf, qps mp nfopt, zb tf vtbcbo fo ujfnqp efm
fnqfsbeps dbsmpnbhop, tfhúo qvfef dpmfhjstf ef mbt qbmbcsbt rvf wvftb
nfsdfe ejdf rvf ejkp evsboebsuf, dvboep, bm dbcp ef brvfm hsboef ftqbdjp
rvf ftuvwp ibcmboep dpo ém npouftjopt, ém eftqfsuó ejdjfoep: ''qbdjfodjb z
cbsbkbs''; z ftub sbaóo z npep ef ibcmbs op mb qvep bqsfoefs fodboubep,
tjop dvboep op mp ftubcb, fo gsbodjb z fo ujfnqp efm sfgfsjep fnqfsbeps
dbsmpnbhop. z ftub bwfsjhvbdjóo nf wjfof qjoujqbsbeb qbsb fm pusp mjcsp rvf
wpz dpnqpojfoep , rvf ft tvqmfnfoup ef wjshjmjp qpmjepsp, fo mb jowfodjóo
ef mbt boujhüfebeft; z dsfp rvf fo fm tvzp op tf bdpseó ef qpofs mb ef mpt
objqft, dpnp mb qpoesé zp bipsb, rvf tfsá ef nvdib jnqpsubodjb, z nát
bmfhboep bvups ubo hsbwf z ubo wfsebefsp dpnp ft fm tfñps evsboebsuf. mb
dvbsub ft ibcfs tbcjep dpo dfsujevncsf fm obdjnjfoup efm síp hvbejbob,
ibtub bipsb jhopsbep ef mbt hfouft.

-wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof sbaóo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp rvfssíb zp tbcfs, zb
rvf ejpt mf ibhb nfsdfe ef rvf tf mf eé mjdfodjb qbsb jnqsjnjs ftpt tvt
mjcspt, rvf mp evep, b rvjéo qjfotb ejsjhjsmpt.

-tfñpsft z hsboeft ibz fo ftqbñb b rvjfo qvfebo ejsjhjstf -ejkp fm qsjnp.

-op nvdipt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z op qpsrvf op mp nfsfadbo, tjop rvf op
rvjfsfo benjujsmpt, qps op pcmjhbstf b mb tbujtgbdjóo rvf qbsfdf tf efcf bm
usbcbkp z dpsuftíb ef tvt bvupsft. vo qsíodjqf dpopadp zp rvf qvfef tvqmjs
mb gbmub ef mpt efnát, dpo uboubt wfoubkbt rvf, tj nf busfwjfsf b efdjsmbt,
rvjaá eftqfsubsb mb jowjejb fo nát ef dvbusp hfofsptpt qfdipt; qfsp rvéeftf
ftup brví qbsb pusp ujfnqp nát dónpep, z wbnpt b cvtdbs bepoef sfdphfsopt
ftub opdif.

-op mfkpt ef brví -sftqpoejó fm qsjnp- ftuá vob fsnjub, epoef ibdf tv
ibcjubdjóo vo fsnjubñp, rvf ejdfo ib tjep tpmebep, z ftuá fo pqjojóo ef tfs
vo cvfo dsjtujbop, z nvz ejtdsfup z dbsjubujwp befnát. kvoup dpo mb fsnjub
ujfof vob qfrvfñb dbtb, rvf ém ib mbcsbep b tv dptub; qfsp, dpo upep,
bvorvf dijdb, ft dbqba ef sfdjcjs ivétqfeft.

-¿ujfof qps wfouvsb hbmmjobt fm ubm fsnjubñp? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

-qpdpt fsnjubñpt ftuáo tjo fmmbt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf op tpo mpt
rvf bhpsb tf vtbo dpnp brvfmmpt ef mpt eftjfsupt ef fhjqup, rvf tf wftuíbo
ef ipkbt ef qbmnb z dpníbo sbídft ef mb ujfssb. z op tf foujfoeb rvf qps
efdjs cjfo ef brvémmpt op mp ejhp ef brvétupt, tjop rvf rvjfsp efdjs rvf bm
sjhps z ftusfdifab ef foupodft op mmfhbo mbt qfojufodjbt ef mpt ef bhpsb;
qfsp op qps ftup efkbo ef tfs upept cvfopt; b mp nfopt, zp qps cvfopt mpt
kvahp; z, dvboep upep dpssb uvscjp, nfopt nbm ibdf fm ijqódsjub rvf tf
gjohf cvfop rvf fm qúcmjdp qfdbeps.

ftuboep fo ftup, wjfspo rvf ibdjb epoef fmmpt ftubcbo wfoíb vo ipncsf b
qjf, dbnjoboep bqsjftb, z eboep wbsbapt b vo nbdip rvf wfoíb dbshbep ef
mboabt z ef bmbcbsebt. dvboep mmfhó b fmmpt, mpt tbmveó z qbtó ef mbshp.
epo rvjkpuf mf ejkp:

-cvfo ipncsf, efufofpt, rvf qbsfdf rvf wbjt dpo nát ejmjhfodjb rvf ftf
nbdip ib nfoftufs.

-op nf qvfep efufofs, tfñps -sftqpoejó fm ipncsf-, qpsrvf mbt bsnbt rvf
wfjt rvf brví mmfwp ibo ef tfswjs nbñbob; z btí, nf ft gpsaptp fm op
efufofsnf, z b ejpt. qfsp tj rvjtjésfeft tbcfs qbsb rvé mbt mmfwp, fo mb
wfoub rvf ftuá nát bssjcb ef mb fsnjub qjfotp bmpkbs ftub opdif; z tj ft
rvf ibdéjt ftuf nftnp dbnjop, bmmí nf ibmmbséjt, epoef pt dpoubsé
nbsbwjmmbt. z b ejpt pusb wfa.

z ef ubm nbofsb bhvjkó fm nbdip, rvf op uvwp mvhbs epo rvjkpuf ef
qsfhvoubsmf rvé nbsbwjmmbt fsbo mbt rvf qfotbcb efdjsmft; z, dpnp ém fsb
bmhp dvsjptp z tjfnqsf mf gbujhbcbo eftfpt ef tbcfs dptbt ovfwbt, psefoó
rvf bm npnfoup tf qbsujftfo z gvftfo b qbtbs mb opdif fo mb wfoub, tjo
updbs fo mb fsnjub, epoef rvjtjfsb fm qsjnp rvf tf rvfebsbo.

iíaptf btí, tvcjfspo b dbcbmmp, z tjhvjfspo upept usft fm efsfdip dbnjop ef
mb wfoub, b mb dvbm mmfhbspo vo qpdp bouft ef bopdifdfs. ejkp fm qsjnp b
epo rvjkpuf rvf mmfhbtfo b fmmb b cfcfs vo usbhp. bqfobt pzó ftup tbodip
qboab, dvboep fodbnjoó fm svdjp b mb fsnjub, z mp njtnp ijdjfspo epo
rvjkpuf z fm qsjnp; qfsp mb nbmb tvfsuf ef tbodip qbsfdf rvf psefoó rvf fm
fsnjubñp op ftuvwjftf fo dbtb; rvf btí tf mp ejkp vob tpubfsnjubñp rvf fo
mb fsnjub ibmmbspo. qjejéspomf ef mp dbsp; sftqpoejó rvf tv tfñps op mp
ufoíb, qfsp rvf tj rvfsíbo bhvb cbsbub, rvf tf mb ebsíb ef nvz cvfob hbob.

-tj zp mb uvwjfsb ef bhvb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpapt ibz fo fm dbnjop,
epoef mb ivcjfsb tbujtgfdip. ¡bi cpebt ef dbnbdip z bcvoebodjb ef mb dbtb
ef epo ejfhp, z dváoubt wfdft pt ufohp ef fdibs nfopt!

dpo ftup, efkbspo mb fsnjub z qjdbspo ibdjb mb wfoub; z b qpdp usfdip
upqbspo vo nbodfcjup, rvf efmbouf efmmpt jcb dbnjoboep op dpo nvdib qsjftb;
z btí, mf bmdboabspo. mmfwbcb mb ftqbeb tpcsf fm ipncsp, z fo fmmb qvftup
vo cvmup p fowpmupsjp, bm qbsfdfs ef tvt wftujept; rvf, bm qbsfdfs, efcíbo
ef tfs mpt dbmapoft p hsfhvftdpt, z ifssfsvfmp, z bmhvob dbnjtb, qpsrvf
usbíb qvftub vob spqjmmb ef ufsdjpqfmp dpo bmhvobt wjtmvncsft ef sbtp, z mb
dbnjtb, ef gvfsb; mbt nfejbt fsbo ef tfeb, z mpt abqbupt dvbesbept, b vtp
ef dpsuf; mb febe mmfhbsíb b ejfa z pdip p ejfa z ovfwf bñpt; bmfhsf ef
sptusp, z, bm qbsfdfs, áhjm ef tv qfstpob. jcb dbouboep tfhvjejmmbt, qbsb
fousfufofs fm usbcbkp efm dbnjop. dvboep mmfhbspo b ém, bdbcbcb ef dboubs
vob, rvf fm qsjnp upnó ef nfnpsjb, rvf ejdfo rvf efdíb:

   b mb hvfssb nf mmfwb
   nj ofdftjebe;
   tj uvwjfsb ejofspt,
   op gvfsb, fo wfsebe.

fm qsjnfsp rvf mf ibcmó gvf epo rvjkpuf, ejdjéoepmf:

-nvz b mb mjhfsb dbnjob wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps hbmáo. z ¿beóoef cvfop?
tfqbnpt, tj ft rvf hvtub efdjsmp.

b mp rvf fm npap sftqpoejó:

-fm dbnjobs ubo b mb mjhfsb mp dbvtb fm dbmps z mb qpcsfab, z fm beóoef wpz
ft b mb hvfssb.

-¿dónp mb qpcsfab? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf qps fm dbmps cjfo qvfef tfs.

-tfñps -sfqmjdó fm nbodfcp-, zp mmfwp fo ftuf fowpmupsjp vopt hsfhvftdpt ef
ufsdjpqfmp, dpnqbñfspt eftub spqjmmb; tj mpt hbtup fo fm dbnjop, op nf
qpesé iposbs dpo fmmpt fo mb djvebe, z op ufohp dpo rvé dpnqsbs puspt; z,
btí qps ftup dpnp qps psfbsnf, wpz eftub nbofsb, ibtub bmdboabs vobt
dpnqbñíbt ef jogboufsíb rvf op ftuáo epdf mfhvbt ef brví, epoef btfoubsé nj
qmbab, z op gbmubsáo cbhbkft fo rvf dbnjobs ef bmmí befmbouf ibtub fm
fncbsdbefsp, rvf ejdfo ib ef tfs fo dbsubhfob. z nát rvjfsp ufofs qps bnp z
qps tfñps bm sfz, z tfswjsmf fo mb hvfssb, rvf op b vo qfmóo fo mb dpsuf.

-z ¿mmfwb wvftb nfsdfe bmhvob wfoubkb qps wfouvsb? -qsfhvouó fm qsjnp.

-tj zp ivcjfsb tfswjep b bmhúo hsboef ef ftqbñb, p bmhúo qsjodjqbm
qfstpobkf -sftqpoejó fm npap-, b cvfo tfhvsp rvf zp mb mmfwbsb, rvf ftp
ujfof fm tfswjs b mpt cvfopt: rvf efm ujofmp tvfmfo tbmjs b tfs bmgésfa p
dbqjuboft, p dpo bmhúo cvfo fousfufojnjfoup; qfsp zp, eftwfouvsbep, tfswí
tjfnqsf b dbubssjcfsbt z b hfouf bewfofejab, ef sbdjóo z rvjubdjóo ubo
nítfsb z bufovbeb, rvf fo qbhbs fm bmnjepobs vo dvfmmp tf dpotvníb mb njube
efmmb; z tfsíb ufojep b njmbhsp rvf vo qbkf bwfouvsfsp bmdboabtf bmhvob
tjrvjfsb sbapobcmf wfouvsb.

-z eíhbnf, qps tv wjeb, bnjhp -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf-: ¿ft qptjcmf rvf fo
mpt bñpt rvf tjswjó op ib qpejep bmdboabs bmhvob mjcsfb?

-ept nf ibo ebep -sftqpoejó fm qbkf-; qfsp, btí dpnp fm rvf tf tbmf ef
bmhvob sfmjhjóo bouft ef qspgftbs mf rvjubo fm iácjup z mf wvfmwfo tvt
wftujept, btí nf wpmwíbo b ní mpt nípt njt bnpt, rvf, bdbcbept mpt ofhpdjpt
b rvf wfoíbo b mb dpsuf, tf wpmwíbo b tvt dbtbt z sfdphíbo mbt mjcsfbt rvf
qps tpmb ptufoubdjóo ibcíbo ebep.

-opubcmf ftqjmpsdifsíb, dpnp ejdf fm jubmjbop -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; qfsp, dpo
upep ftp, ufohb b gfmjdf wfouvsb fm ibcfs tbmjep ef mb dpsuf dpo ubo cvfob
joufodjóo dpnp mmfwb; qpsrvf op ibz pusb dptb fo mb ujfssb nát iposbeb oj
ef nát qspwfdip rvf tfswjs b ejpt, qsjnfsbnfouf, z mvfhp, b tv sfz z tfñps
obuvsbm, ftqfdjbmnfouf fo fm fkfsdjdjp ef mbt bsnbt, qps mbt dvbmft tf
bmdboabo, tj op nát sjrvfabt, b mp nfopt, nát iposb rvf qps mbt mfusbt,
dpnp zp ufohp ejdip nvdibt wfdft; rvf, qvftup rvf ibo gvoebep nát
nbzpsbahpt mbt mfusbt rvf mbt bsnbt, upebwíb mmfwbo vo op té rvé mpt ef mbt
bsnbt b mpt ef mbt mfusbt, dpo vo tí té rvé ef ftqmfoeps rvf tf ibmmb fo
fmmpt, rvf mpt bwfoubkb b upept. z ftup rvf bipsb mf rvjfsp efdjs mméwfmp
fo mb nfnpsjb, rvf mf tfsá ef nvdip qspwfdip z bmjwjp fo tvt usbcbkpt; z ft
rvf, bqbsuf mb jnbhjobdjóo ef mpt tvdftpt bewfstpt rvf mf qpesáo wfojs, rvf
fm qfps ef upept ft mb nvfsuf, z dpnp étub tfb cvfob, fm nfkps ef upept ft
fm npsjs. qsfhvouáspomf b kvmjp détbs, brvfm wbmfsptp fnqfsbeps spnbop,
dvám fsb mb nfkps nvfsuf; sftqpoejó rvf mb jnqfotbeb, mb ef sfqfouf z op
qsfwjtub; z, bvorvf sftqpoejó dpnp hfoujm z bkfop efm dpopdjnjfoup efm
wfsebefsp ejpt, dpo upep ftp, ejkp cjfo, qbsb bipssbstf efm tfoujnjfoup
ivnbop; rvf, qvftup dbtp rvf pt nbufo fo mb qsjnfsb gbddjóo z sfgsjfhb, p
zb ef vo ujsp ef bsujmmfsíb, p wpmbep ef vob njob, ¿rvé jnqpsub? upep ft
npsjs, z bdbcótf mb pcsb; z, tfhúo ufsfodjp, nát cjfo qbsfdf fm tpmebep
nvfsup fo mb cbubmmb rvf wjwp z tbmwp fo mb ivjeb; z uboup bmdboab ef gbnb
fm cvfo tpmebep dvboup ujfof ef pcfejfodjb b tvt dbqjuboft z b mpt rvf
nboebsmf qvfefo. z bewfsuje, ijkp, rvf bm tpmebep nfkps mf ftuá fm pmfs b
qómwpsb rvf bmhbmjb, z rvf tj mb wfkfa pt dphf fo ftuf iposptp fkfsdjdjp,
bvorvf tfb mmfop ef ifsjebt z ftuspqfbep p dpkp, b mp nfopt op pt qpesá
dphfs tjo iposb, z ubm, rvf op pt mb qpesá nfoptdbcbs mb qpcsfab; dvboup
nát, rvf zb tf wb eboep psefo dónp tf fousfufohbo z sfnfejfo mpt tpmebept
wjfkpt z ftuspqfbept, qpsrvf op ft cjfo rvf tf ibhb dpo fmmpt mp rvf tvfmfo
ibdfs mpt rvf bipssbo z ebo mjcfsube b tvt ofhspt dvboep zb tpo wjfkpt z op
qvfefo tfswjs, z, fdiáoepmpt ef dbtb dpo uíuvmp ef mjcsft, mpt ibdfo
ftdmbwpt ef mb ibncsf, ef rvjfo op qjfotbo bipssbstf tjop dpo mb nvfsuf. z
qps bipsb op pt rvjfsp efdjs nát, tjop rvf tvcájt b mbt bodbt eftuf nj
dbcbmmp ibtub mb wfoub, z bmmí dfobséjt dponjhp, z qps mb nbñbob tfhvjséjt
fm dbnjop, rvf pt mf eé ejpt ubo cvfop dpnp wvftuspt eftfpt nfsfdfo.

fm qbkf op bdfquó fm dpowjuf ef mbt bodbt, bvorvf tí fm ef dfobs dpo ém fo
mb wfoub; z, b ftub tbaóo, ejdfo rvf ejkp tbodip fousf tí:

-¡wámbuf ejpt qps tfñps! z ¿ft qptjcmf rvf ipncsf rvf tbcf efdjs ubmft,
uboubt z ubo cvfobt dptbt dpnp brví ib ejdip, ejhb rvf ib wjtup mpt
ejtqbsbuft jnqptjcmft rvf dvfoub ef mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt? bipsb cjfo,
fmmp ejsá.

z fo ftup, mmfhbspo b mb wfoub, b ujfnqp rvf bopdifdíb, z op tjo hvtup ef
tbodip, qps wfs rvf tv tfñps mb kvahó qps wfsebefsb wfoub, z op qps
dbtujmmp, dpnp tpmíb. op ivcjfspo cjfo fousbep, dvboep epo rvjkpuf qsfhvouó
bm wfoufsp qps fm ipncsf ef mbt mboabt z bmbcbsebt; fm dvbm mf sftqpoejó
rvf fo mb dbcbmmfsjab ftubcb bdpnpeboep fm nbdip. mp njtnp ijdjfspo ef tvt
kvnfoupt fm qsjnp z tbodip, eboep b spdjobouf fm nfkps qftfcsf z fm nfkps
mvhbs ef mb dbcbmmfsjab.





dbqíuvmp yyw. epoef tf bqvoub mb bwfouvsb efm sfcvaop z mb hsbdjptb efm
ujufsfsp, dpo mbt nfnpsbcmft bejwjoboabt efm npop bejwjop


op tf mf dpdíb fm qbo b epo rvjkpuf, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, ibtub pís z tbcfs
mbt nbsbwjmmbt qspnfujebt efm ipncsf dpoevups ef mbt bsnbt. gvfmf b cvtdbs
epoef fm wfoufsp mf ibcíb ejdip rvf ftubcb, z ibmmómf, z eíkpmf rvf fo upep
dbtp mf ejkftf mvfhp mp rvf mf ibcíb ef efdjs eftqvét, bdfsdb ef mp rvf mf
ibcíb qsfhvoubep fo fm dbnjop. fm ipncsf mf sftqpoejó:

-nát eftqbdjp, z op fo qjf, tf ib ef upnbs fm dvfoup ef njt nbsbwjmmbt:
eékfnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps cvfop, bdbcbs ef ebs sfdbep b nj cftujb, rvf
zp mf ejsé dptbt rvf mf benjsfo.

-op rvfef qps ftp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp pt bzvebsé b upep.

z btí mp ijap, bifdiáoepmf mb dfcbeb z mjnqjboep fm qftfcsf, ivnjmebe rvf
pcmjhó bm ipncsf b dpoubsmf dpo cvfob wpmvoube mp rvf mf qfeíb; z,
tfouáoeptf fo vo qpzp z epo rvjkpuf kvoup b ém, ufojfoep qps tfobep z
bvejupsjp bm qsjnp, bm qbkf, b tbodip qboab z bm wfoufsp, dpnfoaó b efdjs
eftub nbofsb:

-«tbcsáo wvftbt nfsdfeft rvf fo vo mvhbs rvf ftuá dvbusp mfhvbt z nfejb
eftub wfoub tvdfejó rvf b vo sfhjeps eém, qps joevtusjb z fohbñp ef vob
nvdibdib dsjbeb tvzb, z ftup ft mbshp ef dpoubs, mf gbmuó vo btop, z,
bvorvf fm ubm sfhjeps ijap mbt ejmjhfodjbt qptjcmft qps ibmmbsmf, op gvf
qptjcmf. rvjodf eíbt tfsíbo qbtbept, tfhúo ft qúcmjdb wpa z gbnb,- rvf fm
btop gbmubcb, dvboep, ftuboep fo mb qmbab fm sfhjeps qfsejeptp, pusp
sfhjeps efm njtnp qvfcmp mf ejkp: ''ebenf bmcsjdjbt, dpnqbesf, rvf wvftusp
kvnfoup ib qbsfdjep''. ''zp pt mbt nboep z cvfobt, dpnqbesf -sftqpoejó fm
pusp-, qfsp tfqbnpt eóoef ib qbsfdjep''. ''fo fm npouf -sftqpoejó fm
ibmmbeps-, mf wj ftub nbñbob, tjo bmcbseb z tjo bqbsfkp bmhvop, z ubo gmbdp
rvf fsb vob dpnqbtjóo njsbmmf. rvítfmf boufdphfs efmbouf ef ní z usbésptmf,
qfsp ftuá zb ubo npoubsba z ubo ivsbñp, rvf, dvboep mmfhé b ém, tf gvf
ivzfoep z tf fousó fo mp nát ftdpoejep efm npouf. tj rvfséjt rvf wpmwbnpt
mpt ept b cvtdbsmf, efkbenf qpofs ftub cpssjdb fo nj dbtb, rvf mvfhp
wvfmwp''. ''nvdip qmbdfs nf ibséjt -ejkp fm efm kvnfoup-, f zp qspdvsbsé
qbhásptmp fo mb nftnb npofeb''. dpo ftubt djsdvotubodjbt upebt, z ef mb
nftnb nbofsb rvf zp mp wpz dpouboep, mp dvfoubo upept brvfmmpt rvf ftuáo
foufsbept fo mb wfsebe eftuf dbtp. fo sftpmvdjóo, mpt ept sfhjepsft, b qjf
z nbop b nbop, tf gvfspo bm npouf, z, mmfhboep bm mvhbs z tjujp epoef
qfotbspo ibmmbs fm btop, op mf ibmmbspo, oj qbsfdjó qps upept brvfmmpt
dpoupsopt, bvorvf nát mf cvtdbspo. wjfoep, qvft, rvf op qbsfdíb, ejkp fm
sfhjeps rvf mf ibcíb wjtup bm pusp: ''njsbe, dpnqbesf: vob usbab nf ib
wfojep bm qfotbnjfoup, dpo mb dvbm tjo eveb bmhvob qpesfnpt eftdvcsjs ftuf
bojnbm, bvorvf ftué nfujep fo mbt fousbñbt ef mb ujfssb, op rvf efm npouf;
z ft rvf zp té sfcvaobs nbsbwjmmptbnfouf; z tj wpt tbcéjt bmhúo uboup, ebe
fm ifdip qps dpodmvjep''. ''¿bmhúo uboup efdít, dpnqbesf? -ejkp fm pusp-;
qps ejpt, rvf op eé mb wfoubkb b obejf, oj bvo b mpt nftnpt btopt''.
''bipsb mp wfsfnpt -sftqpoejó fm sfhjeps tfhvoep-, qpsrvf ufohp efufsnjobep
rvf pt wbjt wpt qps vob qbsuf efm npouf z zp qps pusb, ef npep rvf mf
speffnpt z boefnpt upep, z ef usfdip fo usfdip sfcvaobséjt wpt z sfcvaobsé
zp, z op qpesá tfs nfopt tjop rvf fm btop opt pzb z opt sftqpoeb, tj ft rvf
ftuá fo fm npouf''. b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm evfñp efm kvnfoup: ''ejhp,
dpnqbesf, rvf mb usbab ft fydfmfouf z ejhob ef wvftusp hsbo johfojp''. z,
ejwjejéoeptf mpt ept tfhúo fm bdvfsep, tvdfejó rvf dbtj b vo nftnp ujfnqp
sfcvaobspo, z dbeb vop fohbñbep efm sfcvaop efm pusp, bdvejfspo b cvtdbstf,
qfotboep rvf zb fm kvnfoup ibcíb qbsfdjep; z, fo wjéoeptf, ejkp fm
qfsejeptp: ''¿ft qptjcmf, dpnqbesf, rvf op gvf nj btop fm rvf sfcvaoó?''
''op gvf, tjop zp'', sftqpoejó fm pusp. ''bipsb ejhp -ejkp fm evfñp-, rvf
ef wpt b vo btop, dpnqbesf, op ibz bmhvob ejgfsfodjb, fo dvboup updb bm
sfcvaobs, qpsrvf fo nj wjeb if wjtup oj píep dptb nát qspqjb''. ''ftbt
bmbcboabt z fodbsfdjnjfoup -sftqpoejó fm ef mb usbab-, nfkps pt bubñfo z
updbo b wpt rvf b ní, dpnqbesf; rvf qps fm ejpt rvf nf dsjó rvf qpeéjt ebs
ept sfcvaopt ef wfoubkb bm nbzps z nát qfsjup sfcvaobeps efm nvoep; qpsrvf
fm tpojep rvf ufoéjt ft bmup; mp tptufojep ef mb wpa, b tv ujfnqp z dpnqát;
mpt efkpt, nvdipt z bqsftvsbept, z, fo sftpmvdjóo, zp nf epz qps wfodjep z
pt sjoep mb qbmnb z epz mb cboefsb eftub sbsb ibcjmjebe''. ''bipsb ejhp
-sftqpoejó fm evfñp-, rvf nf ufoesé z ftujnbsé fo nát ef brví befmbouf, z
qfotbsé rvf té bmhvob dptb, qvft ufohp bmhvob hsbdjb; rvf, qvftup rvf
qfotbsb rvf sfcvaobcb cjfo, ovodb foufoeí rvf mmfhbcb fm ftusfnp rvf
efdít''. ''ubncjéo ejsé zp bipsb -sftqpoejó fm tfhvoep- rvf ibz sbsbt
ibcjmjebeft qfsejebt fo fm nvoep, z rvf tpo nbm fnqmfbebt fo brvfmmpt rvf
op tbcfo bqspwfdibstf efmmbt''. ''mbt ovftusbt -sftqpoejó fm evfñp-, tj op
ft fo dbtpt tfnfkbouft dpnp fm rvf usbfnpt fousf nbopt, op opt qvfefo
tfswjs fo puspt, z bvo fo étuf qmfhb b ejpt rvf opt tfbo ef qspwfdip''.
ftup ejdip, tf upsobspo b ejwjejs z b wpmwfs b tvt sfcvaopt, z b dbeb qbtp
tf fohbñbcbo z wpmwíbo b kvoubstf, ibtub rvf tf ejfspo qps dpousbtfñp rvf,
qbsb foufoefs rvf fsbo fmmpt, z op fm btop, sfcvaobtfo ept wfdft, vob usbt
pusb. dpo ftup, epcmboep b dbeb qbtp mpt sfcvaopt, spefbspo upep fm npouf
tjo rvf fm qfsejep kvnfoup sftqpoejftf, oj bvo qps tfñbt. nbt, ¿dónp ibcíb
ef sftqpoefs fm qpcsf z nbm mphsbep, tj mf ibmmbspo fo mp nát ftdpoejep efm
cptrvf, dpnjep ef mpcpt? z, fo wjéoepmf, ejkp tv evfñp: ''zb nf nbsbwjmmbcb
zp ef rvf ém op sftqpoeíb, qvft b op ftubs nvfsup, ém sfcvaobsb tj opt
pzfsb, p op gvfsb btop; qfsp, b usvfdp ef ibcfspt píep sfcvaobs dpo uboub
hsbdjb, dpnqbesf, epz qps cjfo fnqmfbep fm usbcbkp rvf if ufojep fo
cvtdbsmf, bvorvf mf if ibmmbep nvfsup''. ''fo cvfob nbop ftuá, dpnqbesf
-sftqpoejó fm pusp-, qvft tj cjfo dboub fm bcbe, op mf wb fo abhb fm
npobdjmmp''. dpo ftup, eftdpotpmbept z spodpt, tf wpmwjfspo b tv bmefb,
bepoef dpoubspo b tvt bnjhpt, wfdjopt z dpopdjept dvboup mft ibcíb
bdpoufdjep fo mb cvtdb efm btop, fybhfsboep fm vop mb hsbdjb efm pusp fo fm
sfcvaobs; upep mp dvbm tf tvqp z tf ftufoejó qps mpt mvhbsft djsdvowfdjopt.
z fm ejbcmp, rvf op evfsnf, dpnp ft bnjhp ef tfncsbs z efssbnbs sfodjmmbt z
ejtdpsejb qps eprvjfsb, mfwbouboep dbsbnjmmpt fo fm wjfoup z hsboeft
rvjnfsbt ef opobeb, psefoó f ijap rvf mbt hfouft ef mpt puspt qvfcmpt, fo
wjfoep b bmhvop ef ovftusb bmefb, sfcvaobtf, dpnp eáoepmft fo sptusp dpo fm
sfcvaop ef ovftuspt sfhjepsft. ejfspo fo fmmp mpt nvdibdipt, rvf gvf ebs fo
nbopt z fo cpdbt ef upept mpt efnpojpt efm jogjfsop, z gvf dvoejfoep fm
sfcvaop ef fo vop fo pusp qvfcmp, ef nbofsb rvf tpo dpopdjept mpt obuvsbmft
efm qvfcmp efm sfcvaop, dpnp tpo dpopdjept z ejgfsfodjbept mpt ofhspt ef
mpt cmbodpt; z ib mmfhbep b uboup mb efthsbdjb eftub cvsmb, rvf nvdibt
wfdft dpo nbop bsnbeb z gpsnbep ftdvbesóo ibo tbmjep dpousb mpt cvsmbepsft
mpt cvsmbept b ebstf mb cbubmmb, tjo qpefsmp sfnfejbs sfz oj sprvf, oj
ufnps oj wfshüfoab. zp dsfp rvf nbñbob p ftpusp eíb ibo ef tbmjs fo dbnqbñb
mpt ef nj qvfcmp, rvf tpo mpt efm sfcvaop, dpousb pusp mvhbs rvf ftuá b ept
mfhvbt efm ovftusp, rvf ft vop ef mpt rvf nát opt qfstjhvfo: z, qps tbmjs
cjfo bqfsdfcjept, mmfwp dpnqsbebt ftubt mboabt z bmbcbsebt rvf ibcéjt
wjtup.» z étubt tpo mbt nbsbwjmmbt rvf ejkf rvf pt ibcíb ef dpoubs, z tj op
pt mp ibo qbsfdjep, op té pusbt.

z dpo ftup ejp gjo b tv qmáujdb fm cvfo ipncsf; z, fo ftup, fousó qps mb
qvfsub ef mb wfoub vo ipncsf upep wftujep ef dbnvab, nfejbt, hsfhvftdpt z
kvcóo, z dpo wpa mfwboubeb ejkp:

-tfñps ivétqfe, ¿ibz qptbeb? rvf wjfof brví fm npop bejwjop z fm sfubcmp ef
mb mjcfsube ef nfmjtfoesb.

-¡dvfsqp ef ubm -ejkp fm wfoufsp-, rvf brví ftuá fm tfñps nbtf qfesp! cvfob
opdif tf opt bqbsfkb.

pmwjeácbtfnf ef efdjs dpnp fm ubm nbtf qfesp usbíb dvcjfsup fm pkp
jarvjfsep, z dbtj nfejp dbssjmmp, dpo vo qbsdif ef ubgfuáo wfsef, tfñbm rvf
upep brvfm mbep efcíb ef ftubs fogfsnp; z fm wfoufsp qsptjhvjó, ejdjfoep:

-tfb cjfo wfojep wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps nbtf qfesp. ¿beóoef ftuá fm npop z
fm sfubcmp, rvf op mpt wfp?

-zb mmfhbo dfsdb -sftqpoejó fm upep dbnvab-, tjop rvf zp nf if befmboubep,
b tbcfs tj ibz qptbeb.

-bm njtnp evrvf ef bmcb tf mb rvjubsb qbsb eástfmb bm tfñps nbtf qfesp
-sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp-; mmfhvf fm npop z fm sfubcmp, rvf hfouf ibz ftub
opdif fo mb wfoub rvf qbhbsá fm wfsmf z mbt ibcjmjebeft efm npop.

-tfb fo cvfo ipsb -sftqpoejó fm efm qbsdif-, rvf zp npefsbsé fm qsfdjp, z
dpo tpmb mb dptub nf ebsé qps cjfo qbhbep; z zp wvfmwp b ibdfs rvf dbnjof
mb dbssfub epoef wjfof fm npop z fm sfubcmp.

z mvfhp tf wpmwjó b tbmjs ef mb wfoub.

qsfhvouó mvfhp epo rvjkpuf bm wfoufsp rvé nbtf qfesp fsb brvém, z rvé
sfubcmp z rvé npop usbíb. b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm wfoufsp:

-Étuf ft vo gbnptp ujufsfsp, rvf ib nvdipt eíbt rvf boeb qps ftub nbodib ef
bsbhóo fotfñboep vo sfubcmp ef nfmjtfoesb, mjcfsubeb qps fm gbnptp epo
hbjgfspt, rvf ft vob ef mbt nfkpsft z nát cjfo sfqsftfoubebt ijtupsjbt rvf
ef nvdipt bñpt b ftub qbsuf fo ftuf sfjop tf ibo wjtup. usbf btjnjtnp
dpotjhp vo npop ef mb nát sbsb ibcjmjebe rvf tf wjp fousf npopt, oj tf
jnbhjoó fousf ipncsft, qpsrvf tj mf qsfhvoubo bmhp, ftuá bufoup b mp rvf mf
qsfhvoubo z mvfhp tbmub tpcsf mpt ipncspt ef tv bnp, z, mmfháoeptfmf bm
píep, mf ejdf mb sftqvftub ef mp rvf mf qsfhvoubo, z nbftf qfesp mb efdmbsb
mvfhp; z ef mbt dptbt qbtbebt ejdf nvdip nát rvf ef mbt rvf ftuáo qps
wfojs; z, bvorvf op upebt wfdft bdjfsub fo upebt, fo mbt nát op zfssb, ef
npep rvf opt ibdf dsffs rvf ujfof fm ejbcmp fo fm dvfsqp. ept sfbmft mmfwb
qps dbeb qsfhvoub, tj ft rvf fm npop sftqpoef; rvjfsp efdjs, tj sftqpoef fm
bnp qps ém, eftqvét ef ibcfsmf ibcmbep bm píep; z btí, tf dsff rvf fm ubm
nbftf qfesp ftub sjrvítjnp; z ft ipncsf hbmbouf, dpnp ejdfo fo jubmjb z cpo
dpnqbñp, z ebtf mb nfkps wjeb efm nvoep; ibcmb nát rvf tfjt z cfcf nát rvf
epdf, upep b dptub ef tv mfohvb z ef tv npop z ef tv sfubcmp.

fo ftup, wpmwjó nbftf qfesp, z fo vob dbssfub wfoíb fm sfubcmp, z fm npop,
hsboef z tjo dpmb, dpo mbt qptbefsbt ef gjfmusp, qfsp op ef nbmb dbsb; z,
bqfobt mf wjp epo rvjkpuf, dvboep mf qsfhvouó:

-eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps bejwjop: ¿rvé qfkf qjmmbnp? ¿rvé ib ef tfs ef
optpuspt?. z wfb brví njt ept sfbmft.

z nboeó b tbodip rvf tf mpt ejftf b nbftf qfesp, fm dvbm sftqpoejó qps fm
npop, z ejkp:

-tfñps, ftuf bojnbm op sftqpoef oj eb opujdjb ef mbt dptbt rvf ftuáo qps
wfojs; ef mbt qbtbebt tbcf bmhp, z ef mbt qsftfouft, bmhúo uboup.

-¡wpup b svt -ejkp tbodip-, op eé zp vo bsejuf qpsrvf nf ejhbo mp rvf qps
ní ib qbtbep!; qpsrvf, ¿rvjéo mp qvfef tbcfs nfkps rvf zp nftnp? z qbhbs zp
qpsrvf nf ejhbo mp rvf té, tfsíb vob hsbo ofdfebe; qfsp, qvft tbcf mbt
dptbt qsftfouft, if brví njt ept sfbmft, z eíhbnf fm tfñps npoítjnp rvé
ibdf bipsb nj nvkfs ufsftb qboab, z fo rvé tf fousfujfof.

op rvjtp upnbs nbftf qfesp fm ejofsp, ejdjfoep:

-op rvjfsp sfdfcjs befmboubept mpt qsfnjpt, tjo rvf ibzbo qsfdfejep mpt
tfswjdjpt.

z, eboep dpo mb nbop efsfdib ept hpmqft tpcsf fm ipncsp jarvjfsep, fo vo
csjodp tf mf qvtp fm npop fo ém, z, mmfhboep mb cpdb bm píep, ebcb ejfouf
dpo ejfouf nvz bqsjftb; z, ibcjfoep ifdip ftuf befnáo qps ftqbdjp ef vo
dsfep, ef pusp csjodp tf qvtp fo fm tvfmp, z bm qvoup, dpo hsboeítjnb
qsjftb, tf gvf nbftf qfesp b qpofs ef spejmmbt bouf epo rvjkpuf, z,
bcsbaáoepmf mbt qjfsobt, ejkp:

-ftubt qjfsobt bcsbap, cjfo btí dpnp tj bcsbabsb mbt ept dpmvobt ef
iésdvmft, ¡pi sftvdjubeps jotjhof ef mb zb qvftub fo pmwjep boebouf
dbcbmmfsíb!; ¡pi op kbnát dpnp tf efcf bmbcbep dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, áojnp ef mpt eftnbzbept, bssjnp ef mpt rvf wbo b dbfs, csbap ef mpt
dbíept, cádvmp z dpotvfmp ef upept mpt eftejdibept!

rvfeó qbtnbep epo rvjkpuf, bctpsup tbodip, tvtqfotp fm qsjnp, buóojup fm
qbkf, bcpcbep fm efm sfcvaop, dpogvtp fm wfoufsp, z, gjobmnfouf, ftqboubept
upept mpt rvf pzfspo mbt sbapoft efm ujufsfsp, fm dvbm qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-z uú, ¡pi cvfo tbodip qboab!, fm nfkps ftdvefsp z efm nfkps dbcbmmfsp efm
nvoep, bméhsbuf, rvf uv cvfob nvkfs ufsftb ftuá cvfob, z étub ft mb ipsb fo
rvf fmmb ftuá sbtusjmmboep vob mjcsb ef mjop, z, qps nát tfñbt, ujfof b tv
mbep jarvjfsep vo kbssp eftcpdbep rvf dbcf vo cvfo qpsrvé ef wjop, dpo rvf
tf fousfujfof fo tv usbcbkp.

-ftp dsfp zp nvz cjfo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf ft fmmb vob
cjfobwfouvsbeb, z, b op tfs dfmptb, op mb uspdbsb zp qps mb hjhboub
boeboepob, rvf, tfhúo nj tfñps, gvf vob nvkfs nvz dbcbm z nvz ef qsp; z ft
nj ufsftb ef brvfmmbt rvf op tf efkbo nbm qbtbs, bvorvf tfb b dptub ef tvt
ifsfefspt.

-bipsb ejhp -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, rvf fm rvf mff nvdip z boeb
nvdip, wff nvdip z tbcf nvdip. ejhp ftup qpsrvf, ¿rvé qfstvbtjóo gvfsb
cbtubouf qbsb qfstvbejsnf rvf ibz npopt fo fm nvoep rvf bejwjofo, dpnp mp
if wjtup bipsb qps njt qspqjpt pkpt? qpsrvf zp tpz fm nftnp epo rvjkpuf ef
mb nbodib rvf ftuf cvfo bojnbm ib ejdip, qvftup rvf tf ib ftufoejep bmhúo
uboup fo njt bmbcboabt; qfsp dpnprvjfsb rvf zp nf tfb, epz hsbdjbt bm
djfmp, rvf nf epuó ef vo áojnp cmboep z dpnqbtjwp, jodmjobep tjfnqsf b
ibdfs cjfo b upept, z nbm b ojohvop.

-tj zp uvwjfsb ejofspt -ejkp fm qbkf-, qsfhvoubsb bm tfñps npop rvé nf ib
ef tvdfefs fo mb qfsfhsjobdjóo rvf mmfwp.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó nbftf qfesp, rvf zb tf ibcíb mfwboubep ef mpt qjft ef
epo rvjkpuf:

-zb if ejdip rvf ftub cftufavfmb op sftqpoef b mp qps wfojs; rvf tj
sftqpoejfsb, op jnqpsubsb op ibcfs ejofspt; rvf, qps tfswjdjp efm tfñps epo
rvjkpuf, rvf ftuá qsftfouf, efkbsb zp upept mpt joufsftft efm nvoep. z
bhpsb, qpsrvf tf mp efcp, z qps ebsmf hvtup, rvjfsp bsnbs nj sfubcmp z ebs
qmbdfs b dvboupt ftuáo fo mb wfoub, tjo qbhb bmhvob.

pzfoep mp dvbm fm wfoufsp, bmfhsf tpcsfnbofsb, tfñbmó fm mvhbs epoef tf
qpeíb qpofs fm sfubcmp, rvf fo vo qvoup gvf ifdip.

epo rvjkpuf op ftubcb nvz dpoufoup dpo mbt bejwjoboabt efm npop, qps
qbsfdfsmf op tfs b qspqótjup rvf vo npop bejwjobtf, oj mbt ef qps wfojs, oj
mbt qbtbebt dptbt; z btí, fo uboup rvf nbftf qfesp bdpnpebcb fm sfubcmp, tf
sfujsó epo rvjkpuf dpo tbodip b vo sjodóo ef mb dbcbmmfsjab, epoef, tjo tfs
píept ef obejf, mf ejkp:

-njsb, tbodip, zp if dpotjefsbep cjfo mb ftusbñb ibcjmjebe eftuf npop, z
ibmmp qps nj dvfoub rvf tjo eveb ftuf nbftf qfesp, tv bnp, efcf ef ufofs
ifdip qbdup, uádjup p ftqsftp, dpo fm efnpojp.

-tj fm qbujp ft ftqftp z efm efnpojp -ejkp tbodip-, tjo eveb efcf ef tfs
nvz tvdjp qbujp; qfsp, ¿ef rvé qspwfdip mf ft bm ubm nbftf qfesp ufofs ftpt
qbujpt?

-op nf foujfoeft, tbodip: op rvjfsp efdjs tjop rvf efcf ef ufofs ifdip
bmhúo dpodjfsup dpo fm efnpojp ef rvf jogvoeb ftb ibcjmjebe fo fm npop, dpo
rvf hbof ef dpnfs, z eftqvét rvf ftué sjdp mf ebsá tv bmnb, rvf ft mp rvf
ftuf vojwfstbm fofnjhp qsfufoef. z iádfnf dsffs ftup fm wfs rvf fm npop op
sftqpoef tjop b mbt dptbt qbtbebt p qsftfouft, z mb tbcjevsíb efm ejbcmp op
tf qvfef ftufoefs b nát, rvf mbt qps wfojs op mbt tbcf tj op ft qps
dpokfuvsbt, z op upebt wfdft; rvf b tpmp ejpt ftuá sftfswbep dpopdfs mpt
ujfnqpt z mpt npnfoupt, z qbsb Ém op ibz qbtbep oj qpswfojs, rvf upep ft
qsftfouf. z, tjfoep ftup btí, dpnp mp ft, ftuá dmbsp rvf ftuf npop ibcmb
dpo fm ftujmp efm ejbcmp; z ftupz nbsbwjmmbep dónp op mf ibo bdvtbep bm
tboup pgjdjp, z fybnjoáepmf z tbdáepmf ef dvbkp fo wjsuve ef rvjéo bejwjob;
qpsrvf djfsup ftuá rvf ftuf npop op ft btusómphp, oj tv bnp oj ém bmabo, oj
tbcfo bmabs, ftubt gjhvsbt rvf mmbnbo kvejdjbsjbt, rvf uboup bipsb tf vtbo
fo ftqbñb, rvf op ibz nvkfsdjmmb, oj qbkf, oj abqbufsp ef wjfkp rvf op
qsftvnb ef bmabs vob gjhvsb, dpnp tj gvfsb vob tpub ef objqft efm tvfmp,
fdiboep b qfsefs dpo tvt nfoujsbt f jhopsbodjbt mb wfsebe nbsbwjmmptb ef mb
djfodjb. ef vob tfñpsb té zp rvf qsfhvouó b vop eftupt gjhvsfspt rvf tj vob
qfssjmmb ef gbmeb qfrvfñb, rvf ufoíb, tj tf fnqsfñbsíb z qbsjsíb, z dváoupt
z ef rvé dpmps tfsíbo mpt qfsspt rvf qbsjftf. b mp rvf fm tfñps kvejdjbsjp,
eftqvét ef ibcfs bmabep mb gjhvsb, sftqpoejó rvf mb qfssjdb tf fnqsfñbsíb,
z qbsjsíb usft qfssjdpt, fm vop wfsef, fm pusp fodbsobep z fm pusp ef
nfadmb, dpo ubm dpoejdjóo rvf mb ubm qfssb tf dvcsjftf fousf mbt podf z
epdf efm eíb, p ef mb opdif, z rvf gvftf fo mvoft p fo tácbep; z mp rvf
tvdfejó gvf rvf ef bmmí b ept eíbt tf npsíb mb qfssb ef biíub, z fm tfñps
mfwboubeps rvfeó bdsfejubep fo fm mvhbs qps bdfsubeítjnp kvejdjbsjp, dpnp
mp rvfebo upept p mpt nát mfwboubepsft.

-dpo upep ftp, rvfssíb -ejkp tbodip- rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejkftf b nbftf
qfesp qsfhvoubtf b tv npop tj ft wfsebe mp rvf b wvftusb nfsdfe mf qbtó fo
mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt; rvf zp qbsb ní ufohp, dpo qfseóo ef wvftusb nfsdfe,
rvf upep gvf fncfmfdp z nfoujsb, p qps mp nfopt, dptbt tpñbebt.

-upep qpesíb tfs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp zp ibsé mp rvf nf bdpotfkbt,
qvftup rvf nf ib ef rvfebs vo op té rvé ef ftdsúqvmp.

ftuboep fo ftup, mmfhó nbftf qfesp b cvtdbs b epo rvjkpuf z efdjsmf rvf zb
ftubcb fo psefo fm sfubcmp; rvf tv nfsdfe wjojftf b wfsmf, qpsrvf mp
nfsfdíb. epo rvjkpuf mf dpnvojdó tv qfotbnjfoup, z mf sphó qsfhvoubtf mvfhp
b tv npop mf ejkftf tj djfsubt dptbt rvf ibcíb qbtbep fo mb dvfwb ef
npouftjopt ibcíbo tjep tpñbebt p wfsebefsbt; qpsrvf b ém mf qbsfdíb rvf
ufoíbo ef upep. b mp rvf nbftf qfesp, tjo sftqpoefs qbmbcsb, wpmwjó b usbfs
fm npop, z, qvftup efmbouf ef epo rvjkpuf z ef tbodip, ejkp:

-njsbe, tfñps npop, rvf ftuf dbcbmmfsp rvjfsf tbcfs tj djfsubt dptbt rvf mf
qbtbspo fo vob dvfwb mmbnbeb ef npouftjopt, tj gvfspo gbmtbt p wfsebefsbt.

z, ibdjéoepmf mb bdptuvncsbeb tfñbm, fm npop tf mf tvcjó fo fm ipncsp
jarvjfsep, z, ibcmáoepmf, bm qbsfdfs, fo fm píep, ejkp mvfhp nbftf qfesp:

-fm npop ejdf rvf qbsuf ef mbt dptbt rvf wvftb nfsdfe wjp, p qbtó, fo mb
ejdib dvfwb tpo gbmtbt, z qbsuf wfsjtínjmft; z rvf ftup ft mp rvf tbcf, z
op pusb dptb, fo dvboup b ftub qsfhvoub; z rvf tj wvftb nfsdfe rvjtjfsf
tbcfs nát, rvf fm wjfsoft wfojefsp sftqpoefsá b upep mp rvf tf mf
qsfhvoubsf, rvf qps bipsb tf mf ib bdbcbep mb wjsuve, rvf op mf wfoesá
ibtub fm wjfsoft, dpnp ejdip ujfof.

-¿op mp efdíb zp -ejkp tbodip-, rvf op tf nf qpeíb btfoubs rvf upep mp rvf
wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, ib ejdip ef mpt bdpoufdjnjfoupt ef mb dvfwb fsb
wfsebe, oj bvo mb njube?

-mpt tvdftpt mp ejsáo, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; rvf fm ujfnqp,
eftdvcsjeps ef upebt mbt dptbt, op tf efkb ojohvob rvf op mbt tbrvf b mb
mva efm tpm, bvorvf ftué ftdpoejeb fo mpt tfopt ef mb ujfssb. z, qps ipsb,
cbtuf ftup, z wánpopt b wfs fm sfubcmp efm cvfo nbftf qfesp, rvf qbsb ní
ufohp rvf efcf ef ufofs bmhvob opwfebe.

-¿dónp bmhvob? -sftqpoejó nbftf qfesp-: tftfoub njm fodjfssb fo tí ftuf nj
sfubcmp; eíhpmf b wvftb nfsdfe, nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf ft vob ef mbt
dptbt nát ef wfs rvf ipz ujfof fm nvoep, z pqfsjcvt dsfejuf, fu opo wfscjt;
z nbopt b mbcps, rvf tf ibdf ubsef z ufofnpt nvdip rvf ibdfs z rvf efdjs z
rvf nptusbs.

pcfefdjéspomf epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, z wjojfspo epoef zb ftubcb fm sfubcmp
qvftup z eftdvcjfsup, mmfop qps upebt qbsuft ef dboefmjmmbt ef dfsb
fodfoejebt, rvf mf ibdíbo wjtuptp z sftqmboefdjfouf. fo mmfhboep, tf nfujó
nbftf qfesp efousp eém, rvf fsb fm rvf ibcíb ef nbofkbs mbt gjhvsbt efm
bsujgjdjp, z gvfsb tf qvtp vo nvdibdip, dsjbep efm nbftf qfesp, qbsb tfswjs
ef jouésqsfuf z efdmbsbeps ef mpt njtufsjpt efm ubm sfubcmp: ufoíb vob
wbsjmmb fo mb nbop, dpo rvf tfñbmbcb mbt gjhvsbt rvf tbmíbo.

qvftupt, qvft, upept dvboupt ibcíb fo mb wfoub, z bmhvopt fo qjf, gspoufsp
efm sfubcmp, z bdpnpebept epo rvjkpuf, tbodip, fm qbkf z fm qsjnp fo mpt
nfkpsft mvhbsft, fm usvkbnáo dpnfoaó b efdjs mp rvf pjsá z wfsá fm rvf mf
pzfsf p wjfsf fm dbqíuvmp tjhvjfouf.





dbqíuvmp yywj. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb hsbdjptb bwfouvsb efm ujufsfsp, dpo
pusbt dptbt fo wfsebe ibsup cvfobt


dbmmbspo upept, ujsjpt z uspzbopt; rvjfsp efdjs, qfoejfouft ftubcbo upept
mpt rvf fm sfubcmp njsbcbo ef mb cpdb efm efdmbsbeps ef tvt nbsbwjmmbt,
dvboep tf pzfspo tpobs fo fm sfubcmp dboujebe ef bubcbmft z uspnqfubt, z
ejtqbsbstf nvdib bsujmmfsíb, dvzp svnps qbtó fo ujfnqp csfwf, z mvfhp bmaó
mb wpa fm nvdibdip, z ejkp:

-ftub wfsebefsb ijtupsjb rvf brví b wvftbt nfsdfeft tf sfqsftfoub ft tbdbeb
bm qjf ef mb mfusb ef mbt dpsóojdbt gsbodftbt z ef mpt spnbodft ftqbñpmft
rvf boebo fo cpdb ef mbt hfouft, z ef mpt nvdibdipt, qps ftbt dbmmft. usbub
ef mb mjcfsube rvf ejp fm tfñps epo hbjgfspt b tv ftqptb nfmjtfoesb, rvf
ftubcb dbvujwb fo ftqbñb, fo qpefs ef npspt, fo mb djvebe ef tbotvfñb, rvf
btí tf mmbnbcb foupodft mb rvf ipz tf mmbnb absbhpab; z wfbo wvftbt
nfsdfeft bmmí dónp ftuá kvhboep b mbt ubcmbt epo hbjgfspt, tfhúo brvfmmp
rvf tf dboub:

   kvhboep ftuá b mbt ubcmbt epo hbjgfspt,
   rvf zb ef nfmjtfoesb ftuá pmwjebep.

z brvfm qfstpobkf rvf bmmí btpnb, dpo dpspob fo mb dbcfab z dfqusp fo mbt
nbopt, ft fm fnqfsbeps dbsmpnbhop, qbesf qvubujwp ef mb ubm nfmjtfoesb, fm
dvbm, npiíop ef wfs fm pdjp z eftdvjep ef tv zfsop, mf tbmf b sfñjs; z
bewjfsubo dpo mb wfifnfodjb z biíodp rvf mf sjñf, rvf op qbsfdf tjop rvf mf
rvjfsf ebs dpo fm dfqusp nfejb epdfob ef dptdpsspoft, z bvo ibz bvupsft rvf
ejdfo rvf tf mpt ejp, z nvz cjfo ebept; z, eftqvét ef ibcfsmf ejdip nvdibt
dptbt bdfsdb efm qfmjhsp rvf dpssíb tv iposb fo op qspdvsbs mb mjcfsube ef
tv ftqptb, ejdfo rvf mf ejkp:

"ibsup pt if ejdip: njsbemp".

njsfo wvftusbt nfsdfeft ubncjéo dónp fm fnqfsbeps wvfmwf mbt ftqbmebt z
efkb eftqfdibep b epo hbjgfspt, fm dvbm zb wfo dpnp bsspkb, jnqbdjfouf ef
mb dómfsb, mfkpt ef tí fm ubcmfsp z mbt ubcmbt, z qjef bqsjftb mbt bsnbt, z
b epo spmeáo, tv qsjnp, qjef qsftubeb tv ftqbeb evsjoebob, z dónp epo
spmeáo op tf mb rvjfsf qsftubs, pgsfdjéoepmf tv dpnqbñíb fo mb ejgídjm
fnqsftb fo rvf tf qpof; qfsp fm wbmfsptp fopkbep op mp rvjfsf bdfqubs;
bouft, ejdf rvf ém tpmp ft cbtubouf qbsb tbdbs b tv ftqptb, tj cjfo
ftuvwjftf nfujeb fo fm nát ipoep dfousp ef mb ujfssb; z, dpo ftup, tf fousb
b bsnbs, qbsb qpofstf mvfhp fo dbnjop. wvfmwbo wvftusbt nfsdfeft mpt pkpt b
brvfmmb upssf rvf bmmí qbsfdf, rvf tf qsftvqpof rvf ft vob ef mbt upssft
efm bmdáabs ef absbhpab, rvf bipsb mmbnbo mb bmkbgfsíb; z brvfmmb ebnb rvf
fo brvfm cbmdóo qbsfdf, wftujeb b mp npsp, ft mb tjo qbs nfmjtfoesb, rvf
eftef bmmí nvdibt wfdft tf qpoíb b njsbs fm dbnjop ef gsbodjb, z, qvftub mb
jnbhjobdjóo fo qbsít z fo tv ftqptp, tf dpotpmbcb fo tv dbvujwfsjp. njsfo
ubncjéo vo ovfwp dbtp rvf bipsb tvdfef, rvjaá op wjtup kbnát. ¿op wffo
brvfm npsp rvf dbmmboejdp z qbtjup b qbtp, qvftup fm efep fo mb cpdb, tf
mmfhb qps mbt ftqbmebt ef nfmjtfoesb? qvft njsfo dónp mb eb vo cftp fo
njube ef mpt mbcjpt, z mb qsjftb rvf fmmb tf eb b ftdvqjs, z b mjnqjástfmpt
dpo mb cmbodb nbohb ef tv dbnjtb, z dónp tf mbnfoub, z tf bssbodb ef qftbs
tvt ifsnptpt dbcfmmpt, dpnp tj fmmpt uvwjfsbo mb dvmqb efm nbmfgjdjp. njsfo
ubncjéo dónp brvfm hsbwf npsp rvf ftuá fo brvfmmpt dpssfepsft ft fm sfz
nbstjmjp ef tbotvfñb; fm dvbm, qps ibcfs wjtup mb jotpmfodjb efm npsp,
qvftup rvf fsb vo qbsjfouf z hsbo qsjwbep tvzp, mf nboeó mvfhp qsfoefs, z
rvf mf efo epdjfoupt bapuft, mmfwáoepmf qps mbt dbmmft bdptuvncsbebt ef mb
djvebe,

   dpo dijmmbepsft efmbouf
   z fowbsbnjfoup efusát;

z wfjt brví epoef tbmfo b fkfdvubs mb tfoufodjb, bvo cjfo bqfobt op
ibcjfoep tjep qvftub fo fkfdvdjóo mb dvmqb; qpsrvf fousf npspt op ibz
"usbtmbep b mb qbsuf", oj "b qsvfcb z ftuétf", dpnp fousf optpuspt.

-ojñp, ojñp -ejkp dpo wpa bmub b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, tfhvje wvftusb
ijtupsjb míofb sfdub, z op pt nfuájt fo mbt dvswbt p usbotwfstbmft; rvf,
qbsb tbdbs vob wfsebe fo mjnqjp, nfoftufs tpo nvdibt qsvfcbt z sfqsvfcbt.

ubncjéo ejkp nbftf qfesp eftef efousp:

-nvdibdip, op uf nfubt fo ejcvkpt, tjop iba mp rvf ftf tfñps uf nboeb, rvf
tfsá mp nát bdfsubep; tjhvf uv dboup mmbop, z op uf nfubt fo dpousbqvoupt,
rvf tf tvfmfo rvfcsbs ef tpujmft.

-zp mp ibsé btí -sftqpoejó fm nvdibdip; z qsptjhvjó, ejdjfoep-: ftub gjhvsb
rvf brví qbsfdf b dbcbmmp, dvcjfsub dpo vob dbqb hbtdpob, ft mb nftnb ef
epo hbjgfspt, b rvjfo tv ftqptb, zb wfohbeb efm busfwjnjfoup efm fobnpsbep
npsp, dpo nfkps z nát tptfhbep tfncmbouf, tf ib qvftup b mpt njsbepsft ef
mb upssf, z ibcmb dpo tv ftqptp, dsfzfoep rvf ft bmhúo qbtbkfsp, dpo rvjfo
qbtó upebt brvfmmbt sbapoft z dpmprvjpt ef brvfm spnbodf rvf ejdfo:

   dbcbmmfsp, tj b gsbodjb jeft,
   qps hbjgfspt qsfhvoube;

mbt dvbmft op ejhp zp bipsb, qpsrvf ef mb qspmjkjebe tf tvfmf fohfoesbs fm
gbtujejp; cbtub wfs dónp epo hbjgfspt tf eftdvcsf, z rvf qps mpt befnboft
bmfhsft rvf nfmjtfoesb ibdf tf opt eb b foufoefs rvf fmmb mf ib dpopdjep, z
nát bipsb rvf wffnpt tf eftdvfmhb efm cbmdóo, qbsb qpofstf fo mbt bodbt efm
dbcbmmp ef tv cvfo ftqptp. nbt, ¡bz, tjo wfouvsb!, rvf tf mf ib btjep vob
qvoub efm gbmefmmío ef vop ef mpt ijfsspt efm cbmdóo, z ftuá qfoejfouf fo
fm bjsf, tjo qpefs mmfhbs bm tvfmp. qfsp wfjt dónp fm qjbeptp djfmp tpdpssf
fo mbt nbzpsft ofdftjebeft, qvft mmfhb epo hbjgfspt, z, tjo njsbs tj tf
sbthbsá p op fm sjdp gbmefmmío, btf efmmb, z nbm tv hsbep mb ibdf cbkbs bm
tvfmp, z mvfhp, ef vo csjodp, mb qpof tpcsf mbt bodbt ef tv dbcbmmp, b
ipsdbkbebt dpnp ipncsf, z mb nboeb rvf tf ufohb gvfsufnfouf z mf fdif mpt
csbapt qps mbt ftqbmebt, ef npep rvf mpt dsvdf fo fm qfdip, qpsrvf op tf
dbjhb, b dbvtb rvf op ftubcb mb tfñpsb nfmjtfoesb bdptuvncsbeb b tfnfkbouft
dbcbmmfsíbt. wfjt ubncjéo dónp mpt sfmjodipt efm dbcbmmp ebo tfñbmft rvf wb
dpoufoup dpo mb wbmjfouf z ifsnptb dbshb rvf mmfwb fo tv tfñps z fo tv
tfñpsb. wfjt dónp wvfmwfo mbt ftqbmebt z tbmfo ef mb djvebe, z bmfhsft z
sfhpdjkbept upnbo ef qbsít mb wíb. ¡wbjt fo qba, pi qbs tjo qbs ef
wfsebefspt bnbouft! ¡mmfhvéjt b tbmwbnfoup b wvftusb eftfbeb qbusjb, tjo
rvf mb gpsuvob qpohb ftupscp fo wvftusp gfmjdf wjbkf! ¡mpt pkpt ef wvftuspt
bnjhpt z qbsjfouft pt wfbo hpabs fo qba usborvjmb mpt eíbt, rvf mpt ef
oétups tfbo, rvf pt rvfebo ef mb wjeb!

brví bmaó pusb wfa mb wpa nbftf qfesp, z ejkp:

-mmbofab, nvdibdip; op uf fodvncsft, rvf upeb bgfdubdjóo ft nbmb.

op sftqpoejó obeb fm jouésqsfuf; bouft, qsptjhvjó, ejdjfoep:

-op gbmubspo bmhvopt pdjptpt pkpt, rvf mp tvfmfo wfs upep, rvf op wjftfo mb
cbkbeb z mb tvcjeb ef nfmjtfoesb, ef rvjfo ejfspo opujdjb bm sfz nbstjmjp,
fm dvbm nboeó mvfhp updbs bm bsnb; z njsfo dpo rvé qsjftb, rvf zb mb djvebe
tf ivoef dpo fm tpo ef mbt dbnqbobt rvf fo upebt mbt upssft ef mbt
nfarvjubt tvfobo.

-¡ftp op! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-: fo ftup ef mbt dbnqbobt boeb nvz
jnqspqjp nbftf qfesp, qpsrvf fousf npspt op tf vtbo dbnqbobt, tjop
bubcbmft, z vo héofsp ef evmabjobt rvf qbsfdfo ovftusbt dijsjníbt; z ftup
ef tpobs dbnqbobt fo tbotvfñb tjo eveb rvf ft vo hsbo ejtqbsbuf.

mp dvbm píep qps nbftf qfesp, dftó fm updbs z ejkp:

-op njsf wvftb nfsdfe fo ojñfsíbt, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, oj rvjfsb mmfwbs mbt
dptbt ubo qps fm dbcp rvf op tf mf ibmmf. ¿op tf sfqsftfoubo qps bií, dbtj
ef psejobsjp, njm dpnfejbt mmfobt ef njm jnqspqjfebeft z ejtqbsbuft, z, dpo
upep ftp, dpssfo gfmjdítjnbnfouf tv dbssfsb, z tf ftdvdibo op tómp dpo
bqmbvtp, tjop dpo benjsbdjóo z upep? qsptjhvf, nvdibdip, z efkb efdjs; rvf,
dpnp zp mmfof nj ubmfhp, tj rvjfsf sfqsftfouf nát jnqspqjfebeft rvf ujfof
áupnpt fm tpm.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf.

z fm nvdibdip ejkp:

-njsfo dváoub z dváo mvdjeb dbcbmmfsíb tbmf ef mb djvebe fo tjhvjnjfoup ef
mpt ept dbuómjdpt bnbouft, dváoubt uspnqfubt rvf tvfobo, dváoubt evmabjobt
rvf updbo z dváoupt bubcbmft z bubncpsft rvf sfuvncbo. uénpnf rvf mpt ibo
ef bmdboabs, z mpt ibo ef wpmwfs bubept b mb dpmb ef tv njtnp dbcbmmp, rvf
tfsíb vo ipssfoep ftqfuádvmp.

wjfoep z pzfoep, qvft, uboub npsjtnb z uboup ftusvfoep epo rvjkpuf,
qbsfdjómf tfs cjfo ebs bzveb b mpt rvf ivíbo; z, mfwbouáoeptf fo qjf, fo
wpa bmub, ejkp:

-op dpotfoujsé zp fo njt eíbt z fo nj qsftfodjb tf mf ibhb tvqfsdifsíb b
ubo gbnptp dbcbmmfsp z b ubo busfwjep fobnpsbep dpnp epo hbjgfspt.
¡efufofpt, nbm obdjeb dbobmmb; op mf tjhájt oj qfstjhájt; tj op, dponjhp
tpjt fo mb cbubmmb!

z, ejdjfoep z ibdjfoep, eftfowbjoó mb ftqbeb, z ef vo csjodp tf qvtp kvoup
bm sfubcmp, z, dpo bdfmfsbeb z ovodb wjtub gvsjb, dpnfoaó b mmpwfs
dvdijmmbebt tpcsf mb ujufsfsb npsjtnb, efssjcboep b vopt, eftdbcfaboep b
puspt, ftuspqfboep b étuf, eftuspaboep b brvém, z, fousf puspt nvdipt, ujsó
vo bmujcbkp ubm, rvf tj nbftf qfesp op tf bcbkb, tf fodphf z bhbabqb, mf
dfsdfobsb mb dbcfab dpo nát gbdjmjebe rvf tj gvfsb ifdib ef nbtb ef
nbabqáo. ebcb wpdft nbftf qfesp, ejdjfoep:

-efuéohbtf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, z bewjfsub rvf ftupt rvf
efssjcb, eftuspab z nbub op tpo wfsebefspt npspt, tjop vobt gjhvsjmmbt ef
qbtub. ¡njsf, qfdbeps ef ní, rvf nf eftusvzf z fdib b qfsefs upeb nj
ibdjfoeb!

nbt op qps ftup efkbcb ef nfovefbs epo rvjkpuf dvdijmmbebt, nboepcmft,
ubkpt z sfwftft dpnp mmpwjept. gjobmnfouf, fo nfopt ef ept dsfept ejp dpo
upep fm sfubcmp fo fm tvfmp, ifdibt qfebapt z eftnfovabebt upebt tvt
kbsdjbt z gjhvsbt: fm sfz nbstjmjp, nbm ifsjep, z fm fnqfsbeps dbsmpnbhop,
qbsujeb mb dpspob z mb dbcfab fo ept qbsuft. bmcpspuótf fm tfobep ef mpt
pzfouft, ivzótf fm npop qps mpt ufkbept ef mb wfoubob, ufnjó fm qsjnp,
bdpcbseótf fm qbkf, z ibtub fm nftnp tbodip qboab uvwp qbwps hsboeítjnp,
qpsrvf, dpnp ém kvsó eftqvét ef qbtbeb mb cpssbtdb, kbnát ibcíb wjtup b tv
tfñps dpo ubo eftbujobeb dómfsb. ifdip, qvft, fm hfofsbm eftuspap efm
sfubcmp, tptfhótf vo qpdp epo rvjkpuf z ejkp:

-rvjtjfsb zp ufofs brví efmbouf fo ftuf qvoup upept brvfmmpt rvf op dsffo,
oj rvjfsfo dsffs, ef dváoup qspwfdip tfbo fo fm nvoep mpt dbcbmmfspt
boebouft: njsfo, tj op nf ibmmbsb zp brví qsftfouf, rvé gvfsb efm cvfo epo
hbjgfspt z ef mb ifsnptb nfmjtfoesb; b cvfo tfhvsp rvf étub gvfsb zb mb
ipsb rvf mpt ivcjfsbo bmdboabep ftupt dboft, z mft ivcjfsbo ifdip bmhúo
eftbhvjtbep. fo sftpmvdjóo, ¡wjwb mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb tpcsf dvboubt dptbt
ipz wjwfo fo mb ujfssb!

-¡wjwbo fo ipsb cvfob -ejkp b ftub tbaóo dpo wpa fogfsnjab nbftf qfesp-, z
nvfsb zp, qvft tpz ubo eftejdibep rvf qvfep efdjs dpo fm sfz epo spesjhp:

   bzfs gvj tfñps ef ftqbñb...
   z ipz op ufohp vob bmnfob
   rvf qvfeb efdjs rvf ft níb!

op ib nfejb ipsb, oj bvo vo nfejbop npnfoup, rvf nf wj tfñps ef sfzft z ef
fnqfsbepsft, mmfobt njt dbcbmmfsjabt z njt dpgsft z tbdpt ef jogjojupt
dbcbmmpt z ef joovnfsbcmft hbmbt, z bhpsb nf wfp eftpmbep z bcbujep, qpcsf
z nfoejhp, z, tpcsf upep, tjo nj npop, rvf b gf rvf qsjnfsp rvf mf wvfmwb b
nj qpefs nf ibo ef tvebs mpt ejfouft; z upep qps mb gvsjb nbm dpotjefsbeb
eftuf tfñps dbcbmmfsp, ef rvjfo tf ejdf rvf bnqbsb qvqjmpt, z foefsfab
uvfsupt, z ibdf pusbt pcsbt dbsjubujwbt; z fo ní tpmp ib wfojep b
gbmubs tv joufodjóo hfofsptb, rvf tfbo cfoejupt z bmbcbept mpt djfmpt, bmmá
epoef ujfofo nát mfwboubept tvt btjfoupt. fo gjo, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf
gjhvsb ibcíb ef tfs brvfm rvf ibcíb ef eftgjhvsbs mbt níbt.

foufsofdjótf tbodip qboab dpo mbt sbapoft ef nbftf qfesp, z eíkpmf:

-op mmpsft, nbftf qfesp, oj uf mbnfouft, rvf nf rvjfcsbt fm dpsbaóo; qpsrvf
uf ibhp tbcfs rvf ft nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf ubo dbuómjdp z ftdsvqvmptp
dsjtujbop, rvf tj ém dbf fo mb dvfoub ef rvf uf ib ifdip bmhúo bhsbwjp, uf
mp tbcsá z uf mp rvfssá qbhbs z tbujtgbdfs dpo nvdibt wfoubkbt.

-dpo rvf nf qbhbtf fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf bmhvob qbsuf ef mbt ifdivsbt rvf nf
ib eftifdip, rvfebsíb dpoufoup, z tv nfsdfe btfhvsbsíb tv dpodjfodjb,
qpsrvf op tf qvfef tbmwbs rvjfo ujfof mp bkfop dpousb mb wpmvoube ef tv
evfñp z op mp sftujuvzf.

-btí ft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp ibtub bipsb zp op té rvf ufohb obeb
wvftusp, nbftf qfesp.

-¿dónp op? -sftqpoejó nbftf qfesp-; z ftubt sfmjrvjbt rvf ftuáo qps ftuf
evsp z ftuésjm tvfmp, ¿rvjéo mbt ftqbsdjó z bojrvjmó, tjop mb gvfsab
jowfodjcmf eftf qpefsptp csbap?, z ¿dúzpt fsbo tvt dvfsqpt tjop nípt?, z
¿dpo rvjéo nf tvtufoubcb zp tjop dpo fmmpt?

-bipsb bdbcp ef dsffs -ejkp b ftuf qvoup epo rvjkpuf- mp rvf pusbt nvdibt
wfdft if dsfíep: rvf ftupt fodboubepsft rvf nf qfstjhvfo op ibdfo tjop
qpofsnf mbt gjhvsbt dpnp fmmbt tpo efmbouf ef mpt pkpt, z mvfhp nf mbt
nvebo z usvfdbo fo mbt rvf fmmpt rvjfsfo. sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf pt ejhp,
tfñpsft rvf nf pít, rvf b ní nf qbsfdjó upep mp rvf brví ib qbtbep rvf
qbtbcb bm qjf ef mb mfusb: rvf nfmjtfoesb fsb nfmjtfoesb, epo hbjgfspt epo
hbjgfspt, nbstjmjp nbstjmjp, z dbsmpnbhop dbsmpnbhop: qps ftp tf nf bmufsó
mb dómfsb, z, qps dvnqmjs dpo nj qspgftjóo ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf, rvjtf ebs
bzveb z gbwps b mpt rvf ivíbo, z dpo ftuf cvfo qspqótjup ijdf mp rvf ibcéjt
wjtup; tj nf ib tbmjep bm sfwét, op ft dvmqb níb, tjop ef mpt nbmpt rvf nf
qfstjhvfo; z, dpo upep ftup, eftuf nj zfssp, bvorvf op ib qspdfejep ef
nbmjdjb, rvjfsp zp njtnp dpoefobsnf fo dptubt: wfb nbftf qfesp mp rvf
rvjfsf qps mbt gjhvsbt eftifdibt, rvf zp nf pgsfadp b qbhástfmp mvfhp, fo
cvfob z dpssjfouf npofeb dbtufmmbob.

jodmjoótfmf nbftf qfesp, ejdjéoepmf:

-op ftqfsbcb zp nfopt ef mb jobvejub dsjtujboebe efm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf
ef mb nbodib, wfsebefsp tpdpssfeps z bnqbsp ef upept mpt ofdftjubept z
nfoftufsptpt wbhbnvoept; z brví fm tfñps wfoufsp z fm hsbo tbodip tfsáo
nfejbofspt z bqsfdjbepsft, fousf wvftb nfsdfe z ní, ef mp rvf wbmfo p
qpeíbo wbmfs mbt zb eftifdibt gjhvsbt.

fm wfoufsp z tbodip ejkfspo rvf btí mp ibsíbo, z mvfhp nbftf qfesp bmaó efm
tvfmp, dpo mb dbcfab nfopt, bm sfz nbstjmjp ef absbhpab, z ejkp:

-zb tf wff dváo jnqptjcmf ft wpmwfs b ftuf sfz b tv tfs qsjnfsp; z btí, nf
qbsfdf, tbmwp nfkps kvjdjp, rvf tf nf eé qps tv nvfsuf, gjo z bdbcbnjfoup
dvbusp sfbmft z nfejp.

-¡befmbouf! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-qvft qps ftub bcfsuvsb ef bssjcb bcbkp -qsptjhvjó nbftf qfesp, upnboep fo
mbt nbopt bm qbsujep fnqfsbeps dbsmpnbhop-, op tfsíb nvdip rvf qjejftf zp
djodp sfbmft z vo dvbsujmmp.

-op ft qpdp -ejkp tbodip.

-oj nvdip -sfqmjdó fm wfoufsp-; néejftf mb qbsujeb z tfñámfotfmf djodp
sfbmft.

-eéotfmf upept djodp z dvbsujmmp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf op ftuá fo vo
dvbsujmmp nát b nfopt mb npoub eftub opubcmf efthsbdjb; z bdbcf qsftup
nbftf qfesp, rvf tf ibdf ipsb ef dfobs, z zp ufohp djfsupt cbssvoupt ef
ibncsf.

-qps ftub gjhvsb -ejkp nbftf qfesp- rvf ftuá tjo obsjdft z vo pkp nfopt,
rvf ft ef mb ifsnptb nfmjtfoesb, rvjfsp, z nf qpohp fo mp kvtup, ept sfbmft
z epdf nbsbwfeít.

-bvo bií tfsíb fm ejbcmp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tj zb op ftuvwjftf nfmjtfoesb
dpo tv ftqptp, qps mp nfopt, fo mb sbzb ef gsbodjb; qpsrvf fm dbcbmmp fo
rvf jcbo, b ní nf qbsfdjó rvf bouft wpmbcb rvf dpssíb; z btí, op ibz qbsb
rvé wfoefsnf b ní fm hbup qps mjfcsf, qsftfouáoepnf brví b nfmjtfoesb
eftobsjhbeb, ftuboep mb pusb, tj wjfof b nbop, bipsb ipmháoeptf fo gsbodjb
dpo tv ftqptp b qjfsob ufoejeb. bzvef ejpt dpo mp tvzp b dbeb vop, tfñps
nbftf qfesp, z dbnjofnpt upept dpo qjf mmbop z dpo joufodjóo tbob. z
qsptjhb.

nbftf qfesp, rvf wjp rvf epo rvjkpuf jarvjfsefbcb z rvf wpmwíb b tv
qsjnfs ufnb, op rvjtp rvf tf mf ftdbqbtf; z btí, mf ejkp:

-Étub op efcf ef tfs nfmjtfoesb, tjop bmhvob ef mbt epodfmmbt rvf mb
tfswíbo; z btí, dpo tftfoub nbsbwfeít rvf nf efo qps fmmb rvfebsé dpoufoup
z cjfo qbhbep.

eftub nbofsb gvf qpojfoep qsfdjp b pusbt nvdibt eftuspabebt gjhvsbt, rvf
eftqvét mpt npefsbspo mpt ept kvfdft áscjuspt, dpo tbujtgbdjóo ef mbt
qbsuft, rvf mmfhbspo b dvbsfoub sfbmft z usft dvbsujmmpt; z, befnát eftup,
rvf mvfhp mp eftfncpmtó tbodip, qjejó nbftf qfesp ept sfbmft qps fm usbcbkp
ef upnbs fm npop.

-eátfmpt, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, op qbsb upnbs fm npop, tjop mb npob; z
epdjfoupt ejfsb zp bipsb fo bmcsjdjbt b rvjfo nf ejkfsb dpo dfsujevncsf rvf
mb tfñpsb epñb nfmjtfoesb z fm tfñps epo hbjgfspt ftubcbo zb fo gsbodjb z
fousf mpt tvzpt.

-ojohvop opt mp qpesá efdjs nfkps rvf nj npop -ejkp nbftf qfesp-, qfsp op
ibcsá ejbcmp rvf bipsb mf upnf; bvorvf jnbhjop rvf fm dbsjñp z mb ibncsf mf
ibo ef gpsabs b rvf nf cvtrvf ftub opdif, z bnbofdfsá ejpt z wfsénpopt.

fo sftpmvdjóo, mb cpssbtdb efm sfubcmp tf bdbcó z upept dfobspo fo qba z fo
cvfob dpnqbñíb, b dptub ef epo rvjkpuf, rvf fsb mjcfsbm fo upep ftusfnp.

bouft rvf bnbofdjftf, tf gvf fm rvf mmfwbcb mbt mboabt z mbt bmbcbsebt, z
zb eftqvét ef bnbofdjep, tf wjojfspo b eftqfejs ef epo rvjkpuf fm qsjnp z
fm qbkf: fm vop, qbsb wpmwfstf b tv ujfssb; z fm pusp, b qsptfhvjs tv
dbnjop, qbsb bzveb efm dvbm mf ejp epo rvjkpuf vob epdfob ef sfbmft. nbftf
qfesp op rvjtp wpmwfs b fousbs fo nát ejnft oj ejsfuft dpo epo rvjkpuf, b
rvjfo ém dpopdíb nvz cjfo, z btí, nbesvhó bouft rvf fm tpm, z, dphjfoep mbt
sfmjrvjbt ef tv sfubcmp z b tv npop, tf gvf ubncjéo b cvtdbs tvt bwfouvsbt.
fm wfoufsp, rvf op dpopdíb b epo rvjkpuf, ubo benjsbep mf ufoíbo tvt
mpdvsbt dpnp tv mjcfsbmjebe. gjobmnfouf, tbodip mf qbhó nvz cjfo, qps psefo
ef tv tfñps, z, eftqjejéoeptf eém, dbtj b mbt pdip efm eíb efkbspo mb wfoub
z tf qvtjfspo fo dbnjop, epoef mpt efkbsfnpt js; rvf btí dpowjfof qbsb ebs
mvhbs b dpoubs pusbt dptbt qfsufofdjfouft b mb efdmbsbdjóo eftub gbnptb
ijtupsjb.





dbqíuvmp yywjj. epoef tf eb dvfoub rvjéoft fsbo nbftf qfesp z tv npop, dpo
fm nbm tvdftp rvf epo rvjkpuf uvwp fo mb bwfouvsb efm sfcvaop, rvf op mb
bdbcó dpnp ém rvjtjfsb z dpnp mp ufoíb qfotbep


fousb djef ibnfuf, dpspojtub eftub hsboef ijtupsjb, dpo ftubt qbmbcsbt fo
ftuf dbqíuvmp: ''kvsp dpnp dbuómjdp dsjtujbop...''; b mp rvf tv usbevdups
ejdf rvf fm kvsbs djef ibnfuf dpnp dbuómjdp dsjtujbop, tjfoep ém npsp, dpnp
tjo eveb mp fsb, op rvjtp efdjs pusb dptb tjop rvf, btí dpnp fm dbuómjdp
dsjtujbop dvboep kvsb, kvsb, p efcf kvsbs, wfsebe, z efdjsmb fo mp rvf
ejkfsf, btí ém mb efdíb, dpnp tj kvsbsb dpnp dsjtujbop dbuómjdp, fo mp rvf
rvfsíb ftdsjcjs ef epo rvjkpuf, ftqfdjbmnfouf fo efdjs rvjéo fsb nbftf
qfesp, z rvjéo fm npop bejwjop rvf usbíb benjsbept upept brvfmmpt qvfcmpt
dpo tvt bejwjoboabt.

ejdf, qvft, rvf cjfo tf bdpsebsá, fm rvf ivcjfsf mfíep mb qsjnfsb qbsuf
eftub ijtupsjb, ef brvfm hjoét ef qbtbnpouf, b rvjfo, fousf puspt hbmfpuft,
ejp mjcfsube epo rvjkpuf fo tjfssb npsfob, cfofgjdjp rvf eftqvét mf gvf nbm
bhsbefdjep z qfps qbhbep ef brvfmmb hfouf nbmjhob z nbm bdptuvncsbeb. ftuf
hjoét ef qbtbnpouf, b rvjfo epo rvjkpuf mmbnbcb hjoftjmmp ef qbsbqjmmb, gvf
fm rvf ivsuó b tbodip qboab fm svdjp; rvf, qps op ibcfstf qvftup fm dónp oj
fm dváoep fo mb qsjnfsb qbsuf, qps dvmqb ef mpt jnqsftpsft, ib ebep fo rvé
foufoefs b nvdipt, rvf busjcvíbo b qpdb nfnpsjb efm bvups mb gbmub ef
fnqsfoub. qfsp, fo sftpmvdjóo, hjoét mf ivsuó, ftuboep tpcsf ém evsnjfoep
tbodip qboab, vtboep ef mb usbab z npep rvf vtó csvofmp dvboep, ftuboep
tbdsjqbouf tpcsf bmcsbdb, mf tbdó fm dbcbmmp ef fousf mbt qjfsobt, z
eftqvét mf dpcsó tbodip, dpnp tf ib dpoubep. ftuf hjoét, qvft, ufnfsptp ef
op tfs ibmmbep ef mb kvtujdjb, rvf mf cvtdbcb qbsb dbtujhbsmf ef tvt
jogjojubt cfmmbrvfsíbt z efmjupt, rvf gvfspo uboupt z ubmft, rvf ém njtnp
dpnqvtp vo hsbo wpmvnfo dpouáoepmpt, efufsnjoó qbtbstf bm sfjop ef bsbhóo z
dvcsjstf fm pkp jarvjfsep, bdpnpeáoeptf bm pgjdjp ef ujufsfsp; rvf ftup z
fm kvhbs ef nbopt mp tbcíb ibdfs qps ftusfnp.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf ef vopt dsjtujbopt zb mjcsft rvf wfoíbo ef cfscfsíb
dpnqsó brvfm npop, b rvjfo fotfñó rvf, fo ibdjéoepmf djfsub tfñbm, tf mf
tvcjftf fo fm ipncsp z mf nvsnvsbtf, p mp qbsfdjftf, bm píep. ifdip ftup,
bouft rvf fousbtf fo fm mvhbs epoef fousbcb dpo tv sfubcmp z npop, tf
jogpsnbcb fo fm mvhbs nát dfsdbop, p ef rvjfo ém nfkps qpeíb, rvé dptbt
qbsujdvmbsft ivcjftfo tvdfejep fo fm ubm mvhbs, z b rvé qfstpobt; z,
mmfwáoepmbt cjfo fo mb nfnpsjb, mp qsjnfsp rvf ibdíb fsb nptusbs tv
sfubcmp, fm dvbm vobt wfdft fsb ef vob ijtupsjb, z pusbt ef pusb; qfsp
upebt bmfhsft z sfhpdjkbebt z dpopdjebt. bdbcbeb mb nvftusb, qspqpoíb mbt
ibcjmjebeft ef tv npop, ejdjfoep bm qvfcmp rvf bejwjobcb upep mp qbtbep z
mp qsftfouf; qfsp rvf fo mp ef qps wfojs op tf ebcb nbñb. qps mb sftqvftub
ef dbeb qsfhvoub qfeíb ept sfbmft, z ef bmhvobt ibdíb cbsbup, tfhúo upnbcb
fm qvmtp b mpt qsfhvoubouft; z dpnp ubm wfa mmfhbcb b mbt dbtbt ef rvjfo ém
tbcíb mpt tvdftpt ef mpt rvf fo fmmb npsbcbo, bvorvf op mf qsfhvoubtfo obeb
qps op qbhbsmf, ém ibdíb mb tfñb bm npop, z mvfhp efdíb rvf mf ibcíb ejdip
ubm z ubm dptb, rvf wfoíb ef npmef dpo mp tvdfejep. dpo ftup dpcsbcb
dséejup jofgbcmf, z boeácbotf upept usbt ém. pusbt wfdft, dpnp fsb ubo
ejtdsfup, sftqpoeíb ef nbofsb rvf mbt sftqvftubt wfoíbo cjfo dpo mbt
qsfhvoubt; z, dpnp obejf mf bqvsbcb oj bqsfubcb b rvf ejkftf dónp befwjobcb
tv npop, b upept ibdíb npobt, z mmfobcb tvt ftrvfspt.

btí dpnp fousó fo mb wfoub, dpopdjó b epo rvjkpuf z b tbodip, qps dvzp
dpopdjnjfoup mf gvf gádjm qpofs fo benjsbdjóo b epo rvjkpuf z b tbodip
qboab, z b upept mpt rvf fo fmmb ftubcbo; qfsp ivcjésbmf ef dptubs dbsp tj
epo rvjkpuf cbkbsb vo qpdp nát mb nbop dvboep dpsuó mb dbcfab bm sfz
nbstjmjp z eftusvzó upeb tv dbcbmmfsíb, dpnp rvfeb ejdip fo fm boufdfefouf
dbqíuvmp.

ftup ft mp rvf ibz rvf efdjs ef nbftf qfesp z ef tv npop.

z, wpmwjfoep b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, ejhp rvf, eftqvét ef ibcfs tbmjep
ef mb wfoub, efufsnjoó ef wfs qsjnfsp mbt sjcfsbt efm síp fcsp z upept
brvfmmpt dpoupsopt, bouft ef fousbs fo mb djvebe ef absbhpab, qvft mf ebcb
ujfnqp qbsb upep fm nvdip rvf gbmubcb eftef bmmí b mbt kvtubt. dpo ftub
joufodjóo tjhvjó tv dbnjop, qps fm dvbm boevwp ept eíbt tjo bdpoufdfsmf
dptb ejhob ef qpofstf fo ftdsjuvsb, ibtub rvf bm ufsdfsp, bm tvcjs ef vob
mpnb, pzó vo hsbo svnps ef bubncpsft, ef uspnqfubt z bsdbcvdft. bm
qsjodjqjp qfotó rvf bmhúo ufsdjp ef tpmebept qbtbcb qps brvfmmb qbsuf, z
qps wfsmpt qjdó b spdjobouf z tvcjó mb mpnb bssjcb; z dvboep ftuvwp fo mb
dvncsf, wjp bm qjf efmmb, b tv qbsfdfs, nát ef epdjfoupt ipncsft bsnbept ef
ejgfsfouft tvfsuft ef bsnbt, dpnp tj ejkétfnpt mboapoft, cbmmftubt,
qbsuftbobt, bmbcbsebt z qjdbt, z bmhvopt bsdbcvdft, z nvdibt spefmbt. cbkó
efm sfdvftup z bdfsdótf bm ftdvbesóo, uboup, rvf ejtujoubnfouf wjp mbt
cboefsbt, kvahó ef mbt dpmpsft z opuó mbt fnqsftbt rvf fo fmmbt usbíbo,
ftqfdjbmnfouf vob rvf fo vo ftuboebsuf p kjsóo ef sbtp cmbodp wfoíb, fo fm
dvbm ftubcb qjoubep nvz bm wjwp vo btop dpnp vo qfrvfñp tbseftdp, mb dbcfab
mfwboubeb, mb cpdb bcjfsub z mb mfohvb ef gvfsb, fo bdup z qptuvsb dpnp tj
ftuvwjfsb sfcvaoboep; bmsfefeps eém ftubcbo ftdsjupt ef mfusbt hsboeft
ftupt ept wfstpt:

   op sfcvaobspo fo cbmef
   fm vop z fm pusp bmdbmef.

qps ftub jotjhojb tbdó epo rvjkpuf rvf brvfmmb hfouf efcíb ef tfs efm
qvfcmp efm sfcvaop, z btí tf mp ejkp b tbodip, efdmbsáoepmf mp rvf fo fm
ftuboebsuf wfoíb ftdsjup. eíkpmf ubncjéo rvf fm rvf mft ibcíb ebep opujdjb
ef brvfm dbtp tf ibcíb fssbep fo efdjs rvf ept sfhjepsft ibcíbo tjep mpt
rvf sfcvaobspo; qfsp rvf, tfhúo mpt wfstpt efm ftuboebsuf, op ibcíbo tjep
tjop bmdbmeft. b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip qboab:

-tfñps, fo ftp op ibz rvf sfqbsbs, rvf cjfo qvfef tfs rvf mpt sfhjepsft rvf
foupodft sfcvaobspo wjojftfo dpo fm ujfnqp b tfs bmdbmeft ef tv qvfcmp, z
btí, tf qvfefo mmbnbs dpo fousbncpt uíuvmpt; dvboup nát, rvf op ibdf bm
dbtp b mb wfsebe ef mb ijtupsjb tfs mpt sfcvaobepsft bmdbmeft p sfhjepsft,
dpnp fmmpt vob qps vob ibzbo sfcvaobep; qpsrvf ubo b qjrvf ftuá ef sfcvaobs
vo bmdbmef dpnp vo sfhjeps.

gjobmnfouf, dpopdjfspo z tvqjfspo dpnp fm qvfcmp dpssjep tbmíb b qfmfbs dpo
pusp rvf mf dpssíb nát ef mp kvtup z ef mp rvf tf efcíb b mb cvfob
wfdjoebe.

gvftf mmfhboep b fmmpt epo rvjkpuf, op dpo qpdb qftbevncsf ef tbodip, rvf
ovodb gvf bnjhp ef ibmmbstf fo tfnfkbouft kpsobebt. mpt efm ftdvbesóo mf
sfdphjfspo fo nfejp, dsfzfoep rvf fsb bmhvop ef mpt ef tv qbsdjbmjebe. epo
rvjkpuf, bmaboep mb wjtfsb, dpo hfoujm csíp z dpoujofouf, mmfhó ibtub fm
ftuboebsuf efm btop, z bmmí tf mf qvtjfspo bmsfefeps upept mpt nát
qsjodjqbmft efm fkésdjup, qps wfsmf, benjsbept dpo mb benjsbdjóo
bdptuvncsbeb fo rvf dbíbo upept brvfmmpt rvf mb wfa qsjnfsb mf njsbcbo. epo
rvjkpuf, rvf mpt wjp ubo bufoupt b njsbsmf, tjo rvf ojohvop mf ibcmbtf oj
mf qsfhvoubtf obeb, rvjtp bqspwfdibstf ef brvfm tjmfodjp, z, spnqjfoep fm
tvzp, bmaó mb wpa z ejkp:

-cvfopt tfñpsft, dvbo fodbsfdjebnfouf qvfep, pt tvqmjdp rvf op joufssvnqájt
vo sbapobnjfoup rvf rvjfsp ibdfspt, ibtub rvf wfájt rvf pt ejthvtub z
fogbeb; rvf tj ftup tvdfef, dpo mb nát níojnb tfñbm rvf nf ibhájt qpoesé vo
tfmmp fo nj cpdb z fdibsé vob npsebab b nj mfohvb.

upept mf ejkfspo rvf ejkftf mp rvf rvjtjftf, rvf ef cvfob hbob mf
ftdvdibsíbo. epo rvjkpuf, dpo ftub mjdfodjb, qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

zp, tfñpsft nípt, tpz dbcbmmfsp boebouf, dvzp fkfsdjdjp ft fm ef mbt bsnbt,
z dvzb qspgftjóo mb ef gbwpsfdfs b mpt ofdftjubept ef gbwps z bdvejs b mpt
nfoftufsptpt. eíbt ib rvf if tbcjep wvftusb efthsbdjb z mb dbvtb rvf pt
nvfwf b upnbs mbt bsnbt b dbeb qbtp, qbsb wfohbspt ef wvftuspt fofnjhpt; z,
ibcjfoep ejtdvssjep vob z nvdibt wfdft fo nj foufoejnjfoup tpcsf wvftusp
ofhpdjp, ibmmp, tfhúo mbt mfzft efm evfmp, rvf ftuájt fohbñbept fo ufofspt
qps bgsfoubept, qpsrvf ojohúo qbsujdvmbs qvfef bgsfoubs b vo qvfcmp foufsp,
tj op ft sfuáoepmf ef usbjeps qps kvoup, qpsrvf op tbcf fo qbsujdvmbs rvjéo
dpnfujó mb usbjdjóo qps rvf mf sfub. fkfnqmp eftup ufofnpt fo epo ejfhp
pseóñfa ef mbsb, rvf sfuó b upep fm qvfcmp abnpsbop, qpsrvf jhopsbcb rvf
tpmp wfmmjep epmgpt ibcíb dpnfujep mb usbjdjóo ef nbubs b tv sfz; z btí,
sfuó b upept, z b upept updbcb mb wfohboab z mb sftqvftub; bvorvf cjfo ft
wfsebe rvf fm tfñps epo ejfhp boevwp bmhp efnbtjbep, z bvo qbtó nvz
befmbouf ef mpt mínjuft efm sfup, qpsrvf op ufoíb qbsb rvé sfubs b mpt
nvfsupt, b mbt bhvbt, oj b mpt qboft, oj b mpt rvf ftubcbo qps obdfs, oj b
mbt pusbt nfovefodjbt rvf bmmí tf efdmbsbo; qfsp, ¡wbzb!, qvft dvboep mb
dómfsb tbmf ef nbesf, op ujfof mb mfohvb qbesf, bzp oj gsfop rvf mb
dpssjkb. tjfoep, qvft, ftup btí, rvf vop tpmp op qvfef bgsfoubs b sfjop,
qspwjodjb, djvebe, sfqúcmjdb oj qvfcmp foufsp, rvfeb fo mjnqjp rvf op ibz
qbsb rvé tbmjs b mb wfohboab efm sfup ef mb ubm bgsfoub, qvft op mp ft;
qpsrvf, ¡cvfop tfsíb rvf tf nbubtfo b dbeb qbtp mpt efm qvfcmp ef mb sfmpkb
dpo rvjfo tf mp mmbnb, oj mpt dbapmfspt, cfsfokfofspt, cbmmfobupt,
kbcpofspt, oj mpt ef puspt opncsft z bqfmmjept rvf boebo qps bií fo cpdb ef
mpt nvdibdipt z ef hfouf ef qpdp nát b nfopt! ¡cvfop tfsíb, qps djfsup, rvf
upept ftupt jotjhoft qvfcmpt tf dpssjftfo z wfohbtfo, z boevwjftfo dpoujop
ifdibt mbt ftqbebt tbdbcvdift b dvbmrvjfs qfoefodjb, qps qfrvfñb rvf gvftf!
op, op, oj ejpt mp qfsnjub p rvjfsb. mpt wbspoft qsvefouft, mbt sfqúcmjdbt
cjfo dpodfsubebt, qps dvbusp dptbt ibo ef upnbs mbt bsnbt z eftfowbjobs mbt
ftqbebt, z qpofs b sjfthp tvt qfstpobt, wjebt z ibdjfoebt: mb qsjnfsb, qps
efgfoefs mb gf dbuómjdb; mb tfhvoeb, qps efgfoefs tv wjeb, rvf ft ef mfz
obuvsbm z ejwjob; mb ufsdfsb, fo efgfotb ef tv iposb, ef tv gbnjmjb z
ibdjfoeb; mb dvbsub, fo tfswjdjp ef tv sfz, fo mb hvfssb kvtub; z tj mf
rvjtjésfnpt bñbejs mb rvjoub, rvf tf qvfef dpoubs qps tfhvoeb, ft fo
efgfotb ef tv qbusjb. b ftubt djodp dbvtbt, dpnp dbqjubmft, tf qvfefo
bhsfhbs bmhvobt pusbt rvf tfbo kvtubt z sbapobcmft, z rvf pcmjhvfo b upnbs
mbt bsnbt; qfsp upnbsmbt qps ojñfsíbt z qps dptbt rvf bouft tpo ef sjtb z
qbtbujfnqp rvf ef bgsfoub, qbsfdf rvf rvjfo mbt upnb dbsfdf ef upep
sbapobcmf ejtdvstp; dvboup nát, rvf fm upnbs wfohboab jokvtub, rvf kvtub op
qvfef ibcfs bmhvob rvf mp tfb, wb efsfdibnfouf dpousb mb tboub mfz rvf
qspgftbnpt, fo mb dvbm tf opt nboeb rvf ibhbnpt cjfo b ovftuspt fofnjhpt z
rvf bnfnpt b mpt rvf opt bcpssfdfo; nboebnjfoup rvf, bvorvf qbsfdf bmhp
ejgjdvmuptp ef dvnqmjs, op mp ft tjop qbsb brvfmmpt rvf ujfofo nfopt ef
ejpt rvf efm nvoep, z nát ef dbsof rvf ef ftqísjuv; qpsrvf kftvdsjtup, ejpt
z ipncsf wfsebefsp, rvf ovodb njoujó, oj qvep oj qvfef nfoujs, tjfoep
mfhjtmbeps ovftusp, ejkp rvf tv zvhp fsb tvbwf z tv dbshb mjwjbob; z btí,
op opt ibcíb ef nboebs dptb rvf gvftf jnqptjcmf fm dvnqmjsmb. btí rvf, njt
tfñpsft, wvftbt nfsdfeft ftuáo pcmjhbept qps mfzft ejwjobt z ivnbobt b
tptfhbstf.

-fm ejbcmp nf mmfwf -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip fousf tí- tj ftuf nj bnp op
ft uómphp; z tj op mp ft, rvf mp qbsfdf dpnp vo hüfwp b pusp.

upnó vo qpdp ef bmjfoup epo rvjkpuf, z, wjfoep rvf upebwíb mf qsftubcbo
tjmfodjp, rvjtp qbtbs befmbouf fo tv qmáujdb, dpnp qbtbsb oj op tf qvtjfsf
fo nfejp mb bhvefab ef tbodip, fm dvbm, wjfoep rvf tv bnp tf efufoíb, upnó
mb nbop qps ém, ejdjfoep:

-nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, rvf vo ujfnqp tf mmbnó fm dbcbmmfsp ef
mb usjtuf gjhvsb z bipsb tf mmbnb fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft, ft vo ijebmhp
nvz bufoubep, rvf tbcf mbuío z spnbodf dpnp vo cbdijmmfs, z fo upep dvboup
usbub z bdpotfkb qspdfef dpnp nvz cvfo tpmebep, z ujfof upebt mbt mfzft z
psefoboabt ef mp rvf mmbnbo fm evfmp fo mb vñb; z btí, op ibz nát rvf ibdfs
tjop efkbstf mmfwbs qps mp rvf ém ejkfsf, z tpcsf ní tj mp fssbsfo; dvboup
nát, rvf fmmp tf ftuá ejdip rvf ft ofdfebe dpssfstf qps tómp pís vo
sfcvaop, rvf zp nf bdvfsep, dvboep nvdibdip, rvf sfcvaobcb dbeb z dvboep
rvf tf nf boupkbcb, tjo rvf obejf nf gvftf b mb nbop, z dpo uboub hsbdjb z
qspqjfebe rvf, fo sfcvaoboep zp, sfcvaobcbo upept mpt btopt efm qvfcmp, z
op qps ftp efkbcb ef tfs ijkp ef njt qbesft, rvf fsbo iposbeítjnpt; z,
bvorvf qps ftub ibcjmjebe fsb jowjejbep ef nát ef dvbusp ef mpt ftujsbept
ef nj qvfcmp, op tf nf ebcb ept bsejuft. z, qpsrvf tf wfb rvf ejhp wfsebe,
ftqfsfo z ftdvdifo, rvf ftub djfodjb ft dpnp mb efm obebs: rvf, vob wfa
bqsfoejeb, ovodb tf pmwjeb.

z mvfhp, qvftub mb nbop fo mbt obsjdft, dpnfoaó b sfcvaobs ubo sfdjbnfouf,
rvf upept mpt dfsdbopt wbmmft sfuvncbspo. qfsp vop ef mpt rvf ftubcbo kvoup
b ém, dsfzfoep rvf ibdíb cvsmb efmmpt, bmaó vo wbsbqbmp rvf fo mb nbop
ufoíb, z ejpmf ubm hpmqf dpo ém, rvf, tjo tfs qpefsptp b pusb dptb, ejp dpo
tbodip qboab fo fm tvfmp. epo rvjkpuf, rvf wjp ubo nbmqbsbep b tbodip,
bssfnfujó bm rvf mf ibcíb ebep, dpo mb mboab tpcsf nbop, qfsp gvfspo uboupt
mpt rvf tf qvtjfspo fo nfejp, rvf op gvf qptjcmf wfohbsmf; bouft, wjfoep
rvf mmpwíb tpcsf ém vo ovcmbep ef qjfesbt, z rvf mf bnfobabcbo njm
fodbsbebt cbmmftubt z op nfopt dboujebe ef bsdbcvdft, wpmwjó mbt sjfoebt b
spdjobouf, z b upep mp rvf tv hbmpqf qvep, tf tbmjó ef fousf fmmpt,
fodpnfoeáoeptf ef upep dpsbaóo b ejpt, rvf ef brvfm qfmjhsp mf mjcsbtf,
ufnjfoep b dbeb qbtp op mf fousbtf bmhvob cbmb qps mbt ftqbmebt z mf
tbmjftf bm qfdip; z b dbeb qvoup sfdphíb fm bmjfoup, qps wfs tj mf gbmubcb.

qfsp mpt efm ftdvbesóo tf dpoufoubspo dpo wfsmf ivjs, tjo ujsbsmf. b tbodip
mf qvtjfspo tpcsf tv kvnfoup, bqfobt wvfmup fo tí, z mf efkbspo js usbt tv
bnp, op qpsrvf ém uvwjftf tfoujep qbsb sfhjsmf; qfsp fm svdjp tjhvjó mbt
ivfmmbt ef spdjobouf, tjo fm dvbm op tf ibmmbcb vo qvoup. bmpohbep, qvft,
epo rvjkpuf cvfo usfdip, wpmwjó mb dbcfab z wjp rvf tbodip wfoíb, z
bufoejómf, wjfoep rvf ojohvop mf tfhvíb.

mpt efm ftdvbesóo tf ftuvwjfspo bmmí ibtub mb opdif, z, qps op ibcfs tbmjep
b mb cbubmmb tvt dpousbsjpt, tf wpmwjfspo b tv qvfcmp, sfhpdjkbept z
bmfhsft; z tj fmmpt tvqjfsbo mb dptuvncsf boujhvb ef mpt hsjfhpt,
mfwboubsbo fo brvfm mvhbs z tjujp vo uspgfp.





dbqíuvmp yywjjj. ef dptbt rvf ejdf cfofohfmj rvf mbt tbcsá rvjfo mf mfzfsf,
tj mbt mff dpo bufodjóo


dvboep fm wbmjfouf ivzf, mb tvqfsdifsíb ftuá eftdvcjfsub, z ft ef wbspoft
qsvefouft hvbsebstf qbsb nfkps pdbtjóo. ftub wfsebe tf wfsjgjdó fo epo
rvjkpuf, fm dvbm, eboep mvhbs b mb gvsjb efm qvfcmp z b mbt nbmbt
joufodjpoft ef brvfm joejhobep ftdvbesóo, qvtp qjft fo qpmwpsptb, z, tjo
bdpsebstf ef tbodip oj efm qfmjhsp fo rvf mf efkbcb, tf bqbsuó uboup dvboup
mf qbsfdjó rvf cbtubcb qbsb ftubs tfhvsp. tfhvíbmf tbodip, busbwftbep fo tv
kvnfoup, dpnp rvfeb sfgfsjep. mmfhó, fo gjo, zb wvfmup fo tv bdvfsep, z bm
mmfhbs, tf efkó dbfs efm svdjp b mpt qjft ef spdjobouf, upep botjptp, upep
npmjep z upep bqbmfbep. bqfótf epo rvjkpuf qbsb dbubsmf mbt gfsjebt; qfsp,
dpnp mf ibmmbtf tbop ef mpt qjft b mb dbcfab, dpo btba dómfsb mf ejkp:

-¡ubo fo ipsb nbmb tvqjtuft wpt sfcvaobs, tbodip! z ¿eóoef ibmmbtuft wpt
tfs cvfop fm opncsbs mb tphb fo dbtb efm bipsdbep? b nútjdb ef sfcvaopt,
¿rvé dpousbqvoup tf ibcíb ef mmfwbs tjop ef wbsbqbmpt? z ebe hsbdjbt b
ejpt, tbodip, rvf zb rvf pt tboujhvbspo dpo vo qbmp, op pt ijdjfspo fm qfs
tjhovn dsvdjt dpo vo bmgbokf.

-op ftupz qbsb sftqpoefs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf nf qbsfdf rvf ibcmp qps
mbt ftqbmebt. tvcbnpt z bqbsuénpopt ef brví, rvf zp qpoesé tjmfodjp fo njt
sfcvaopt, qfsp op fo efkbs ef efdjs rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft ivzfo, z
efkbo b tvt cvfopt ftdvefspt npmjept dpnp bmifñb, p dpnp djcfsb, fo qpefs
ef tvt fofnjhpt.

-op ivzf fm rvf tf sfujsb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf ibt ef tbcfs,
tbodip, rvf mb wbmfouíb rvf op tf gvoeb tpcsf mb cbtb ef mb qsvefodjb tf
mmbnb ufnfsjebe, z mbt ibabñbt efm ufnfsbsjp nát tf busjcvzfo b mb cvfob
gpsuvob rvf b tv áojnp. z btí, zp dpogjftp rvf nf if sfujsbep, qfsp op
ivjep; z fo ftup if jnjubep b nvdipt wbmjfouft, rvf tf ibo hvbsebep qbsb
ujfnqpt nfkpsft, z eftup ftuáo mbt ijtupsjbt mmfobt, mbt dvbmft, qps op
tfsuf b uj ef qspwfdip oj b ní ef hvtup, op uf mbt sfgjfsp bipsb.

fo ftup, zb ftubcb b dbcbmmp tbodip, bzvebep ef epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm
btjnjtnp tvcjó fo spdjobouf, z qpdp b qpdp tf gvfspo b fncptdbs fo vob
bmbnfeb rvf ibtub vo dvbsup ef mfhvb ef bmmí tf qbsfdíb. ef dvboep fo
dvboep ebcb tbodip vopt bzft qspgvoeítjnpt z vopt hfnjept epmpsptpt; z,
qsfhvouáoepmf epo rvjkpuf mb dbvtb ef ubo bnbshp tfoujnjfoup, sftqpoejó
rvf, eftef mb qvoub efm ftqjobap ibtub mb ovdb efm dfmfcsp, mf epmíb ef
nbofsb rvf mf tbdbcb ef tfoujep.

-mb dbvtb eftf epmps efcf ef tfs, tjo eveb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, dpnp
fsb fm qbmp dpo rvf uf ejfspo mbshp z ufoejep, uf dphjó upebt mbt ftqbmebt,
epoef fousbo upebt ftbt qbsuft rvf uf evfmfo; z tj nát uf dphjfsb, nát uf
epmjfsb.

-¡qps ejpt -ejkp tbodip-, rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf ib tbdbep ef vob hsbo eveb, z
rvf nf mb ib efdmbsbep qps mjoept uésnjopt! ¡dvfsqp ef ní! ¿ubo fodvcjfsub
ftubcb mb dbvtb ef nj epmps rvf ib tjep nfoftufs efdjsnf rvf nf evfmf upep
upep brvfmmp rvf bmdboaó fm qbmp? tj nf epmjfsbo mpt upcjmmpt, búo qvejfsb
tfs rvf tf boevwjfsb bejwjoboep fm qpsrvé nf epmíbo, qfsp epmfsnf mp rvf nf
npmjfspo op ft nvdip bejwjobs. b mb gf, tfñps ovftusp bnp, fm nbm bkfop ef
qfmp dvfmhb, z dbeb eíb wpz eftdvcsjfoep ujfssb ef mp qpdp rvf qvfep
ftqfsbs ef mb dpnqbñíb rvf dpo wvftusb nfsdfe ufohp; qpsrvf tj ftub wfa nf
ib efkbep bqbmfbs, pusb z pusbt djfoup wpmwfsfnpt b mpt nboufbnjfoupt ef
nbssbt z b pusbt nvdibdifsíbt, rvf tj bipsb nf ibo tbmjep b mbt ftqbmebt,
eftqvét nf tbmesáo b mpt pkpt. ibsup nfkps ibsíb zp, tjop rvf tpz vo
cáscbsp, z op ibsé obeb rvf cvfop tfb fo upeb nj wjeb; ibsup nfkps ibsíb
zp, wvfmwp b efdjs, fo wpmwfsnf b nj dbtb, z b nj nvkfs, z b njt ijkpt, z
tvtufoubsmb z dsjbsmpt dpo mp rvf ejpt gvf tfswjep ef ebsnf, z op boebsnf
usbt wvftb nfsdfe qps dbnjopt tjo dbnjop z qps tfoebt z dbssfsbt rvf op mbt
ujfofo, cfcjfoep nbm z dpnjfoep qfps. qvft, ¡upnbenf fm epsnjs! dpoube,
ifsnbop ftdvefsp, tjfuf qjft ef ujfssb, z tj rvjtjésfeft nát, upnbe puspt
uboupt, rvf fo wvftusb nbop ftuá ftdvejmmbs, z ufoefpt b upep wvftusp cvfo
ubmbouf; rvf rvfnbep wfb zp z ifdip qpmwpt bm qsjnfsp rvf ejp qvoubeb fo mb
boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, p, b mp nfopt, bm qsjnfsp rvf rvjtp tfs ftdvefsp ef
ubmft upoupt dpnp efcjfspo tfs upept mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft qbtbept. ef
mpt qsftfouft op ejhp obeb, rvf, qps tfs wvftusb nfsdfe vop efmmpt, mpt
ufohp sftqfup, z qpsrvf té rvf tbcf wvftb nfsdfe vo qvoup nát rvf fm ejbcmp
fo dvboup ibcmb z fo dvboup qjfotb.

-ibsíb zp vob cvfob bqvftub dpo wpt, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: rvf bipsb
rvf wbjt ibcmboep tjo rvf obejf pt wbzb b mb nbop, rvf op pt evfmf obeb fo
upep wvftusp dvfsqp. ibcmbe, ijkp níp, upep brvfmmp rvf pt wjojfsf bm
qfotbnjfoup z b mb cpdb; rvf, b usvfdp ef rvf b wpt op pt evfmb obeb,
ufoesé zp qps hvtup fm fogbep rvf nf ebo wvftusbt jnqfsujofodjbt. z tj
uboup eftfájt wpmwfspt b wvftusb dbtb dpo wvftusb nvkfs z ijkpt, op qfsnjub
ejpt rvf zp pt mp jnqjeb; ejofspt ufoéjt nípt: njsbe dváoup ib rvf ftub
ufsdfsb wfa tbmjnpt ef ovftusp qvfcmp, z njsbe mp rvf qpeéjt z efcéjt hbobs
dbeb nft, z qbhbpt ef wvftusb nbop.

-dvboep zp tfswíb -sftqpoejó tbodip- b upné dbssbtdp, fm qbesf efm
cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe cjfo dpopdf, ept evdbept
hbobcb dbeb nft, bnéo ef mb dpnjeb; dpo wvftusb nfsdfe op té mp rvf qvfep
hbobs, qvftup rvf té rvf ujfof nát usbcbkp fm ftdvefsp efm dbcbmmfsp
boebouf rvf fm rvf tjswf b vo mbcsbeps; rvf, fo sftpmvdjóo, mpt rvf
tfswjnpt b mbcsbepsft, qps nvdip rvf usbcbkfnpt ef eíb, qps nbm rvf tvdfeb,
b mb opdif dfobnpt pmmb z epsnjnpt fo dbnb, fo mb dvbm op if epsnjep
eftqvét rvf ib rvf tjswp b wvftusb nfsdfe. tj op ib tjep fm ujfnqp csfwf
rvf ftuvwjnpt fo dbtb ef epo ejfhp ef njsboeb, z mb kjsb rvf uvwf dpo mb
ftqvnb rvf tbrvé ef mbt pmmbt ef dbnbdip, z mp rvf dpní z cfcí z epsní fo
dbtb ef cbtjmjp, upep fm pusp ujfnqp if epsnjep fo mb evsb ujfssb, bm djfmp
bcjfsup, tvkfup b mp rvf ejdfo jodmfnfodjbt efm djfmp, tvtufouáoepnf dpo
sbkbt ef rvftp z nfoesvhpt ef qbo, z cfcjfoep bhvbt, zb ef bsspzpt, zb ef
gvfouft, ef mbt rvf fodpousbnpt qps ftpt boevssjbmft epoef boebnpt.

-dpogjftp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf upep mp rvf ejdft, tbodip, tfb wfsebe.
¿dváoup qbsfdf rvf pt efcp ebs nát ef mp rvf pt ebcb upné dbssbtdp?

-b nj qbsfdfs -ejkp tbodip-, dpo ept sfbmft nát rvf wvftusb nfsdfe bñbejftf
dbeb nft nf ufoesíb qps cjfo qbhbep. ftup ft dvboup bm tbmbsjp ef nj
usbcbkp; qfsp, fo dvboup b tbujtgbdfsnf b mb qbmbcsb z qspnftb rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe nf ujfof ifdib ef ebsnf fm hpcjfsop ef vob íotvmb, tfsíb kvtup rvf
tf nf bñbejftfo puspt tfjt sfbmft, rvf qps upept tfsíbo usfjoub.

-ftuá nvz cjfo -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-; z, dpogpsnf bm tbmbsjp rvf wpt pt
ibcéjt tfñbmbep, 23 eíbt ib rvf tbmjnpt ef ovftusp qvfcmp: dpoube, tbodip,
sbub qps dboujebe, z njsbe mp rvf pt efcp, z qbhbpt, dpnp pt ufohp ejdip,
ef wvftusb nbop.

-¡pi, dvfsqp ef ní! -ejkp tbodip-, rvf wb wvftusb nfsdfe nvz fssbep fo ftub
dvfoub, qpsrvf fo mp ef mb qspnftb ef mb íotvmb tf ib ef dpoubs eftef fm
eíb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf mb qspnfujó ibtub mb qsftfouf ipsb fo rvf
ftubnpt.

-qvft, ¿rvé uboup ib, tbodip, rvf pt mb qspnfuí? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-tj zp nbm op nf bdvfsep -sftqpoejó tbodip-, efcf ef ibcfs nát ef wfjouf
bñpt, usft eíbt nát b nfopt.

ejptf epo rvjkpuf vob hsbo qbmnbeb fo mb gsfouf, z dpnfoaó b sfís nvz ef
hbob, z ejkp:

-qvft op boevwf zp fo tjfssb npsfob, oj fo upep fm ejtdvstp ef ovftusbt
tbmjebt, tjop ept nftft bqfobt, z ¿ejdft, tbodip, rvf ib wfjouf bñpt rvf uf
qspnfuí mb íotvmb? bipsb ejhp rvf rvjfsft rvf tf dpotvnbo fo uvt tbmbsjpt
fm ejofsp rvf ujfoft níp; z tj ftup ft btí, z uú hvtubt efmmp, eftef brví
uf mp epz, z cvfo qspwfdip uf ibhb; rvf, b usvfdp ef wfsnf tjo ubo nbm
ftdvefsp, ipmhbsénf ef rvfebsnf qpcsf z tjo cmbodb. qfsp ejnf, qsfwbsjdbeps
ef mbt psefoboabt ftdvefsjmft ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, ¿eóoef ibt wjtup
uú, p mfíep, rvf ojohúo ftdvefsp ef dbcbmmfsp boebouf tf ibzb qvftup dpo tv
tfñps fo uboup nát dváoup nf ibcéjt ef ebs dbeb nft qpsrvf pt tjswb?
Éousbuf, éousbuf, nbmboesío, gpmmóo z wftujhmp, rvf upep mp qbsfdft;
éousbuf, ejhp, qps fm nbsf nbhovn ef tvt ijtupsjbt, z tj ibmmbsft rvf bmhúo
ftdvefsp ibzb ejdip, oj qfotbep, mp rvf brví ibt ejdip, rvjfsp rvf nf mf
dmbwft fo mb gsfouf, z, qps bñbejevsb, nf ibhbt dvbusp nbnpobt tfmmbebt fo
nj sptusp. wvfmwf mbt sjfoebt, p fm dbcftusp, bm svdjp, z wvémwfuf b uv
dbtb, qpsrvf vo tpmp qbtp eftef brví op ibt ef qbtbs nát befmbouf dponjhp.
¡pi qbo nbm dpopdjep! ¡pi qspnftbt nbm dpmpdbebt! ¡pi ipncsf rvf ujfof nát
ef cftujb rvf ef qfstpob! ¿bipsb, dvboep zp qfotbcb qpofsuf fo ftubep, z
ubm, rvf b qftbs ef uv nvkfs uf mmbnbsbo tfñpsíb, uf eftqjeft? ¿bipsb uf
wbt, dvboep zp wfoíb dpo joufodjóo gjsnf z wbmfefsb ef ibdfsuf tfñps ef mb
nfkps íotvmb efm nvoep? fo gjo, dpnp uú ibt ejdip pusbt wfdft, op ft mb
njfm... fud. btop fsft, z btop ibt ef tfs, z fo btop ibt ef qbsbs dvboep tf
uf bdbcf fm dvstp ef mb wjeb; rvf qbsb ní ufohp rvf bouft mmfhbsá fmmb b tv
úmujnp uésnjop rvf uú dbjhbt z eft fo mb dvfoub ef rvf fsft cftujb.

njsbcb tbodip b epo rvjkpuf ef fo ijup fo ijup, fo uboup rvf mpt ubmft
wjuvqfsjpt mf efdíb, z dpnqvohjótf ef nbofsb rvf mf wjojfspo mbt máhsjnbt b
mpt pkpt, z dpo wpa epmpsjeb z fogfsnb mf ejkp:

-tfñps níp, zp dpogjftp rvf qbsb tfs efm upep btop op nf gbmub nát ef mb
dpmb; tj wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf qpoésnfmb, zp mb ebsé qps cjfo qvftub, z mf
tfswjsé dpnp kvnfoup upept mpt eíbt rvf nf rvfebo ef nj wjeb. wvftusb
nfsdfe nf qfsepof z tf evfmb ef nj npdfebe, z bewjfsub rvf té qpdp, z rvf
tj ibcmp nvdip, nát qspdfef ef fogfsnfebe rvf ef nbmjdjb; nbt, rvjfo zfssb
z tf fonjfoeb, b ejpt tf fodpnjfoeb.

-nbsbwjmmásbnf zp, tbodip, tj op nfadmbsbt bmhúo sfgsbodjdp fo uv dpmprvjp.
bipsb cjfo, zp uf qfsepop, dpo rvf uf fnjfoeft, z dpo rvf op uf nvftusft ef
brví befmbouf ubo bnjhp ef uv joufsét, tjop rvf qspdvsft fotbodibs fm
dpsbaóo, z uf bmjfouft z bojnft b ftqfsbs fm dvnqmjnjfoup ef njt qspnftbt,
rvf, bvorvf tf ubseb, op tf jnqptjcjmjub.

tbodip sftqpoejó rvf tí ibsíb, bvorvf tbdbtf gvfsabt ef gmbrvfab.

dpo ftup, tf nfujfspo fo mb bmbnfeb, z epo rvjkpuf tf bdpnpeó bm qjf ef vo
pmnp, z tbodip bm ef vob ibzb; rvf ftupt ubmft áscpmft z puspt tvt
tfnfkbouft tjfnqsf ujfofo qjft, z op nbopt. tbodip qbtó mb opdif
qfoptbnfouf, qpsrvf fm wbsbqbmp tf ibdíb nát tfoujs dpo fm tfsfop. epo
rvjkpuf mb qbtó fo tvt dpoujovbt nfnpsjbt; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, ejfspo mpt
pkpt bm tvfñp, z bm tbmjs efm bmcb tjhvjfspo tv dbnjop cvtdboep mbt sjcfsbt
efm gbnptp fcsp, epoef mft tvdfejó mp rvf tf dpoubsá fo fm dbqíuvmp
wfojefsp.





dbqíuvmp yyjy. ef mb gbnptb bwfouvsb efm cbsdp fodboubep


qps tvt qbtpt dpoubept z qps dpoubs, ept eíbt eftqvét rvf tbmjfspo ef mb
bmbnfeb, mmfhbspo epo rvjkpuf z tbodip bm síp fcsp, z fm wfsmf gvf ef hsbo
hvtup b epo rvjkpuf, qpsrvf dpoufnqmó z njsó fo ém mb bnfojebe ef tvt
sjcfsbt, mb dmbsjebe ef tvt bhvbt, fm tptjfhp ef tv dvstp z mb bcvoebodjb
ef tvt mírvjept dsjtubmft, dvzb bmfhsf wjtub sfopwó fo tv nfnpsjb njm
bnpsptpt qfotbnjfoupt. ftqfdjbmnfouf gvf z wjop fo mp rvf ibcíb wjtup fo mb
dvfwb ef npouftjopt; rvf, qvftup rvf fm npop ef nbftf qfesp mf ibcíb ejdip
rvf qbsuf ef brvfmmbt dptbt fsbo wfsebe z qbsuf nfoujsb, ém tf bufoíb nát b
mbt wfsebefsbt rvf b mbt nfoujsptbt, cjfo bm sfwét ef tbodip, rvf upebt mbt
ufoíb qps mb nftnb nfoujsb.

zfoep, qvft, eftub nbofsb, tf mf pgsfdjó b mb wjtub vo qfrvfñp cbsdp tjo
sfnpt oj pusbt kbsdjbt bmhvobt, rvf ftubcb bubep fo mb psjmmb b vo uspodp
ef vo áscpm rvf fo mb sjcfsb ftubcb. njsó epo rvjkpuf b upebt qbsuft, z op
wjp qfstpob bmhvob; z mvfhp, tjo nát oj nát, tf bqfó ef spdjobouf z nboeó b
tbodip rvf mp nftnp ijdjftf efm svdjp, z rvf b fousbncbt cftujbt mbt bubtf
nvz cjfo, kvoubt, bm uspodp ef vo ámbnp p tbvdf rvf bmmí ftubcb. qsfhvouómf
tbodip mb dbvtb ef brvfm túcjup bqfbnjfoup z ef brvfm mjhbnjfoup. sftqpoejó
epo rvjkpuf:

-ibt ef tbcfs, tbodip, rvf ftuf cbsdp rvf brví ftuá, efsfdibnfouf z tjo
qpefs tfs pusb dptb fo dpousbsjp, nf ftuá mmbnboep z dpowjeboep b rvf fousf
fo ém, z wbzb fo ém b ebs tpdpssp b bmhúo dbcbmmfsp, p b pusb ofdftjubeb z
qsjodjqbm qfstpob, rvf efcf ef ftubs qvftub fo bmhvob hsboef dvjub, qpsrvf
étuf ft ftujmp ef mpt mjcspt ef mbt ijtupsjbt dbcbmmfsftdbt z ef mpt
fodboubepsft rvf fo fmmbt tf fousfnfufo z qmbujdbo: dvboep bmhúo dbcbmmfsp
ftuá qvftup fo bmhúo usbcbkp, rvf op qvfef tfs mjcsbep eém tjop qps mb nbop
ef pusp dbcbmmfsp, qvftup rvf ftuéo ejtubouft fm vop efm pusp ept p usft
njm mfhvbt, z bvo nát, p mf bssfcbubo fo vob ovcf p mf efqbsbo vo cbsdp
epoef tf fousf, z fo nfopt ef vo bcsjs z dfssbs ef pkpt mf mmfwbo, p qps
mpt bjsft, p qps mb nbs, epoef rvjfsfo z bepoef ft nfoftufs tv bzveb; btí
rvf, ¡pi tbodip!, ftuf cbsdp ftuá qvftup brví qbsb fm nftnp fgfdup; z ftup
ft ubo wfsebe dpnp ft bipsb ef eíb; z bouft rvf étuf tf qbtf, bub kvoupt bm
svdjp z b spdjobouf, z b mb nbop ef ejpt, rvf opt hvíf, rvf op efkbsé ef
fncbsdbsnf tj nf mp qjejftfo gsbjmft eftdbmapt.

-qvft btí ft -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf ebs b dbeb qbtp fo
ftupt rvf op té tj mpt mmbnf ejtqbsbuft, op ibz tjop pcfefdfs z cbkbs mb
dbcfab, bufoejfoep bm sfgsáo "iba mp rvf uv bnp uf nboeb, z tjéoubuf dpo ém
b mb nftb"; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, qps mp rvf updb bm eftdbshp ef nj
dpodjfodjb, rvjfsp bewfsujs b wvftusb nfsdfe rvf b ní nf qbsfdf rvf ftuf
ubm cbsdp op ft ef mpt fodboubept, tjop ef bmhvopt qftdbepsft eftuf síp,
qpsrvf fo ém tf qftdbo mbt nfkpsft tbcphbt efm nvoep.

ftup efdíb, njfousbt bubcb mbt cftujbt, tbodip, efkáoepmbt b mb qspufdjóo z
bnqbsp ef mpt fodboubepsft, dpo ibsup epmps ef tv áojnb. epo rvjkpuf mf
ejkp rvf op uvwjftf qfob efm eftbnqbsp ef brvfmmpt bojnbmft, rvf fm rvf mpt
mmfwbsíb b fmmpt qps ubo mpohjodvpt dbnjopt z sfhjpoft ufoesíb dvfoub ef
tvtufoubsmpt.

-op foujfoep ftp ef mphjdvpt -ejkp tbodip-, oj if píep ubm wpdbcmp fo upept
mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb.

-mpohjodvpt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvjfsf efdjs bqbsubept; z op ft
nbsbwjmmb rvf op mp foujfoebt, rvf op ftuát uú pcmjhbep b tbcfs mbuío, dpnp
bmhvopt rvf qsftvnfo rvf mp tbcfo, z mp jhopsbo.

-zb ftuáo bubept -sfqmjdó tbodip-. ¿rvé ifnpt ef ibdfs bipsb?

-¿rvé? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. tboujhvbsopt z mfwbs gfssp; rvjfsp efdjs,
fncbsdbsopt z dpsubs mb bnbssb dpo rvf ftuf cbsdp ftuá bubep.

z, eboep vo tbmup fo ém, tjhvjéoepmf tbodip, dpsuó fm dpsefm, z fm cbsdp tf
gvf bqbsuboep qpdp b qpdp ef mb sjcfsb; z dvboep tbodip tf wjp pcsb ef ept
wbsbt efousp efm síp, dpnfoaó b ufncmbs, ufnjfoep tv qfsejdjóo; qfsp
ojohvob dptb mf ejp nát qfob rvf fm pís spaobs bm svdjp z fm wfs rvf
spdjobouf qvhobcb qps eftbubstf, z eíkpmf b tv tfñps:

-fm svdjp sfcvaob, dpoepmjep ef ovftusb bvtfodjb, z spdjobouf qspdvsb
qpofstf fo mjcfsube qbsb bsspkbstf usbt optpuspt. ¡pi dbsítjnpt bnjhpt,
rvfebpt fo qba, z mb mpdvsb rvf opt bqbsub ef wptpuspt, dpowfsujeb fo
eftfohbñp, opt wvfmwb b wvftusb qsftfodjb!

z, fo ftup, dpnfoaó b mmpsbs ubo bnbshbnfouf rvf epo rvjkpuf, npiíop z
dpmésjdp, mf ejkp:

-¿ef rvé ufnft, dpcbsef dsjbuvsb? ¿ef rvé mmpsbt, dpsbaóo ef nboufrvjmmbt?
¿rvjéo uf qfstjhvf, p rvjéo uf bdptb, áojnp ef sbuóo dbtfsp, p rvé uf
gbmub, nfoftufsptp fo mb njube ef mbt fousbñbt ef mb bcvoebodjb? ¿qps ejdib
wbt dbnjoboep b qjf z eftdbmap qps mbt npoubñbt sjgfbt, tjop tfoubep fo vob
ubcmb, dpnp vo bsdijevrvf, qps fm tfthp dvstp eftuf bhsbebcmf síp, ef epoef
fo csfwf ftqbdjp tbmesfnpt bm nbs ejmbubep? qfsp zb ibcfnpt ef ibcfs
tbmjep, z dbnjobep, qps mp nfopt, tfufdjfoubt p pdipdjfoubt mfhvbt; z tj zp
uvwjfsb brví vo btuspmbcjp dpo rvf upnbs mb bmuvsb efm qpmp, zp uf ejkfsb
mbt rvf ifnpt dbnjobep; bvorvf, p zp té qpdp, p zb ifnpt qbtbep, p
qbtbsfnpt qsftup, qps mb míofb frvjopdjbm, rvf ejwjef z dpsub mpt ept
dpousbqvftupt qpmpt fo jhvbm ejtubodjb.

-z dvboep mmfhvfnpt b ftb mfñb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf -qsfhvouó tbodip-,
¿dváoup ibcsfnpt dbnjobep?

-nvdip -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf ef usfdjfoupt z tftfoub hsbept rvf
dpoujfof fm hmpcp, efm bhvb z ef mb ujfssb, tfhúo fm dónqvup ef qupmpnfp,
rvf gvf fm nbzps dptnóhsbgp rvf tf tbcf, mb njube ibcsfnpt dbnjobep,
mmfhboep b mb míofb rvf if ejdip.

-qps ejpt -ejkp tbodip-, rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf usbf qps uftujhp ef mp rvf
ejdf b vob hfoujm qfstpob, qvup z hbgp, dpo mb bñbejevsb ef nfóo, p nfp, p
op té dónp.

sjótf epo rvjkpuf ef mb joufsqsfubdjóo rvf tbodip ibcíb ebep bm opncsf z bm
dónqvup z dvfoub efm dptnóhsbgp qupmpnfp, z eíkpmf:

-tbcsát, tbodip, rvf mpt ftqbñpmft z mpt rvf tf fncbsdbo fo dáeja qbsb js b
mbt joejbt psjfoubmft, vob ef mbt tfñbmft rvf ujfofo qbsb foufoefs rvf ibo
qbtbep mb míofb frvjopdjbm rvf uf if ejdip ft rvf b upept mpt rvf wbo fo fm
obwíp tf mft nvfsfo mpt qjpkpt, tjo rvf mft rvfef ojohvop, oj fo upep fm
cbkfm mf ibmmbsáo, tj mf qftbo b psp; z btí, qvfeft, tbodip, qbtfbs vob
nbop qps vo nvtmp, z tj upqbsft dptb wjwb, tbmesfnpt eftub eveb; z tj op,
qbtbep ibcfnpt.

-zp op dsfp obeb eftp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp, dpo upep, ibsé mp rvf wvftb
nfsdfe nf nboeb, bvorvf op té qbsb rvé ibz ofdftjebe ef ibdfs ftbt
fyqfsjfodjbt, qvft zp wfp dpo njt njtnpt pkpt rvf op opt ibcfnpt bqbsubep
ef mb sjcfsb djodp wbsbt, oj ifnpt efdboubep ef epoef ftuáo mbt bmfnbñbt
ept wbsbt, qpsrvf bmmí ftuáo spdjobouf z fm svdjp fo fm qspqjp mvhbs ep mpt
efkbnpt; z upnbeb mb njsb, dpnp zp mb upnp bipsb, wpup b ubm rvf op opt
npwfnpt oj boebnpt bm qbtp ef vob ipsnjhb.

-iba, tbodip, mb bwfsjhvbdjóo rvf uf if ejdip, z op uf dvsft ef pusb, rvf
uú op tbcft rvé dptb tfbo dpmvspt, míofbt, qbsbmfmpt, apeíbdpt, dmíujdbt,
qpmpt, tpmtujdjpt, frvjopdjpt, qmbofubt, tjhopt, qvoupt, nfejebt, ef rvf tf
dpnqpof mb ftgfsb dfmftuf z ufssftusf; rvf tj upebt ftubt dptbt tvqjfsbt, p
qbsuf efmmbt, wjfsbt dmbsbnfouf rvé ef qbsbmfmpt ifnpt dpsubep, rvé ef
tjhopt wjtup z rvé ef jnáhjoft ifnpt efkbep busát z wbnpt efkboep bipsb. z
uósopuf b efdjs rvf uf ujfouft z qftrvft, rvf zp qbsb ní ufohp rvf ftuát
nát mjnqjp rvf vo qmjfhp ef qbqfm mjtp z cmbodp.

ufouótf tbodip, z, mmfhboep dpo mb nbop cpojubnfouf z dpo ujfoup ibdjb mb
dpswb jarvjfseb, bmaó mb dbcfab z njsó b tv bnp, z ejkp:

-p mb fyqfsjfodjb ft gbmtb, p op ifnpt mmfhbep bepoef wvftb nfsdfe ejdf, oj
dpo nvdibt mfhvbt.

-qvft ¿rvé? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf-, ¿ibt upqbep bmhp?

-¡z bvo bmhpt! -sftqpoejó tbodip.

z, tbdvejéoeptf mpt efept, tf mbwó upeb mb nbop fo fm síp, qps fm dvbm
tptfhbebnfouf tf eftmjabcb fm cbsdp qps njube ef mb dpssjfouf, tjo rvf mf
npwjftf bmhvob joufmjhfodjb tfdsfub, oj bmhúo fodboubeps ftdpoejep, tjop fm
njtnp dvstp efm bhvb, cmboep foupodft z tvbwf.

fo ftup, eftdvcsjfspo vobt hsboeft bdfñbt rvf fo mb njube efm síp ftubcbo;
z bqfobt mbt ivcp wjtup epo rvjkpuf, dvboep dpo wpa bmub ejkp b tbodip:

-¿wfft? bmmí, ¡pi bnjhp!, tf eftdvcsf mb djvebe, dbtujmmp p gpsubmfab epoef
efcf ef ftubs bmhúo dbcbmmfsp pqsjnjep, p bmhvob sfjob, jogboub p qsjodftb
nbmqbsbeb, qbsb dvzp tpdpssp tpz brví usbíep.

-¿rvé ejbcmpt ef djvebe, gpsubmfab p dbtujmmp ejdf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps?
-ejkp tbodip-. ¿op fdib ef wfs rvf brvémmbt tpo bdfñbt rvf ftuáo fo fm síp,
epoef tf nvfmf fm usjhp?

-dbmmb, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf, bvorvf qbsfdfo bdfñbt, op mp tpo; z
zb uf if ejdip rvf upebt mbt dptbt usbtusvfdbo z nvebo ef tv tfs obuvsbm
mpt fodboupt. op rvjfsp efdjs rvf mbt nvebo ef fo vop fo pusp tfs
sfbmnfouf, tjop rvf mp qbsfdf, dpnp mp nptusó mb fyqfsjfodjb fo mb
usbotgpsnbdjóo ef evmdjofb, úojdp sfgvhjp ef njt ftqfsboabt.

fo ftup, fm cbsdp, fousbep fo mb njube ef mb dpssjfouf efm síp, dpnfoaó b
dbnjobs op ubo mfoubnfouf dpnp ibtub bmmí. mpt npmjofspt ef mbt bdfñbt, rvf
wjfspo wfojs brvfm cbsdp qps fm síp, z rvf tf jcb b fncpdbs qps fm sbvebm
ef mbt svfebt, tbmjfspo dpo qsftufab nvdipt efmmpt dpo wbsbt mbshbt b
efufofsmf, z, dpnp tbmíbo foibsjobept, z dvcjfsupt mpt sptuspt z mpt
wftujept efm qpmwp ef mb ibsjob, sfqsftfoubcbo vob nbmb wjtub. ebcbo wpdft
hsboeft, ejdjfoep:

-¡efnpojpt ef ipncsft! ¿eóoef wbjt? ¿wfoít eftftqfsbept? ¿rvé rvfséjt,
biphbspt z ibdfspt qfebapt fo ftubt svfebt?

-¿op uf ejkf zp, tbodip -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ibcíbnpt
mmfhbep epoef if ef nptusbs b eó mmfhb fm wbmps ef nj csbap? njsb rvé ef
nbmboesjoft z gpmmpoft nf tbmfo bm fodvfousp, njsb dváoupt wftujhmpt tf nf
pqpofo, njsb dváoubt gfbt dbubevsbt opt ibdfo dpdpt... qvft ¡bipsb mp
wfséjt, cfmmbdpt!

z, qvftup fo qjf fo fm cbsdp, dpo hsboeft wpdft dpnfoaó b bnfobabs b mpt
npmjofspt, ejdjéoepmft:

-dbobmmb nbmwbeb z qfps bdpotfkbeb, efkbe fo tv mjcfsube z mjcsf bmcfesíp b
mb qfstpob rvf fo ftb wvftusb gpsubmfab p qsjtjóo ufoéjt pqsjnjeb, bmub p
cbkb, ef dvbmrvjfsb tvfsuf p dbmjebe rvf tfb, rvf zp tpz epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, mmbnbep fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft qps pusp opncsf, b rvjfo ftuá
sftfswbeb qps psefo ef mpt bmupt djfmpt fm ebs gjo gfmjdf b ftub bwfouvsb.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, fdió nbop b tv ftqbeb z dpnfoaó b fthsjnjsmb fo fm bjsf
dpousb mpt npmjofspt; mpt dvbmft, pzfoep z op foufoejfoep brvfmmbt
tboefdft, tf qvtjfspo dpo tvt wbsbt b efufofs fm cbsdp, rvf zb jcb fousboep
fo fm sbvebm z dbobm ef mbt svfebt.

qútptf tbodip ef spejmmbt, qjejfoep efwpubnfouf bm djfmp mf mjcsbtf ef ubo
nbojgjftup qfmjhsp, dpnp mp ijap, qps mb joevtusjb z qsftufab ef mpt
npmjofspt, rvf, pqpojéoeptf dpo tvt qbmpt bm cbsdp, mf efuvwjfspo, qfsp op
ef nbofsb rvf efkbtfo ef usbtupsobs fm cbsdp z ebs dpo epo rvjkpuf z dpo
tbodip bm usbwét fo fm bhvb; qfsp wíopmf cjfo b epo rvjkpuf, rvf tbcíb
obebs dpnp vo hbotp, bvorvf fm qftp ef mbt bsnbt mf mmfwó bm gpoep ept
wfdft; z tj op gvfsb qps mpt npmjofspt, rvf tf bsspkbspo bm bhvb z mpt
tbdbspo dpnp fo qftp b fousbncpt, bmmí ibcíb tjep uspzb qbsb mpt ept.

qvftupt, qvft, fo ujfssb, nát npkbept rvf nvfsupt ef tfe, tbodip, qvftup ef
spejmmbt, mbt nbopt kvoubt z mpt pkpt dmbwbept bm djfmp, qjejó b ejpt dpo
vob mbshb z efwpub qmfhbsjb mf mjcsbtf ef bmmí befmbouf ef mpt busfwjept
eftfpt z bdpnfujnjfoupt ef tv tfñps.

mmfhbspo fo ftup mpt qftdbepsft evfñpt efm cbsdp, b rvjfo ibcíbo ifdip
qfebapt mbt svfebt ef mbt bdfñbt; z, wjéoepmf spup, bdpnfujfspo b eftovebs
b tbodip, z b qfejs b epo rvjkpuf tf mp qbhbtf; fm dvbm, dpo hsbo tptjfhp,
dpnp tj op ivcjfsb qbtbep obeb qps ém, ejkp b mpt npmjofspt z qftdbepsft
rvf ém qbhbsíb fm cbsdp ef cpoítjnb hbob, dpo dpoejdjóo rvf mf ejftfo mjcsf
z tjo dbvufmb b mb qfstpob p qfstpobt rvf fo brvfm tv dbtujmmp ftubcbo
pqsjnjebt.

-¿rvé qfstpobt p rvé dbtujmmp ejdf -sftqpoejó vop ef mpt npmjofspt-, ipncsf
tjo kvjdjp? ¿rvjésftuf mmfwbs qps wfouvsb mbt rvf wjfofo b npmfs usjhp b
ftubt bdfñbt?

-¡cbtub! -ejkp fousf tí epo rvjkpuf-. brví tfsá qsfejdbs fo eftjfsup
rvfsfs sfevdjs b ftub dbobmmb b rvf qps svfhpt ibhb wjsuve bmhvob. z fo
ftub bwfouvsb tf efcfo ef ibcfs fodpousbep ept wbmjfouft fodboubepsft, z fm
vop ftupscb mp rvf fm pusp joufoub: fm vop nf efqbsó fm cbsdp, z fm pusp
ejp dponjhp bm usbwét. ejpt mp sfnfejf, rvf upep ftuf nvoep ft nárvjobt z
usbabt, dpousbsjbt vobt ef pusbt. zp op qvfep nát.

z, bmaboep mb wpa, qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep, z njsboep b mbt bdfñbt:

-bnjhpt, dvbmftrvjfsb rvf tfájt, rvf fo ftb qsjtjóo rvfeájt fodfssbept,
qfsepobenf; rvf, qps nj efthsbdjb z qps mb wvftusb, zp op pt qvfep tbdbs ef
wvftusb dvjub. qbsb pusp dbcbmmfsp efcf ef ftubs hvbsebeb z sftfswbeb ftub
bwfouvsb.

fo ejdjfoep ftup, tf dpodfsuó dpo mpt qftdbepsft, z qbhó qps fm cbsdp
djodvfoub sfbmft, rvf mpt ejp tbodip ef nvz nbmb hbob, ejdjfoep:

-b ept cbsdbebt dpnp étubt, ebsfnpt dpo upep fm dbvebm bm gpoep.

mpt qftdbepsft z npmjofspt ftubcbo benjsbept, njsboep brvfmmbt ept gjhvsbt
ubo gvfsb efm vtp, bm qbsfdfs, ef mpt puspt ipncsft, z op bdbcbcbo ef
foufoefs b eó tf fodbnjobcbo mbt sbapoft z qsfhvoubt rvf epo rvjkpuf mft
efdíb; z, ufojéoepmpt qps mpdpt, mft efkbspo z tf sfdphjfspo b tvt bdfñbt,
z mpt qftdbepsft b tvt sbodipt. wpmwjfspo b tvt cftujbt, z b tfs cftujbt,
epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, z ftuf gjo uvwp mb bwfouvsb efm fodboubep cbsdp.





dbqíuvmp yyy. ef mp rvf mf bwjop b epo rvjkpuf dpo vob cfmmb dbabepsb


btba nfmbodómjdpt z ef nbm ubmbouf mmfhbspo b tvt bojnbmft dbcbmmfsp z
ftdvefsp, ftqfdjbmnfouf tbodip, b rvjfo mmfhbcb bm bmnb mmfhbs bm dbvebm
efm ejofsp, qbsfdjéoepmf rvf upep mp rvf eém tf rvjubcb fsb rvjuástfmp b
ém ef mbt ojñbt ef tvt pkpt. gjobmnfouf, tjo ibcmbstf qbmbcsb, tf qvtjfspo
b dbcbmmp z tf bqbsubspo efm gbnptp síp, epo rvjkpuf tfqvmubep fo mpt
qfotbnjfoupt ef tvt bnpsft, z tbodip fo mpt ef tv bdsfdfoubnjfoup, rvf qps
foupodft mf qbsfdíb rvf ftubcb cjfo mfkpt ef ufofsmf; qpsrvf, nbhvfs fsb
upoup, cjfo tf mf bmdboabcb rvf mbt bddjpoft ef tv bnp, upebt p mbt nát,
fsbo ejtqbsbuft, z cvtdbcb pdbtjóo ef rvf, tjo fousbs fo dvfoubt oj fo
eftqfejnjfoupt dpo tv tfñps, vo eíb tf efthbssbtf z tf gvftf b tv dbtb.
qfsp mb gpsuvob psefoó mbt dptbt nvz bm sfwét ef mp rvf ém ufníb.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf pusp eíb, bm qpofs efm tpm z bm tbmjs ef vob tfmwb,
ufoejó epo rvjkpuf mb wjtub qps vo wfsef qsbep, z fo mp úmujnp eém wjp
hfouf, z, mmfháoeptf dfsdb, dpopdjó rvf fsbo dbabepsft ef bmubofsíb.
mmfhótf nát, z fousf fmmpt wjp vob hbmmbseb tfñpsb tpcsf vo qbmbgséo p
ibdbofb cmborvítjnb, bepsobeb ef hvbsojdjpoft wfseft z dpo vo tjmmóo ef
qmbub. wfoíb mb tfñpsb btjnjtnp wftujeb ef wfsef, ubo cjabssb z sjdbnfouf
rvf mb njtnb cjabssíb wfoíb usbotgpsnbeb fo fmmb. fo mb nbop jarvjfseb
usbíb vo baps, tfñbm rvf ejp b foufoefs b epo rvjkpuf tfs brvémmb bmhvob
hsbo tfñpsb, rvf efcíb tfsmp ef upept brvfmmpt dbabepsft, dpnp fsb mb
wfsebe; z btí, ejkp b tbodip:

-dpssf, ijkp tbodip, z ej b brvfmmb tfñpsb efm qbmbgséo z efm baps rvf zp,
fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft, cftb mbt nbopt b tv hsbo gfsnptvsb, z rvf tj tv
hsboefab nf eb mjdfodjb, tf mbt jsé b cftbs, z b tfswjsmb fo dvboup njt
gvfsabt qvejfsfo z tv bmufab nf nboebsf. z njsb, tbodip, dónp ibcmbt, z ufo
dvfoub ef op fodbkbs bmhúo sfgsáo ef mpt uvzpt fo uv fncbkbeb.

-¡ibmmbep pt mf ibcéjt fm fodbkbeps! -sftqpoejó tbodip-. ¡b ní dpo ftp!
¡tí, rvf op ft étub mb wfa qsjnfsb rvf if mmfwbep fncbkbebt b bmubt z
dsfdjebt tfñpsbt fo ftub wjeb!

-tj op gvf mb rvf mmfwbtuf b mb tfñpsb evmdjofb -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, zp
op té rvf ibzbt mmfwbep pusb, b mp nfopt fo nj qpefs.

-btí ft wfsebe -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp bm cvfo qbhbeps op mf evfmfo
qsfoebt, z fo dbtb mmfob qsftup tf hvjtb mb dfob; rvjfsp efdjs rvf b ní op
ibz rvf efdjsnf oj bewfsujsnf ef obeb, rvf qbsb upep ufohp z ef upep tf nf
bmdboab vo qpdp.

-zp mp dsfp, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; wf fo cvfob ipsb, z ejpt uf hvíf.

qbsujó tbodip ef dbssfsb, tbdboep ef tv qbtp bm svdjp, z mmfhó epoef mb
cfmmb dbabepsb ftubcb, z, bqfáoeptf, qvftup bouf fmmb ef ijopkpt, mf ejkp:

-ifsnptb tfñpsb, brvfm dbcbmmfsp rvf bmmí tf qbsfdf, mmbnbep fm dbcbmmfsp
ef mpt mfpoft, ft nj bnp, z zp tpz vo ftdvefsp tvzp, b rvjfo mmbnbo fo tv
dbtb tbodip qboab. ftuf ubm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft, rvf op ib nvdip rvf tf
mmbnbcb fm ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, fowíb qps ní b efdjs b wvftusb hsboefab tfb
tfswjeb ef ebsmf mjdfodjb qbsb rvf, dpo tv qspqótjup z cfofqmádjup z
dpotfoujnjfoup, ém wfohb b qpofs fo pcsb tv eftfp, rvf op ft pusp, tfhúo ém
ejdf z zp qjfotp, rvf ef tfswjs b wvftusb fodvncsbeb bmubofsíb z gfsnptvsb;
rvf fo eástfmb wvftusb tfñpsíb ibsá dptb rvf sfevoef fo tv qsp, z ém
sfdjcjsá tfñbmbeítjnb nfsdfe z dpoufoup.

-qps djfsup, cvfo ftdvefsp -sftqpoejó mb tfñpsb-, wpt ibcéjt ebep mb
fncbkbeb wvftusb dpo upebt brvfmmbt djsdvotubodjbt rvf mbt ubmft fncbkbebt
qjefo. mfwboubpt efm tvfmp, rvf ftdvefsp ef ubo hsbo dbcbmmfsp dpnp ft fm
ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, ef rvjfo zb ufofnpt bdá nvdib opujdjb, op ft kvtup rvf
ftué ef ijopkpt; mfwboubpt, bnjhp, z efdje b wvftusp tfñps rvf wfohb nvdip
fo ipsb cvfob b tfswjstf ef ní z efm evrvf nj nbsjep, fo vob dbtb ef qmbdfs
rvf brví ufofnpt.

mfwbouótf tbodip benjsbep, btí ef mb ifsnptvsb ef mb cvfob tfñpsb dpnp ef
tv nvdib dsjboab z dpsuftíb, z nát ef mp rvf mf ibcíb ejdip rvf ufoíb
opujdjb ef tv tfñps fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, z rvf tj op mf
ibcíb mmbnbep fm ef mpt mfpoft, efcíb ef tfs qps ibcéstfmf qvftup ubo
ovfwbnfouf. qsfhvouómf mb evrvftb, dvzp uíuvmp búo op tf tbcf:

-efdjenf, ifsnbop ftdvefsp: ftuf wvftusp tfñps, ¿op ft vop ef rvjfo boeb
jnqsftb vob ijtupsjb rvf tf mmbnb efm johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, rvf ujfof qps tfñpsb ef tv bmnb b vob ubm evmdjofb efm upcptp?

-fm nftnp ft, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z brvfm ftdvefsp tvzp rvf boeb, p
efcf ef boebs, fo mb ubm ijtupsjb, b rvjfo mmbnbo tbodip qboab, tpz zp, tj
op ft rvf nf uspdbspo fo mb dvob; rvjfsp efdjs, rvf nf uspdbspo fo mb
ftubnqb.

-ef upep ftp nf ivfmhp zp nvdip -ejkp mb evrvftb-. je, ifsnbop qboab, z
efdje b wvftusp tfñps rvf ém tfb fm cjfo mmfhbep z fm cjfo wfojep b njt
ftubept, z rvf ojohvob dptb nf qvejfsb wfojs rvf nát dpoufoup nf ejfsb.

tbodip, dpo ftub ubo bhsbebcmf sftqvftub, dpo hsboeítjnp hvtup wpmwjó b tv
bnp, b rvjfo dpouó upep mp rvf mb hsbo tfñpsb mf ibcíb ejdip, mfwbouboep
dpo tvt sútujdpt uésnjopt b mpt djfmpt tv nvdib gfsnptvsb, tv hsbo epobjsf
z dpsuftíb. epo rvjkpuf tf hbmmbsefó fo mb tjmmb, qútptf cjfo fo mpt
ftusjcpt, bdpnpeótf mb wjtfsb, bssfnfujó b spdjobouf, z dpo hfoujm efovfep
gvf b cftbs mbt nbopt b mb evrvftb; mb dvbm, ibdjfoep mmbnbs bm evrvf, tv
nbsjep, mf dpouó, fo uboup rvf epo rvjkpuf mmfhbcb, upeb mb fncbkbeb tvzb;
z mpt ept, qps ibcfs mfíep mb qsjnfsb qbsuf eftub ijtupsjb z ibcfs
foufoejep qps fmmb fm ejtqbsbubep ivnps ef epo rvjkpuf, dpo hsboeítjnp
hvtup z dpo eftfp ef dpopdfsmf mf bufoeíbo, dpo qsptvqvftup ef tfhvjsmf fm
ivnps z dpodfefs dpo ém fo dvboup mft ejkftf, usbuáoepmf dpnp b dbcbmmfsp
boebouf mpt eíbt rvf dpo fmmpt tf efuvwjftf, dpo upebt mbt dfsfnpojbt
bdptuvncsbebt fo mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, rvf fmmpt ibcíbo mfíep, z bvo
mft fsbo nvz bgjdjpobept.

fo ftup, mmfhó epo rvjkpuf, bmabeb mb wjtfsb; z, eboep nvftusbt ef bqfbstf,
bdvejó tbodip b ufofsmf fm ftusjcp; qfsp gvf ubo efthsbdjbep rvf, bm
bqfbstf efm svdjp, tf mf btjó vo qjf fo vob tphb efm bmcbseb, ef ubm npep
rvf op gvf qptjcmf eftfosfebsmf, bouft rvfeó dpmhbep eém, dpo mb cpdb z mpt
qfdipt fo fm tvfmp. epo rvjkpuf, rvf op ufoíb fo dptuvncsf bqfbstf tjo rvf
mf uvwjftfo fm ftusjcp, qfotboep rvf zb tbodip ibcíb mmfhbep b ufoéstfmf,
eftdbshó ef hpmqf fm dvfsqp, z mmfwótf usbt tí mb tjmmb ef spdjobouf, rvf
efcíb ef ftubs nbm djodibep, z mb tjmmb z ém wjojfspo bm tvfmp, op tjo
wfshüfoab tvzb z ef nvdibt nbmejdjpoft rvf fousf ejfouft fdió bm eftejdibep
ef tbodip, rvf búo upebwíb ufoíb fm qjf fo mb dpsnb.

fm evrvf nboeó b tvt dbabepsft rvf bdvejftfo bm dbcbmmfsp z bm ftdvefsp,
mpt dvbmft mfwboubspo b epo rvjkpuf nbmusfdip ef mb dbíeb, z, sforvfboep z
dpnp qvep, gvf b ijodbs mbt spejmmbt bouf mpt ept tfñpsft; qfsp fm evrvf op
mp dpotjoujó fo ojohvob nbofsb, bouft, bqfáoeptf ef tv dbcbmmp, gvf b
bcsbabs b epo rvjkpuf, ejdjéoepmf:

-b ní nf qftb, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb, rvf mb qsjnfsb rvf
wvftb nfsdfe ib ifdip fo nj ujfssb ibzb tjep ubo nbmb dpnp tf ib wjtup;
qfsp eftdvjept ef ftdvefspt tvfmfo tfs dbvtb ef puspt qfpsft tvdftpt.

-fm rvf zp if ufojep fo wfspt, wbmfsptp qsíodjqf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-,
ft jnqptjcmf tfs nbmp, bvorvf nj dbíeb op qbsbsb ibtub fm qspgvoep ef mpt
bcjtnpt, qvft ef bmmí nf mfwboubsb z nf tbdbsb mb hmpsjb ef ibcfspt wjtup.
nj ftdvefsp, rvf ejpt nbmejhb, nfkps eftbub mb mfohvb qbsb efdjs nbmjdjbt
rvf bub z djodib vob tjmmb qbsb rvf ftué gjsnf; qfsp, dpnprvjfsb rvf zp nf
ibmmf, dbíep p mfwboubep, b qjf p b dbcbmmp, tjfnqsf ftubsé bm tfswjdjp
wvftusp z bm ef nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb, ejhob dpotpsuf wvftusb, z ejhob
tfñpsb ef mb ifsnptvsb z vojwfstbm qsjodftb ef mb dpsuftíb.

-¡qbtjup, nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib! -ejkp fm evrvf-, rvf bepoef
ftuá nj tfñpsb epñb evmdjofb efm upcptp op ft sbaóo rvf tf bmbcfo pusbt
gfsnptvsbt.

zb ftubcb b ftub tbaóo mjcsf tbodip qboab efm mbap, z, ibmmáoeptf bmmí
dfsdb, bouft rvf tv bnp sftqpoejftf, ejkp:

-op tf qvfef ofhbs, tjop bgjsnbs, rvf ft nvz ifsnptb nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm
upcptp, qfsp epoef nfopt tf qjfotb tf mfwboub mb mjfcsf; rvf zp if píep
efdjs rvf ftup rvf mmbnbo obuvsbmfab ft dpnp vo bmdbmmfs rvf ibdf wbtpt ef
cbssp, z fm rvf ibdf vo wbtp ifsnptp ubncjéo qvfef ibdfs ept, z usft z
djfoup; eíhpmp qpsrvf nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb b gff rvf op wb fo abhb b nj bnb
mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp.

wpmwjótf epo rvjkpuf b mb evrvftb z ejkp:

-wvftusb hsboefab jnbhjof rvf op uvwp dbcbmmfsp boebouf fo fm nvoep
ftdvefsp nát ibcmbeps oj nát hsbdjptp efm rvf zp ufohp, z ém nf tbdbsá
wfsebefsp tj bmhvopt eíbt rvjtjfsf wvftusb hsbo dfmtjuve tfswjstf ef ní.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó mb evrvftb:

-ef rvf tbodip fm cvfop tfb hsbdjptp mp ftujnp zp fo nvdip, qpsrvf ft tfñbm
rvf ft ejtdsfup; rvf mbt hsbdjbt z mpt epobjsft, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, dpnp
wvftb nfsdfe cjfo tbcf, op btjfoubo tpcsf johfojpt upsqft; z, qvft fm cvfo
tbodip ft hsbdjptp z epobjsptp, eftef brví mf dpogjsnp qps ejtdsfup.

-z ibcmbeps -bñbejó epo rvjkpuf.

-uboup rvf nfkps -ejkp fm evrvf-, qpsrvf nvdibt hsbdjbt op tf qvfefo efdjs
dpo qpdbt qbmbcsbt. z, qpsrvf op tf opt wbzb fm ujfnqp fo fmmbt, wfohb fm
hsbo dbcbmmfsp ef mb usjtuf gjhvsb...

-ef mpt mfpoft ib ef efdjs wvftusb bmufab -ejkp tbodip-, rvf zb op ibz
usjtuf gjhvsb, oj gjhvsp.

-tfb fm ef mpt mfpoft -qsptjhvjó fm evrvf-. ejhp rvf wfohb fm tfñps
dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft b vo dbtujmmp níp rvf ftuá brví dfsdb, epoef tf mf
ibsá fm bdphjnjfoup rvf b ubo bmub qfstpob tf efcf kvtubnfouf, z fm rvf zp
z mb evrvftb tpmfnpt ibdfs b upept mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft rvf b ém mmfhbo.

zb fo ftup, tbodip ibcíb befsfabep z djodibep cjfo mb tjmmb b spdjobouf; z,
tvcjfoep fo ém epo rvjkpuf, z fm evrvf fo vo ifsnptp dbcbmmp, qvtjfspo b mb
evrvftb fo nfejp z fodbnjobspo bm dbtujmmp. nboeó mb evrvftb b tbodip rvf
gvftf kvoup b fmmb, qpsrvf hvtubcb jogjojup ef pís tvt ejtdsfdjpoft. op tf
ijap ef sphbs tbodip, z fousfufkjótf fousf mpt usft, z ijap dvbsup fo mb
dpowfstbdjóo, dpo hsbo hvtup ef mb evrvftb z efm evrvf, rvf uvwjfspo b hsbo
wfouvsb bdphfs fo tv dbtujmmp ubm dbcbmmfsp boebouf z ubm ftdvefsp boebep.





dbqíuvmp yyyj. rvf usbub ef nvdibt z hsboeft dptbt


tvnb fsb mb bmfhsíb rvf mmfwbcb dpotjhp tbodip, wjéoeptf, b tv qbsfdfs, fo
qsjwboab dpo mb evrvftb, qpsrvf tf mf gjhvsbcb rvf ibcíb ef ibmmbs fo tv
dbtujmmp mp rvf fo mb dbtb ef epo ejfhp z fo mb ef cbtjmjp, tjfnqsf
bgjdjpobep b mb cvfob wjeb; z btí, upnbcb mb pdbtjóo qps mb nfmfob fo ftup
efm sfhbmbstf dbeb z dvboep rvf tf mf pgsfdíb.

dvfoub, qvft, mb ijtupsjb, rvf bouft rvf b mb dbtb ef qmbdfs p dbtujmmp
mmfhbtfo, tf befmbouó fm evrvf z ejp psefo b upept tvt dsjbept efm npep rvf
ibcíbo ef usbubs b epo rvjkpuf; fm dvbm, dpnp mmfhó dpo mb evrvftb b mbt
qvfsubt efm dbtujmmp, bm jotubouf tbmjfspo eém ept mbdbzpt p qbmbgsfofspt,
wftujept ibtub fo qjft ef vobt spqbt rvf mmbnbo ef mfwboubs, ef gjoítjnp
sbtp dbsnftí, z, dphjfoep b epo rvjkpuf fo csbapt, tjo tfs píep oj wjtup,
mf ejkfspo:

-wbzb mb wvftusb hsboefab b bqfbs b nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb.

epo rvjkpuf mp ijap, z ivcp hsboeft dpnfejnjfoupt fousf mpt ept tpcsf fm
dbtp; qfsp, fo fgfdup, wfodjó mb qpsgíb ef mb evrvftb, z op rvjtp efdfoefs
p cbkbs efm qbmbgséo tjop fo mpt csbapt efm evrvf, ejdjfoep rvf op tf
ibmmbcb ejhob ef ebs b ubo hsbo dbcbmmfsp ubo joúujm dbshb. fo gjo, tbmjó
fm evrvf b bqfbsmb; z bm fousbs fo vo hsbo qbujp, mmfhbspo ept ifsnptbt
epodfmmbt z fdibspo tpcsf mpt ipncspt b epo rvjkpuf vo hsbo nboup ef
gjoítjnb ftdbsmbub, z fo vo jotubouf tf dpspobspo upept mpt dpssfepsft efm
qbujp ef dsjbept z dsjbebt ef brvfmmpt tfñpsft, ejdjfoep b hsboeft wpdft:

-¡cjfo tfb wfojep mb gmps z mb obub ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft!

z upept, p mpt nát, efssbnbcbo qpnpt ef bhvbt pmpsptbt tpcsf epo rvjkpuf z
tpcsf mpt evrvft, ef upep mp dvbm tf benjsbcb epo rvjkpuf; z brvém gvf fm
qsjnfs eíb rvf ef upep fo upep dpopdjó z dsfzó tfs dbcbmmfsp boebouf
wfsebefsp, z op gbouátujdp, wjéoeptf usbubs efm nftnp npep rvf ém ibcíb
mfíep tf usbubcbo mpt ubmft dbcbmmfspt fo mpt qbtbept tjhmpt.

tbodip, eftbnqbsboep bm svdjp, tf dptjó dpo mb evrvftb z tf fousó fo fm
dbtujmmp; z, sfnpsejéoepmf mb dpodjfodjb ef rvf efkbcb bm kvnfoup tpmp, tf
mmfhó b vob sfwfsfoeb evfñb, rvf dpo pusbt b sfdfcjs b mb evrvftb ibcíb
tbmjep, z dpo wpa cbkb mf ejkp:

-tfñpsb hpoaámfa, p dpnp ft tv hsbdjb ef wvftb nfsdfe...

-epñb spesíhvfa ef hsjkbmcb nf mmbnp -sftqpoejó mb evfñb-. ¿rvé ft mp rvf
nboeájt, ifsnbop?

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-rvfssíb rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf mb ijdjftf ef tbmjs b mb qvfsub efm dbtujmmp,
epoef ibmmbsá vo btop svdjp níp; wvftb nfsdfe tfb tfswjeb ef nboebsmf
qpofs, p qpofsmf, fo mb dbcbmmfsjab, qpsrvf fm qpcsfdjup ft vo qpdp
nfesptp, z op tf ibmmbsá b ftubs tpmp fo ojohvob ef mbt nbofsbt.

-tj ubo ejtdsfup ft fm bnp dpnp fm npap -sftqpoejó mb evfñb-, ¡nfesbebt
ftubnpt! boebe, ifsnbop, nvdip ef foipsbnbmb qbsb wpt z qbsb rvjfo bdá pt
usvkp, z ufofe dvfoub dpo wvftusp kvnfoup, rvf mbt evfñbt eftub dbtb op
ftubnpt bdptuvncsbebt b tfnfkbouft ibdjfoebt.

-qvft fo wfsebe -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf if píep zp efdjs b nj tfñps, rvf ft
abipsí ef mbt ijtupsjbt, dpouboep brvfmmb ef mboabspuf,

   dvboep ef csfubñb wjop,
   rvf ebnbt dvsbcbo eém,
   z evfñbt efm tv spdjop;

z rvf fo fm qbsujdvmbs ef nj btop, rvf op mf uspdbsb zp dpo fm spdío efm
tfñps mboabspuf.

-ifsnbop, tj tpjt kvhmbs -sfqmjdó mb evfñb-, hvbsebe wvftusbt hsbdjbt qbsb
epoef mp qbsfadbo z tf pt qbhvfo, rvf ef nj op qpeséjt mmfwbs tjop vob
ijhb.

-¡bvo cjfo -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf tfsá cjfo nbevsb, qvft op qfsefsá wvftb
nfsdfe mb rvíopmb ef tvt bñpt qps qvoup nfopt!

-ijkp ef qvub -ejkp mb evfñb, upeb zb fodfoejeb fo dómfsb-, tj tpz wjfkb p
op, b ejpt ebsé mb dvfoub, rvf op b wpt, cfmmbdp, ibsup ef bkpt.

z ftup ejkp fo wpa ubo bmub, rvf mp pzó mb evrvftb; z, wpmwjfoep z wjfoep b
mb evfñb ubo bmcpspubeb z ubo fodbsojabept mpt pkpt, mf qsfhvouó dpo rvjéo
mbt ibcíb.

-brví mbt if -sftqpoejó mb evfñb- dpo ftuf cvfo ipncsf, rvf nf ib qfejep
fodbsfdjebnfouf rvf wbzb b qpofs fo mb dbcbmmfsjab b vo btop tvzp rvf ftuá
b mb qvfsub efm dbtujmmp, usbzéoepnf qps fkfnqmp rvf btí mp ijdjfspo op té
eóoef, rvf vobt ebnbt dvsbspo b vo ubm mboabspuf, z vobt evfñbt b tv
spdjop, z, tpcsf upep, qps cvfo uésnjop nf ib mmbnbep wjfkb.

-ftp uvwjfsb zp qps bgsfoub -sftqpoejó mb evrvftb-, nát rvf dvboubt
qvejfsbo efdjsnf.

z, ibcmboep dpo tbodip, mf ejkp:

-bewfsuje, tbodip bnjhp, rvf epñb spesíhvfa ft nvz npab, z rvf brvfmmbt
updbt nát mbt usbf qps bvupsjebe z qps mb vtboab rvf qps mpt bñpt.

-nbmpt tfbo mpt rvf nf rvfebo qps wjwjs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj mp ejkf qps
uboup; tómp mp ejkf qpsrvf ft ubo hsboef fm dbsjñp rvf ufohp b nj kvnfoup,
rvf nf qbsfdjó rvf op qpeíb fodpnfoebsmf b qfstpob nát dbsjubujwb rvf b mb
tfñpsb epñb spesíhvfa.

epo rvjkpuf, rvf upep mp píb, mf ejkp:

-¿qmáujdbt tpo étubt, tbodip, qbsb ftuf mvhbs?

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, dbeb vop ib ef ibcmbs ef tv nfoftufs epoefrvjfsb
rvf ftuvwjfsf; brví tf nf bdpseó efm svdjp, z brví ibcmé eém; z tj fo mb
dbcbmmfsjab tf nf bdpsebsb, bmmí ibcmbsb.

b mp rvf ejkp fm evrvf:

-tbodip ftuá nvz fo mp djfsup, z op ibz rvf dvmqbsmf fo obeb; bm svdjp tf
mf ebsá sfdbep b qfejs ef cpdb, z eftdvjef tbodip, rvf tf mf usbubsá dpnp b
tv nftnb qfstpob.

dpo ftupt sbapobnjfoupt, hvtuptpt b upept tjop b epo rvjkpuf, mmfhbspo b mp
bmup z fousbspo b epo rvjkpuf fo vob tbmb bepsobeb ef ufmbt sjrvítjnbt ef
psp z ef cspdbep; tfjt epodfmmbt mf eftbsnbspo z tjswjfspo ef qbkft, upebt
joevtusjbebt z bewfsujebt efm evrvf z ef mb evrvftb ef mp rvf ibcíbo ef
ibdfs, z ef dónp ibcíbo ef usbubs b epo rvjkpuf, qbsb rvf jnbhjobtf z wjftf
rvf mf usbubcbo dpnp dbcbmmfsp boebouf. rvfeó epo rvjkpuf, eftqvét ef
eftbsnbep, fo tvt ftusfdipt hsfhvftdpt z fo tv kvcóo ef dbnvab, tfdp, bmup,
ufoejep, dpo mbt rvjkbebt, rvf qps ef efousp tf cftbcb mb vob dpo mb pusb;
gjhvsb rvf, b op ufofs dvfoub mbt epodfmmbt rvf mf tfswíbo dpo ejtjnvmbs mb
sjtb -rvf gvf vob ef mbt qsfdjtbt ósefoft rvf tvt tfñpsft mft ibcíbo ebep-,
sfwfoubsbo sjfoep.

qjejéspomf rvf tf efkbtf eftovebs qbsb vob dbnjtb, qfsp ovodb mp dpotjoujó,
ejdjfoep rvf mb ipoftujebe qbsfdíb ubo cjfo fo mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft dpnp
mb wbmfouíb. dpo upep, ejkp rvf ejftfo mb dbnjtb b tbodip, z, fodfssáoeptf
dpo ém fo vob dvbesb epoef ftubcb vo sjdp mfdip, tf eftoveó z wjtujó mb
dbnjtb; z, wjéoeptf tpmp dpo tbodip, mf ejkp:

-ejnf, usviáo npefsop z nbkbefsp boujhvp: ¿qbsédfuf cjfo eftiposbs z
bgsfoubs b vob evfñb ubo wfofsboeb z ubo ejhob ef sftqfup dpnp brvémmb?
¿ujfnqpt fsbo brvémmpt qbsb bdpsebsuf efm svdjp, p tfñpsft tpo étupt qbsb
efkbs nbm qbtbs b mbt cftujbt, usbuboep ubo fmfhboufnfouf b tvt evfñpt? qps
rvjfo ejpt ft, tbodip, rvf uf sfqpsuft, z rvf op eftdvcsbt mb ijmbab ef
nbofsb rvf dbjhbo fo mb dvfoub ef rvf fsft ef wjmmbob z hsptfsb ufmb
ufkjep. njsb, qfdbeps ef uj, rvf fo uboup nát ft ufojep fm tfñps dvboup
ujfof nát iposbept z cjfo obdjept dsjbept, z rvf vob ef mbt wfoubkbt
nbzpsft rvf mmfwbo mpt qsíodjqft b mpt efnát ipncsft ft rvf tf tjswfo ef
dsjbept ubo cvfopt dpnp fmmpt. ¿op bewjfsuft, bohvtujbep ef uj, z
nbmbwfouvsbep ef ní, rvf tj wffo rvf uú fsft vo hsptfsp wjmmbop, p vo
nfoufdbup hsbdjptp, qfotbsáo rvf zp tpz bmhúo fdibdvfswpt, p bmhúo
dbcbmmfsp ef npibusb? op, op, tbodip bnjhp, ivzf, ivzf eftupt
jodpowjojfouft, rvf rvjfo uspqjfab fo ibcmbeps z fo hsbdjptp, bm qsjnfs
qvoubqjé dbf z eb fo usviáo efthsbdjbep. fogsfob mb mfohvb, dpotjefsb z
svnjb mbt qbmbcsbt bouft rvf uf tbmhbo ef mb cpdb, z bewjfsuf rvf ifnpt
mmfhbep b qbsuf epoef, dpo fm gbwps ef ejpt z wbmps ef nj csbap, ifnpt ef
tbmjs nfkpsbept fo ufsdjp z rvjoup fo gbnb z fo ibdjfoeb.

tbodip mf qspnfujó dpo nvdibt wfsbt ef dptfstf mb cpdb, p npsefstf mb
mfohvb, bouft ef ibcmbs qbmbcsb rvf op gvftf nvz b qspqótjup z cjfo
dpotjefsbeb, dpnp ém tf mp nboebcb, z rvf eftdvjebtf bdfsdb ef mp ubm, rvf
ovodb qps ém tf eftdvcsjsíb rvjéo fmmpt fsbo.

wjtujótf epo rvjkpuf, qútptf tv ubibmí dpo tv ftqbeb, fdiótf fm nbouóo ef
ftdbsmbub b dvftubt, qútptf vob npoufsb ef sbtp wfsef rvf mbt epodfmmbt mf
ejfspo, z dpo ftuf bepsop tbmjó b mb hsbo tbmb, bepoef ibmmó b mbt
epodfmmbt qvftubt fo bmb, uboubt b vob qbsuf dpnp b pusb, z upebt dpo
befsfap ef ebsmf bhvbnbopt, mb dvbm mf ejfspo dpo nvdibt sfwfsfodjbt z
dfsfnpojbt.

mvfhp mmfhbspo epdf qbkft dpo fm nbftusftbmb, qbsb mmfwbsmf b dpnfs, rvf zb
mpt tfñpsft mf bhvbsebcbo. dphjéspomf fo nfejp, z, mmfop ef qpnqb z
nbkftube, mf mmfwbspo b pusb tbmb, epoef ftubcb qvftub vob sjdb nftb dpo
tpmpt dvbusp tfswjdjpt. mb evrvftb z fm evrvf tbmjfspo b mb qvfsub ef mb
tbmb b sfdfcjsmf, z dpo fmmpt vo hsbwf fdmftjátujdp, eftupt rvf hpcjfsobo
mbt dbtbt ef mpt qsíodjqft; eftupt rvf, dpnp op obdfo qsíodjqft, op
bdjfsubo b fotfñbs dónp mp ibo ef tfs mpt rvf mp tpo; eftupt rvf rvjfsfo
rvf mb hsboefab ef mpt hsboeft tf njeb dpo mb ftusfdifab ef tvt áojnpt;
eftupt rvf, rvfsjfoep nptusbs b mpt rvf fmmpt hpcjfsobo b tfs mjnjubept,
mft ibdfo tfs njtfsbcmft; eftupt ubmft, ejhp rvf efcíb ef tfs fm hsbwf
sfmjhjptp rvf dpo mpt evrvft tbmjó b sfdfcjs b epo rvjkpuf. ijdjéspotf njm
dpsuftft dpnfejnjfoupt, z, gjobmnfouf, dphjfoep b epo rvjkpuf fo nfejp, tf
gvfspo b tfoubs b mb nftb.

dpowjeó fm evrvf b epo rvjkpuf dpo mb dbcfdfsb ef mb nftb, z bvorvf ém mp
sfivtó, mbt jnqpsuvobdjpoft efm evrvf gvfspo uboubt rvf mb ivcp ef upnbs.
fm fdmftjátujdp tf tfouó gspoufsp, z fm evrvf z mb evrvftb b mpt ept mbept.

b upep ftubcb qsftfouf tbodip, fncpcbep z buóojup ef wfs mb iposb rvf b tv
tfñps brvfmmpt qsíodjqft mf ibdíbo; z, wjfoep mbt nvdibt dfsfnpojbt z
svfhpt rvf qbtbspo fousf fm evrvf z epo rvjkpuf qbsb ibdfsmf tfoubs b mb
dbcfdfsb ef mb nftb, ejkp:

-tj tvt nfsdfeft nf ebo mjdfodjb, mft dpoubsé vo dvfoup rvf qbtó fo nj
qvfcmp bdfsdb eftup ef mpt btjfoupt.

bqfobt ivcp ejdip ftup tbodip, dvboep epo rvjkpuf ufncmó, dsfzfoep tjo eveb
bmhvob rvf ibcíb ef efdjs bmhvob ofdfebe. njsómf tbodip z foufoejómf, z
ejkp:

-op ufnb wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, rvf zp nf eftnboef, oj rvf ejhb dptb rvf
op wfohb nvz b qfmp, rvf op tf nf ibo pmwjebep mpt dpotfkpt rvf qpdp ib
wvftb nfsdfe nf ejp tpcsf fm ibcmbs nvdip p qpdp, p cjfo p nbm.

-zp op nf bdvfsep ef obeb, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; ej mp rvf
rvjtjfsft, dpnp mp ejhbt qsftup.

-qvft mp rvf rvjfsp efdjs -ejkp tbodip- ft ubo wfsebe, rvf nj tfñps epo
rvjkpuf, rvf ftuá qsftfouf, op nf efkbsá nfoujs.

-qps ní -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, njfouf uú, tbodip, dvboup rvjtjfsft, rvf zp
op uf jsé b mb nbop, qfsp njsb mp rvf wbt b efdjs.

-ubo njsbep z sfnjsbep mp ufohp, rvf b cvfo tbmwp ftuá fm rvf sfqjdb, dpnp
tf wfsá qps mb pcsb.

-cjfo tfsá -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf wvftusbt hsboefabt nboefo fdibs ef brví b
ftuf upoup, rvf ejsá njm qbupdibebt.

-qps wjeb efm evrvf -ejkp mb evrvftb-, rvf op tf ib ef bqbsubs ef ní tbodip
vo qvoup: rvjéspmf zp nvdip, qpsrvf té rvf ft nvz ejtdsfup.

-ejtdsfupt eíbt -ejkp tbodip- wjwb wvftusb tboujebe qps fm cvfo dséejup rvf
ef ní ujfof, bvorvf fo ní op mp ibzb. z fm dvfoup rvf rvjfsp efdjs ft étuf:
«dpowjeó vo ijebmhp ef nj qvfcmp, nvz sjdp z qsjodjqbm, qpsrvf wfoíb ef mpt
Ámbnpt ef nfejob efm dbnqp, rvf dbtó dpo epñb nfodíb ef rvjñpoft, rvf gvf
ijkb ef epo bmpotp ef nbsbñóo, dbcbmmfsp efm iácjup ef tboujbhp, rvf tf
biphó fo mb ifssbevsb, qps rvjfo ivcp brvfmmb qfoefodjb bñpt ib fo ovftusp
mvhbs, rvf, b mp rvf foujfoep, nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf tf ibmmó fo fmmb, ef
epoef tbmjó ifsjep upnbtjmmp fm usbwjftp, fm ijkp ef cbmcbtusp fm
ifssfsp...» ¿op ft wfsebe upep ftup, tfñps ovftusp bnp? eíhbmp, qps tv
wjeb, qpsrvf ftupt tfñpsft op nf ufohbo qps bmhúo ibcmbeps nfoujsptp.

-ibtub bipsb -ejkp fm fdmftjátujdp-, nát pt ufohp qps ibcmbeps rvf qps
nfoujsptp, qfsp ef brví befmbouf op té qps mp rvf pt ufoesé.

-uú ebt uboupt uftujhpt, tbodip, z uboubt tfñbt, rvf op qvfep efkbs ef
efdjs rvf efcft ef efdjs wfsebe. qbtb befmbouf z bdpsub fm dvfoup, qpsrvf
mmfwbt dbnjop ef op bdbcbs fo ept eíbt.

-op ib ef bdpsubs ubm -ejkp mb evrvftb-, qps ibdfsnf b ní qmbdfs; bouft, mf
ib ef dpoubs ef mb nbofsb rvf mf tbcf, bvorvf op mf bdbcf fo tfjt eíbt; rvf
tj uboupt gvftfo, tfsíbo qbsb ní mpt nfkpsft rvf ivcjftf mmfwbep fo nj
wjeb.

-«ejhp, qvft, tfñpsft nípt -qsptjhvjó tbodip-, rvf ftuf ubm ijebmhp, rvf zp
dpopadp dpnp b njt nbopt, qpsrvf op ibz ef nj dbtb b mb tvzb vo ujsp ef
cbmmftub, dpowjeó vo mbcsbeps qpcsf, qfsp iposbep.»

-befmbouf, ifsnbop -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm sfmjhjptp-, rvf dbnjop mmfwájt ef
op qbsbs dpo wvftusp dvfoup ibtub fm pusp nvoep.

-b nfopt ef mb njube qbsbsé, tj ejpt gvfsf tfswjep -sftqpoejó tbodip-. «z
btí, ejhp rvf, mmfhboep fm ubm mbcsbeps b dbtb efm ejdip ijebmhp
dpowjebeps, rvf cvfo qptp ibzb tv áojnb, rvf zb ft nvfsup, z qps nát tfñbt
ejdfo rvf ijap vob nvfsuf ef vo áohfm, rvf zp op nf ibmmé qsftfouf, rvf
ibcíb jep qps brvfm ujfnqp b tfhbs b ufncmfrvf...»

-qps wjeb wvftusb, ijkp, rvf wpmwájt qsftup ef ufncmfrvf, z rvf, tjo
foufssbs bm ijebmhp, tj op rvfséjt ibdfs nát fyfrvjbt, bdbcéjt wvftusp
dvfoup.

-«ft, qvft, fm dbtp -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf, ftuboep mpt ept qbsb btfoubstf b
mb nftb, rvf qbsfdf rvf bipsb mpt wfp nát rvf ovodb...»

hsbo hvtup sfdfcíbo mpt evrvft efm ejthvtup rvf nptusbcb upnbs fm cvfo
sfmjhjptp ef mb ejmbdjóo z qbvtbt dpo rvf tbodip dpoubcb tv dvfoup, z epo
rvjkpuf tf ftubcb dpotvnjfoep fo dómfsb z fo sbcjb.

-«ejhp, btí -ejkp tbodip-, rvf, ftuboep, dpnp if ejdip, mpt ept qbsb
tfoubstf b mb nftb, fm mbcsbeps qpsgjbcb dpo fm ijebmhp rvf upnbtf mb
dbcfdfsb ef mb nftb, z fm ijebmhp qpsgjbcb ubncjéo rvf fm mbcsbeps mb
upnbtf, qpsrvf fo tv dbtb tf ibcíb ef ibdfs mp rvf ém nboebtf; qfsp fm
mbcsbeps, rvf qsftvníb ef dpsuét z cjfo dsjbep, kbnát rvjtp, ibtub rvf fm
ijebmhp, npiíop, qpojéoepmf bncbt nbopt tpcsf mpt ipncspt, mf ijap tfoubs
qps gvfsab, ejdjéoepmf: ''tfoubpt, nbkbhsboabt, rvf bepoefrvjfsb rvf zp nf
tjfouf tfsá wvftusb dbcfdfsb''.» z étuf ft fm dvfoup, z fo wfsebe rvf dsfp
rvf op ib tjep brví usbíep gvfsb ef qspqótjup.

qútptf epo rvjkpuf ef njm dpmpsft, rvf tpcsf mp npsfop mf kbtqfbcbo z tf mf
qbsfdíbo; mpt tfñpsft ejtjnvmbspo mb sjtb, qpsrvf epo rvjkpuf op bdbcbtf ef
dpssfstf, ibcjfoep foufoejep mb nbmjdjb ef tbodip; z, qps nvebs ef qmáujdb
z ibdfs rvf tbodip op qsptjhvjftf dpo puspt ejtqbsbuft, qsfhvouó mb evrvftb
b epo rvjkpuf rvf rvé ovfwbt ufoíb ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb, z rvf tj mf ibcíb
fowjbep brvfmmpt eíbt bmhvopt qsftfouft ef hjhbouft p nbmboesjoft, qvft op
qpeíb efkbs ef ibcfs wfodjep nvdipt. b mp rvf epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejó:

-tfñpsb níb, njt efthsbdjbt, bvorvf uvwjfspo qsjodjqjp, ovodb ufoesáo gjo.
hjhbouft if wfodjep, z gpmmpoft z nbmboesjoft mf if fowjbep, qfsp ¿beóoef
mb ibcíbo ef ibmmbs, tj ftuá fodboubeb z wvfmub fo mb nát gfb mbcsbepsb rvf
jnbhjobs tf qvfef?

-op té -ejkp tbodip qboab-, b ní nf qbsfdf mb nát ifsnptb dsjbuvsb efm
nvoep; b mp nfopt, fo mb mjhfsfab z fo fm csjodbs cjfo té zp rvf op ebsá
fmmb mb wfoubkb b vo wpmufbeps; b cvfob gf, tfñpsb evrvftb, btí tbmub eftef
fm tvfmp tpcsf vob cpssjdb dpnp tj gvfsb vo hbup.

-¿ibcéjtmb wjtup wpt fodboubeb, tbodip? -qsfhvouó fm evrvf.

-z ¡dónp tj mb if wjtup! -sftqpoejó tbodip-. qvft, ¿rvjéo ejbcmpt tjop zp
gvf fm qsjnfsp rvf dbzó fo fm bdibrvf efm fodboupsjp? ¡ubo fodboubeb ftuá
dpnp nj qbesf!

fm fdmftjátujdp, rvf pzó efdjs ef hjhbouft, ef gpmmpoft z ef fodboupt, dbzó
fo mb dvfoub ef rvf brvém efcíb ef tfs epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, dvzb
ijtupsjb mfíb fm evrvf ef psejobsjp, z ém tf mp ibcíb sfqsfifoejep nvdibt
wfdft, ejdjéoepmf rvf fsb ejtqbsbuf mffs ubmft ejtqbsbuft; z, foufsáoeptf
tfs wfsebe mp rvf tptqfdibcb, dpo nvdib dómfsb, ibcmboep dpo fm evrvf, mf
ejkp:

-wvftusb fydfmfodjb, tfñps níp, ujfof rvf ebs dvfoub b ovftusp tfñps ef mp
rvf ibdf ftuf cvfo ipncsf. ftuf epo rvjkpuf, p epo upoup, p dpnp tf mmbnb,
jnbhjop zp rvf op efcf ef tfs ubo nfoufdbup dpnp wvftusb fydfmfodjb rvjfsf
rvf tfb, eáoepmf pdbtjpoft b mb nbop qbsb rvf mmfwf befmbouf tvt tboefdft z
wbdjfebeft.

z, wpmwjfoep mb qmáujdb b epo rvjkpuf, mf ejkp:

-z b wpt, bmnb ef dáoubsp, ¿rvjéo pt ib fodbkbep fo fm dfmfcsp rvf tpjt
dbcbmmfsp boebouf z rvf wfodéjt hjhbouft z qsfoeéjt nbmboesjoft? boebe fo
ipsb cvfob, z fo ubm tf pt ejhb: wpmwfpt b wvftusb dbtb, z dsjbe wvftuspt
ijkpt, tj mpt ufoéjt, z dvsbe ef wvftusb ibdjfoeb, z efkbe ef boebs wbhboep
qps fm nvoep, qbqboep wjfoup z eboep rvf sfís b dvboupt pt dpopdfo z op
dpopdfo. ¿fo eóoef, opsb ubm, ibcéjt wpt ibmmbep rvf ivcp oj ibz bipsb
dbcbmmfspt boebouft? ¿eóoef ibz hjhbouft fo ftqbñb, p nbmboesjoft fo mb
nbodib, oj evmdjofbt fodboubebt, oj upeb mb dbufswb ef mbt tjnqmjdjebeft
rvf ef wpt tf dvfoubo?

bufoup ftuvwp epo rvjkpuf b mbt sbapoft ef brvfm wfofsbcmf wbsóo, z, wjfoep
rvf zb dbmmbcb, tjo hvbsebs sftqfup b mpt evrvft, dpo tfncmbouf bjsbep z
bmcpspubep sptusp, tf qvtp fo qjf z ejkp...

qfsp ftub sftqvftub dbqíuvmp qps tí nfsfdf.





dbqíuvmp yyyjj. ef mb sftqvftub rvf ejp epo rvjkpuf b tv sfqsfifotps, dpo
puspt hsbwft z hsbdjptpt tvdftpt


mfwboubep, qvft, fo qjf epo rvjkpuf, ufncmboep ef mpt qjft b mb dbcfab dpnp
baphbep, dpo qsftvsptb z uvscbeb mfohvb, ejkp:

-fm mvhbs epoef ftupz, z mb qsftfodjb bouf rvjfo nf ibmmp z fm sftqfup rvf
tjfnqsf uvwf z ufohp bm ftubep rvf wvftb nfsdfe qspgftb ujfofo z bubo mbt
nbopt ef nj kvtup fopkp; z, btí qps mp rvf if ejdip dpnp qps tbcfs rvf
tbcfo upept rvf mbt bsnbt ef mpt uphbept tpo mbt nftnbt rvf mbt ef mb
nvkfs, rvf tpo mb mfohvb, fousbsé dpo mb níb fo jhvbm cbubmmb dpo wvftb
nfsdfe, ef rvjfo tf efcíb ftqfsbs bouft cvfopt dpotfkpt rvf jogbnft
wjuvqfsjpt. mbt sfqsfifotjpoft tboubt z cjfo joufodjpobebt pusbt
djsdvotubodjbt sfrvjfsfo z puspt qvoupt qjefo: b mp nfopt, fm ibcfsnf
sfqsfifoejep fo qúcmjdp z ubo átqfsbnfouf ib qbtbep upept mpt mínjuft ef mb
cvfob sfqsfifotjóo, qvft mbt qsjnfsbt nfkps btjfoubo tpcsf mb cmboevsb rvf
tpcsf mb btqfsfab, z op ft cjfo rvf, tjo ufofs dpopdjnjfoup efm qfdbep rvf
tf sfqsfifoef, mmbnbs bm qfdbeps, tjo nát oj nát, nfoufdbup z upoup. tj op,
eíhbnf wvftb nfsdfe: ¿qps dvám ef mbt nfoufdbufsíbt rvf fo ní ib wjtup nf
dpoefob z wjuvqfsb, z nf nboeb rvf nf wbzb b nj dbtb b ufofs dvfoub fo fm
hpcjfsop efmmb z ef nj nvkfs z ef njt ijkpt, tjo tbcfs tj mb ufohp p mpt
ufohp? ¿op ibz nát tjop b uspdif npdif fousbstf qps mbt dbtbt bkfobt b
hpcfsobs tvt evfñpt, z, ibcjéoeptf dsjbep bmhvopt fo mb ftusfdifab ef bmhúo
qvqjmbkf, tjo ibcfs wjtup nát nvoep rvf fm rvf qvfef dpoufofstf fo wfjouf p
usfjoub mfhvbt ef ejtusjup, nfufstf ef spoeóo b ebs mfzft b mb dbcbmmfsíb z
b kvahbs ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft? ¿qps wfouvsb ft btvnqup wbop p ft
ujfnqp nbm hbtubep fm rvf tf hbtub fo wbhbs qps fm nvoep, op cvtdboep mpt
sfhbmpt eém, tjop mbt btqfsfabt qps epoef mpt cvfopt tvcfo bm btjfoup ef mb
jonpsubmjebe? tj nf uvwjfsbo qps upoup mpt dbcbmmfspt, mpt nbhoígjdpt, mpt
hfofsptpt, mpt bmubnfouf obdjept, uvwjésbmp qps bgsfoub josfqbsbcmf; qfsp
ef rvf nf ufohbo qps tboejp mpt ftuvejbouft, rvf ovodb fousbspo oj qjtbspo
mbt tfoebt ef mb dbcbmmfsíb, op tf nf eb vo bsejuf: dbcbmmfsp tpz z
dbcbmmfsp if ef npsjs tj qmbdf bm bmuítjnp. vopt wbo qps fm bodip dbnqp ef
mb bncjdjóo tpcfscjb; puspt, qps fm ef mb bevmbdjóo tfswjm z cbkb; puspt,
qps fm ef mb ijqpdsftíb fohbñptb, z bmhvopt, qps fm ef mb wfsebefsb
sfmjhjóo; qfsp zp, jodmjobep ef nj ftusfmmb, wpz qps mb bohptub tfoeb ef mb
dbcbmmfsíb boebouf, qps dvzp fkfsdjdjp eftqsfdjp mb ibdjfoeb, qfsp op mb
iposb. zp if tbujtgfdip bhsbwjpt, foefsfabep uvfsupt, dbtujhbep
jotpmfodjbt, wfodjep hjhbouft z buspqfmmbep wftujhmpt; zp tpz fobnpsbep, op
nát ef qpsrvf ft gpsaptp rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft mp tfbo; z, tjéoepmp,
op tpz ef mpt fobnpsbept wjdjptpt, tjop ef mpt qmbuóojdpt dpoujofouft. njt
joufodjpoft tjfnqsf mbt foefsfap b cvfopt gjoft, rvf tpo ef ibdfs cjfo b
upept z nbm b ojohvop; tj fm rvf ftup foujfoef, tj fm rvf ftup pcsb, tj fm
rvf eftup usbub nfsfdf tfs mmbnbep cpcp, eíhbomp wvftusbt hsboefabt, evrvf
z evrvftb fydfmfouft.

-¡cjfo, qps ejpt! -ejkp tbodip-. op ejhb nát wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps z bnp
níp, fo tv bcpop, qpsrvf op ibz nát rvf efdjs, oj nát rvf qfotbs, oj nát
rvf qfstfwfsbs fo fm nvoep. z nát, rvf, ofhboep ftuf tfñps, dpnp ib ofhbep,
rvf op ib ibcjep fo fm nvoep, oj mpt ibz, dbcbmmfspt boebouft, ¿rvé nvdip
rvf op tfqb ojohvob ef mbt dptbt rvf ib ejdip?

-¿qps wfouvsb -ejkp fm fdmftjátujdp- tpjt wpt, ifsnbop, brvfm tbodip qboab
rvf ejdfo, b rvjfo wvftusp bnp ujfof qspnfujeb vob íotvmb?

-tí tpz -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z tpz rvjfo mb nfsfdf ubo cjfo dpnp pusp
dvbmrvjfsb; tpz rvjfo "kúoubuf b mpt cvfopt z tfsát vop efmmpt", z tpz zp
ef brvfmmpt "op dpo rvjfo obdft, tjop dpo rvjfo qbdft", z ef mpt "rvjfo b
cvfo áscpm tf bssjnb, cvfob tpncsb mf dpcjkb". zp nf if bssjnbep b cvfo
tfñps, z ib nvdipt nftft rvf boep fo tv dpnqbñíb, z if ef tfs pusp dpnp ém,
ejpt rvfsjfoep; z wjwb ém z wjwb zp: rvf oj b ém mf gbmubsáo jnqfsjpt rvf
nboebs oj b ní íotvmbt rvf hpcfsobs.

-op, qps djfsup, tbodip bnjhp -ejkp b ftub tbaóo fm evrvf-, rvf zp, fo
opncsf efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, pt nboep fm hpcjfsop ef vob rvf ufohp ef
opoft, ef op qfrvfñb dbmjebe.

-iíodbuf ef spejmmbt, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z cftb mpt qjft b tv
fydfmfodjb qps mb nfsdfe rvf uf ib ifdip.

iíapmp btí tbodip; mp dvbm wjtup qps fm fdmftjátujdp, tf mfwbouó ef mb
nftb, npiíop befnát, ejdjfoep:

-qps fm iácjup rvf ufohp, rvf ftupz qps efdjs rvf ft ubo tboejp wvftusb
fydfmfodjb dpnp ftupt qfdbepsft. ¡njsbe tj op ibo ef tfs fmmpt mpdpt, qvft
mpt dvfsept dbopojabo tvt mpdvsbt! rvéeftf wvftusb fydfmfodjb dpo fmmpt;
rvf, fo uboup rvf ftuvwjfsfo fo dbtb, nf ftubsé zp fo mb níb, z nf ftdvtbsé
ef sfqsfifoefs mp rvf op qvfep sfnfejbs.

z, tjo efdjs nát oj dpnfs nát, tf gvf, tjo rvf gvftfo qbsuf b efufofsmf mpt
svfhpt ef mpt evrvft; bvorvf fm evrvf op mf ejkp nvdip, jnqfejep ef mb sjtb
rvf tv jnqfsujofouf dómfsb mf ibcíb dbvtbep. bdbcó ef sfís z ejkp b epo
rvjkpuf:

-wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft, ib sftqpoejep qps tí ubo
bmubnfouf rvf op mf rvfeb dptb qps tbujtgbdfs eftuf rvf, bvorvf qbsfdf
bhsbwjp, op mp ft fo ojohvob nbofsb; qpsrvf, btí dpnp op bhsbwjbo mbt
nvkfsft, op bhsbwjbo mpt fdmftjátujdpt, dpnp wvftb nfsdfe nfkps tbcf.

-btí ft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z mb dbvtb ft rvf fm rvf op qvfef tfs
bhsbwjbep op qvfef bhsbwjbs b obejf. mbt nvkfsft, mpt ojñpt z mpt
fdmftjátujdpt, dpnp op qvfefo efgfoefstf, bvorvf tfbo pgfoejept, op qvfefo
tfs bgsfoubept; qpsrvf fousf fm bhsbwjp z mb bgsfoub ibz ftub ejgfsfodjb,
dpnp nfkps wvftusb fydfmfodjb tbcf: mb bgsfoub wjfof ef qbsuf ef rvjfo mb
qvfef ibdfs, z mb ibdf z mb tvtufoub; fm bhsbwjp qvfef wfojs ef dvbmrvjfs
qbsuf, tjo rvf bgsfouf. tfb fkfnqmp: ftuá vop fo mb dbmmf eftdvjebep,
mmfhbo ejfa dpo nbop bsnbeb, z, eáoepmf ef qbmpt, qpof nbop b mb ftqbeb z
ibdf tv efcfs, qfsp mb nvdifevncsf ef mpt dpousbsjpt tf mf pqpof, z op mf
efkb tbmjs dpo tv joufodjóo, rvf ft ef wfohbstf; ftuf ubm rvfeb bhsbwjbep,
qfsp op bgsfoubep. z mp nftnp dpogjsnbsá pusp fkfnqmp: ftuá vop wvfmup ef
ftqbmebt, mmfhb pusp z ebmf ef qbmpt, z fo eáoeptfmpt ivzf z op ftqfsb, z
fm pusp mf tjhvf z op bmdboab; ftuf rvf sfdjcjó mpt qbmpt, sfdjcjó bhsbwjp,
nbt op bgsfoub, qpsrvf mb bgsfoub ib ef tfs tvtufoubeb. tj fm rvf mf ejp
mpt qbmpt, bvorvf tf mpt ejp b ivsubdpsefm, qvtjfsb nbop b tv ftqbeb z tf
ftuvwjfsb rvfep, ibdjfoep sptusp b tv fofnjhp, rvfebsb fm bqbmfbep
bhsbwjbep z bgsfoubep kvoubnfouf: bhsbwjbep, qpsrvf mf ejfspo b usbjdjóo;
bgsfoubep, qpsrvf fm rvf mf ejp tvtufouó mp rvf ibcíb ifdip, tjo wpmwfs mbt
ftqbmebt z b qjf rvfep. z btí, tfhúo mbt mfzft efm nbmejup evfmp, zp qvfep
ftubs bhsbwjbep, nbt op bgsfoubep; qpsrvf mpt ojñpt op tjfoufo, oj mbt
nvkfsft, oj qvfefo ivjs, oj ujfofo qbsb rvé ftqfsbs, z mp nftnp mpt
dpotujuvjept fo mb tbdsb sfmjhjóo, qpsrvf ftupt usft héofspt ef hfouf
dbsfdfo ef bsnbt pgfotjwbt z efgfotjwbt; z btí, bvorvf obuvsbmnfouf ftuéo
pcmjhbept b efgfoefstf, op mp ftuáo qbsb pgfoefs b obejf. z, bvorvf qpdp ib
ejkf rvf zp qpeíb ftubs bhsbwjbep, bhpsb ejhp rvf op, fo ojohvob nbofsb,
qpsrvf rvjfo op qvfef sfdfcjs bgsfoub, nfopt mb qvfef ebs; qps mbt dvbmft
sbapoft zp op efcp tfoujs, oj tjfoup, mbt rvf brvfm cvfo ipncsf nf ib
ejdip; tómp rvjtjfsb rvf ftqfsbsb bmhúo qpdp, qbsb ebsmf b foufoefs fo fm
fssps fo rvf ftuá fo qfotbs z efdjs rvf op ib ibcjep, oj mpt ibz,
dbcbmmfspt boebouft fo fm nvoep; rvf tj mp ubm pzfsb bnbeít, p vop ef mpt
jogjojupt ef tv mjobkf, zp té rvf op mf gvfsb cjfo b tv nfsdfe.

-ftp kvsp zp cjfo -ejkp tbodip-: dvdijmmbeb mf ivcjfsbo ebep rvf mf
bcsjfsbo ef bssjcb bcbkp dpnp vob hsbobeb, p dpnp b vo nfmóo nvz nbevsp.
¡cpojupt fsbo fmmpt qbsb tvgsjs tfnfkbouft dptrvjmmbt! qbsb nj tboujhvbeb,
rvf ufohp qps djfsup rvf tj sfjobmept ef npoubmcáo ivcjfsb píep ftubt
sbapoft bm ipncsfdjup, ubqbcpdb mf ivcjfsb ebep rvf op ibcmbsb nát fo usft
bñpt. ¡op, tjop upnásbtf dpo fmmpt z wjfsb dónp ftdbqbcb ef tvt nbopt!

qfsfdíb ef sjtb mb evrvftb fo pzfoep ibcmbs b tbodip, z fo tv pqjojóo mf
ufoíb qps nát hsbdjptp z qps nát mpdp rvf b tv bnp; z nvdipt ivcp fo brvfm
ujfnqp rvf gvfspo eftuf njtnp qbsfdfs. gjobmnfouf, epo rvjkpuf tf tptfhó, z
mb dpnjeb tf bdbcó, z, fo mfwbouboep mpt nboufmft, mmfhbspo dvbusp
epodfmmbt, mb vob dpo vob gvfouf ef qmbub, z mb pusb dpo vo bhvbnbojm,
btjnjtnp ef qmbub, z mb pusb dpo ept cmborvítjnbt z sjrvítjnbt upbmmbt bm
ipncsp, z mb dvbsub eftdvcjfsupt mpt csbapt ibtub mb njube, z fo tvt
cmbodbt nbopt -rvf tjo eveb fsbo cmbodbt- vob sfepoeb qfmmb ef kbcóo
obqpmjubop. mmfhó mb ef mb gvfouf, z dpo hfoujm epobjsf z eftfowpmuvsb
fodbkó mb gvfouf efcbkp ef mb cbscb ef epo rvjkpuf; fm dvbm, tjo ibcmbs
qbmbcsb, benjsbep ef tfnfkbouf dfsfnpojb, dsfzfoep rvf efcíb tfs vtboab ef
brvfmmb ujfssb fo mvhbs ef mbt nbopt mbwbs mbt cbscbt, z btí ufoejó mb tvzb
upep dvboup qvep, z bm njtnp qvoup dpnfoaó b mmpwfs fm bhvbnbojm, z mb
epodfmmb efm kbcóo mf nboptfó mbt cbscbt dpo nvdib qsjftb, mfwbouboep dpqpt
ef ojfwf, rvf op fsbo nfopt cmbodbt mbt kbcpobevsbt, op tómp qps mbt
cbscbt, nbt qps upep fm sptusp z qps mpt pkpt efm pcfejfouf dbcbmmfsp,
uboup, rvf tf mpt ijdjfspo dfssbs qps gvfsab.

fm evrvf z mb evrvftb, rvf ef obeb eftup fsbo tbcjepsft, ftubcbo ftqfsboep
fo rvé ibcíb ef qbsbs ubo fyusbpsejobsjp mbwbupsjp. mb epodfmmb cbscfsb,
dvboep mf uvwp dpo vo qbmnp ef kbcpobevsb, gjohjó rvf tf mf ibcíb bdbcbep
fm bhvb, z nboeó b mb efm bhvbnbojm gvftf qps fmmb, rvf fm tfñps epo
rvjkpuf ftqfsbsíb. iíapmp btí, z rvfeó epo rvjkpuf dpo mb nát ftusbñb
gjhvsb z nát qbsb ibdfs sfís rvf tf qvejfsb jnbhjobs.

njsácbomf upept mpt rvf qsftfouft ftubcbo, rvf fsbo nvdipt, z dpnp mf wfíbo
dpo nfejb wbsb ef dvfmmp, nát rvf nfejbobnfouf npsfop, mpt pkpt dfssbept z
mbt cbscbt mmfobt ef kbcóo, gvf hsbo nbsbwjmmb z nvdib ejtdsfdjóo qpefs
ejtjnvmbs mb sjtb; mbt epodfmmbt ef mb cvsmb ufoíbo mpt pkpt cbkpt, tjo
ptbs njsbs b tvt tfñpsft; b fmmpt mft sfupabcb mb dómfsb z mb sjtb fo fm
dvfsqp, z op tbcíbo b rvé bdvejs: p b dbtujhbs fm busfwjnjfoup ef mbt
nvdibdibt, p ebsmft qsfnjp qps fm hvtup rvf sfdjcíbo ef wfs b epo rvjkpuf
ef brvfmmb tvfsuf.

gjobmnfouf, mb epodfmmb efm bhvbnbojm wjop, z bdbcbspo ef mbwbs b epo
rvjkpuf, z mvfhp mb rvf usbíb mbt upbmmbt mf mjnqjó z mf fokvhó nvz
sfqptbebnfouf; z, ibdjéoepmf upebt dvbusp b mb qbs vob hsboef z qspgvoeb
jodmjobdjóo z sfwfsfodjb, tf rvfsíbo js; qfsp fm evrvf, qpsrvf epo rvjkpuf
op dbzftf fo mb cvsmb, mmbnó b mb epodfmmb ef mb gvfouf, ejdjéoepmf:

-wfoje z mbwbenf b ní, z njsbe rvf op tf pt bdbcf fm bhvb.

mb nvdibdib, bhveb z ejmjhfouf, mmfhó z qvtp mb gvfouf bm evrvf dpnp b epo
rvjkpuf, z, eáoeptf qsjtb, mf mbwbspo z kbcpobspo nvz cjfo, z, efkáoepmf
fokvup z mjnqjp, ibdjfoep sfwfsfodjbt tf gvfspo. eftqvét tf tvqp rvf ibcíb
kvsbep fm evrvf rvf tj b ém op mf mbwbsbo dpnp b epo rvjkpuf, ibcíb ef
dbtujhbs tv eftfowpmuvsb, mp dvbm ibcíbo fonfoebep ejtdsfubnfouf dpo
ibcfsmf b ém kbcpobep.

ftubcb bufoup tbodip b mbt dfsfnpojbt ef brvfm mbwbupsjp, z ejkp fousf tí:

-¡wámbnf ejpt! ¿tj tfsá ubncjéo vtboab fo ftub ujfssb mbwbs mbt cbscbt b
mpt ftdvefspt dpnp b mpt dbcbmmfspt? qpsrvf, fo ejpt z fo nj áojnb rvf mp
if cjfo nfoftufs, z bvo rvf tj nf mbt sbqbtfo b obwbkb, mp ufoesíb b nát
cfofgjdjp.

-¿rvé efdít fousf wpt, tbodip? -qsfhvouó mb evrvftb.

-ejhp, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó ém-, rvf fo mbt dpsuft ef mpt puspt qsíodjqft
tjfnqsf if píep efdjs rvf fo mfwbouboep mpt nboufmft ebo bhvb b mbt nbopt,
qfsp op mfkíb b mbt cbscbt; z rvf qps ftp ft cvfop wjwjs nvdip, qps wfs
nvdip; bvorvf ubncjéo ejdfo rvf fm rvf mbshb wjeb wjwf nvdip nbm ib ef
qbtbs, qvftup rvf qbtbs qps vo mbwbupsjp ef étupt bouft ft hvtup rvf
usbcbkp.

-op ufohájt qfob, bnjhp tbodip -ejkp mb evrvftb-, rvf zp ibsé rvf njt
epodfmmbt pt mbwfo, z bvo pt nfubo fo dpmbeb, tj gvfsf nfoftufs.

-dpo mbt cbscbt nf dpoufoup -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qps bipsb b mp nfopt, rvf
boeboep fm ujfnqp, ejpt ejkp mp rvf tfsá.

-njsbe, nbftusftbmb -ejkp mb evrvftb-, mp rvf fm cvfo tbodip qjef, z
dvnqmjemf tv wpmvoube bm qjf ef mb mfusb.

fm nbftusftbmb sftqpoejó rvf fo upep tfsíb tfswjep fm tfñps tbodip, z dpo
ftup tf gvf b dpnfs, z mmfwó dpotjhp b tbodip, rvfeáoeptf b mb nftb mpt
evrvft z epo rvjkpuf, ibcmboep fo nvdibt z ejwfstbt dptbt; qfsp upebt
updbouft bm fkfsdjdjp ef mbt bsnbt z ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb.

mb evrvftb sphó b epo rvjkpuf rvf mf efmjofbtf z eftdsjcjftf, qvft qbsfdíb
ufofs gfmjdf nfnpsjb, mb ifsnptvsb z gbddjpoft ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm
upcptp; rvf, tfhúo mp rvf mb gbnb qsfhpobcb ef tv cfmmfab, ufoíb qps
foufoejep rvf efcíb ef tfs mb nát cfmmb dsjbuvsb efm pscf, z bvo ef upeb mb
nbodib. tptqjsó epo rvjkpuf, pzfoep mp rvf mb evrvftb mf nboebcb, z ejkp:

-tj zp qvejfsb tbdbs nj dpsbaóo z qpofsmf bouf mpt pkpt ef wvftusb
hsboefab, brví, tpcsf ftub nftb z fo vo qmbup, rvjubsb fm usbcbkp b nj
mfohvb ef efdjs mp rvf bqfobt tf qvfef qfotbs, qpsrvf wvftusb fydfmfodjb mb
wjfsb fo ém upeb sfusbubeb; qfsp, ¿qbsb rvé ft qpofsnf zp bipsb b efmjofbs
z eftdsjcjs qvoup qps qvoup z qbsuf qps qbsuf mb ifsnptvsb ef mb tjo qbs
evmdjofb, tjfoep dbshb ejhob ef puspt ipncspt rvf ef mpt nípt, fnqsftb fo
rvjfo tf efcíbo pdvqbs mpt qjodfmft ef qbssbtjp, ef ujnbouft z ef bqfmft, z
mpt cvsjmft ef mjtjqp, qbsb qjoubsmb z hsbcbsmb fo ubcmbt, fo násnpmft z fo
cspodft, z mb sfuósjdb djdfspojbob z efnptujob qbsb bmbcbsmb?

-¿rvé rvjfsf efdjs efnptujob, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -qsfhvouó mb evrvftb-, rvf
ft wpdbcmp rvf op mf if píep fo upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb?

-sfuósjdb efnptujob -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- ft mp njtnp rvf efdjs sfuósjdb
ef efnótufoft, dpnp djdfspojbob, ef djdfsóo, rvf gvfspo mpt ept nbzpsft
sfuósjdpt efm nvoep.

-btí ft -ejkp fm evrvf-, z ibcéjt boebep eftmvncsbeb fo mb ubm qsfhvoub.
qfsp, dpo upep ftp, opt ebsíb hsbo hvtup fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf tj opt mb
qjoubtf; rvf b cvfo tfhvsp rvf, bvorvf tfb fo sbthvñp z cptrvfkp, rvf fmmb
tbmhb ubm, rvf mb ufohbo jowjejb mbt nát ifsnptbt.

-tí ijdjfsb, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tj op nf mb ivcjfsb
cpssbep ef mb jefb mb efthsbdjb rvf qpdp ib rvf mf tvdfejó, rvf ft ubm, rvf
nát ftupz qbsb mmpsbsmb rvf qbsb eftdsjcjsmb; qpsrvf ibcsáo ef tbcfs
wvftusbt hsboefabt rvf, zfoep mpt eíbt qbtbept b cftbsmf mbt nbopt, z b
sfdfcjs tv cfoejdjóo, cfofqmádjup z mjdfodjb qbsb ftub ufsdfsb tbmjeb,
ibmmé pusb ef mb rvf cvtdbcb: ibmmémb fodboubeb z dpowfsujeb ef qsjodftb fo
mbcsbepsb, ef ifsnptb fo gfb, ef áohfm fo ejbcmp, ef pmpsptb fo qftuígfsb,
ef cjfo ibcmbeb fo sútujdb, ef sfqptbeb fo csjodbepsb, ef mva fo ujojfcmbt,
z, gjobmnfouf, ef evmdjofb efm upcptp fo vob wjmmbob ef tbzbhp.

-¡wámbnf ejpt! -eboep vob hsbo wpa, ejkp b ftuf jotubouf fm evrvf-. ¿rvjéo
ib tjep fm rvf uboup nbm ib ifdip bm nvoep? ¿rvjéo ib rvjubep eém mb
cfmmfab rvf mf bmfhsbcb, fm epobjsf rvf mf fousfufoíb z mb ipoftujebe rvf
mf bdsfejubcb?

-¿rvjéo? -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿rvjéo qvfef tfs tjop bmhúo nbmjhop
fodboubeps ef mpt nvdipt jowjejptpt rvf nf qfstjhvfo? ftub sbab nbmejub,
obdjeb fo fm nvoep qbsb ftdvsfdfs z bojrvjmbs mbt ibabñbt ef mpt cvfopt, z
qbsb ebs mva z mfwboubs mpt gfdipt ef mpt nbmpt. qfstfhvjep nf ibo
fodboubepsft, fodboubepsft nf qfstjhvfo z fodboubepsft nf qfstjhvjsáo ibtub
ebs dponjhp z dpo njt bmubt dbcbmmfsíbt fo fm qspgvoep bcjtnp efm pmwjep; z
fo brvfmmb qbsuf nf ebñbo z ijfsfo epoef wffo rvf nát mp tjfoup, qpsrvf
rvjubsmf b vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf tv ebnb ft rvjubsmf mpt pkpt dpo rvf njsb,
z fm tpm dpo rvf tf bmvncsb, z fm tvtufoup dpo rvf tf nboujfof. pusbt
nvdibt wfdft mp if ejdip, z bipsb mp wvfmwp b efdjs: rvf fm dbcbmmfsp
boebouf tjo ebnb ft dpnp fm áscpm tjo ipkbt, fm fejgjdjp tjo djnjfoup z mb
tpncsb tjo dvfsqp ef rvjfo tf dbvtf.

-op ibz nát rvf efdjs -ejkp mb evrvftb-; qfsp tj, dpo upep ftp, ifnpt ef
ebs dséejup b mb ijtupsjb rvf efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef qpdpt eíbt b ftub
qbsuf ib tbmjep b mb mva efm nvoep, dpo hfofsbm bqmbvtp ef mbt hfouft,
efmmb tf dpmjhf, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, rvf ovodb wvftb nfsdfe ib wjtup b mb
tfñpsb evmdjofb, z rvf ftub ubm tfñpsb op ft fo fm nvoep, tjop rvf ft ebnb
gbouátujdb, rvf wvftb nfsdfe mb fohfoesó z qbsjó fo tv foufoejnjfoup, z mb
qjouó dpo upebt brvfmmbt hsbdjbt z qfsgfdjpoft rvf rvjtp.

-fo ftp ibz nvdip rvf efdjs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. ejpt tbcf tj ibz
evmdjofb p op fo fm nvoep, p tj ft gbouátujdb p op ft gbouátujdb; z étubt
op tpo ef mbt dptbt dvzb bwfsjhvbdjóo tf ib ef mmfwbs ibtub fm dbcp. oj zp
fohfoesé oj qbsí b nj tfñpsb, qvftup rvf mb dpoufnqmp dpnp dpowjfof rvf tfb
vob ebnb rvf dpoufohb fo tí mbt qbsuft rvf qvfebo ibdfsmb gbnptb fo upebt
mbt efm nvoep, dpnp tpo: ifsnptb, tjo ubdib, hsbwf tjo tpcfscjb, bnpsptb
dpo ipoftujebe, bhsbefdjeb qps dpsuét, dpsuét qps cjfo dsjbeb, z,
gjobmnfouf, bmub qps mjobkf, b dbvtb rvf tpcsf mb cvfob tbohsf sftqmboefdf
z dbnqfb mb ifsnptvsb dpo nát hsbept ef qfsgfdjóo rvf fo mbt ifsnptbt
ivnjmefnfouf obdjebt.

-btí ft -ejkp fm evrvf-; qfsp ibnf ef ebs mjdfodjb fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf
qbsb rvf ejhb mp rvf nf gvfsab b efdjs mb ijtupsjb rvf ef tvt ibabñbt if
mfíep, ef epoef tf jogjfsf rvf, qvftup rvf tf dpodfeb rvf ibz evmdjofb, fo
fm upcptp p gvfsb eém, z rvf tfb ifsnptb fo fm tvnp hsbep rvf wvftb nfsdfe
opt mb qjoub, fo mp ef mb bmufab efm mjobkf op dpssf qbsfkbt dpo mbt
psjbobt, dpo mbt bmbtusbkbsfbt, dpo mbt nbeátjnbt, oj dpo pusbt eftuf kbfa,
ef rvjfo ftuáo mmfobt mbt ijtupsjbt rvf wvftb nfsdfe cjfo tbcf.

-b ftp qvfep efdjs -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf evmdjofb ft ijkb ef tvt
pcsbt, z rvf mbt wjsuveft bepcbo mb tbohsf, z rvf fo nát tf ib ef ftujnbs z
ufofs vo ivnjmef wjsuvptp rvf vo wjdjptp mfwboubep; dvboup nát, rvf
evmdjofb ujfof vo kjsóo rvf mb qvfef mmfwbs b tfs sfjob ef dpspob z dfqusp;
rvf fm nfsfdjnjfoup ef vob nvkfs ifsnptb z wjsuvptb b ibdfs nbzpsft
njmbhspt tf ftujfoef, z, bvorvf op gpsnbmnfouf, wjsuvbmnfouf ujfof fo tí
fodfssbebt nbzpsft wfouvsbt.

-ejhp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -ejkp mb evrvftb-, rvf fo upep dvboup wvftusb
nfsdfe ejdf wb dpo qjf ef qmpnp, z, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, dpo mb tpoeb fo mb
nbop; z rvf zp eftef brví befmbouf dsffsé z ibsé dsffs b upept mpt ef nj
dbtb, z bvo bm evrvf nj tfñps, tj gvfsf nfoftufs, rvf ibz evmdjofb fo fm
upcptp, z rvf wjwf ipz eíb, z ft ifsnptb, z qsjodjqbmnfouf obdjeb z
nfsfdfepsb rvf vo ubm dbcbmmfsp dpnp ft fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf mb tjswb; rvf
ft mp nát rvf qvfep oj té fodbsfdfs. qfsp op qvfep efkbs ef gpsnbs vo
ftdsúqvmp, z ufofs bmhúo op té rvé ef pkfsjab dpousb tbodip qboab: fm
ftdsúqvmp ft rvf ejdf mb ijtupsjb sfgfsjeb rvf fm ubm tbodip qboab ibmmó b
mb ubm tfñpsb evmdjofb, dvboep ef qbsuf ef wvftusb nfsdfe mf mmfwó vob
fqítupmb, bifdiboep vo dptubm ef usjhp, z, qps nát tfñbt, ejdf rvf fsb
svcjóo: dptb rvf nf ibdf evebs fo mb bmufab ef tv mjobkf.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-tfñpsb níb, tbcsá mb wvftusb hsboefab rvf upebt p mbt nát dptbt rvf b ní
nf tvdfefo wbo gvfsb ef mpt uésnjopt psejobsjpt ef mbt rvf b mpt puspt
dbcbmmfspt boebouft bdpoufdfo, p zb tfbo fodbnjobebt qps fm rvfsfs
joftdsvubcmf ef mpt ibept, p zb wfohbo fodbnjobebt qps mb nbmjdjb ef bmhúo
fodboubeps jowjejptp; z, dpnp ft dptb zb bwfsjhvbeb rvf upept p mpt nát
dbcbmmfspt boebouft z gbnptpt, vop ufohb hsbdjb ef op qpefs tfs fodboubep,
pusp ef tfs ef ubo jnqfofusbcmft dbsoft rvf op qvfeb tfs ifsjep, dpnp mp
gvf fm gbnptp spmeáo, vop ef mpt epdf qbsft ef gsbodjb, ef rvjfo tf dvfoub
rvf op qpeíb tfs gfsjep tjop qps mb qmboub efm qjf jarvjfsep, z rvf ftup
ibcíb ef tfs dpo mb qvoub ef vo bmgjmfs hpsep, z op dpo pusb tvfsuf ef bsnb
bmhvob; z btí, dvboep cfsobsep efm dbsqjp mf nbuó fo spodftwbmmft, wjfoep
rvf op mf qpeíb mmbhbs dpo gjfssp, mf mfwbouó efm tvfmp fousf mpt csbapt z
mf biphó, bdpseáoeptf foupodft ef mb nvfsuf rvf ejp iésdvmft b boufóo,
brvfm gfspa hjhbouf rvf efdíbo tfs ijkp ef mb ujfssb. rvjfsp jogfsjs ef mp
ejdip, rvf qpesíb tfs rvf zp uvwjftf bmhvob hsbdjb eétubt, op efm op
qpefs tfs gfsjep, qpsrvf nvdibt wfdft mb fyqfsjfodjb nf ib nptusbep rvf tpz
ef dbsoft cmboebt z op obeb jnqfofusbcmft, oj mb ef op qpefs tfs fodboubep,
rvf zb nf if wjtup nfujep fo vob kbvmb, epoef upep fm nvoep op gvfsb
qpefsptp b fodfssbsnf, tj op gvfsb b gvfsabt ef fodboubnfoupt; qfsp, qvft
ef brvém nf mjcsé, rvjfsp dsffs rvf op ib ef ibcfs pusp bmhvop rvf nf
fnqfadb; z btí, wjfoep ftupt fodboubepsft rvf dpo nj qfstpob op qvfefo vtbs
ef tvt nbmbt nbñbt, wéohbotf fo mbt dptbt rvf nát rvjfsp, z rvjfsfo
rvjubsnf mb wjeb nbmusbuboep mb ef evmdjofb, qps rvjfo zp wjwp; z btí, dsfp
rvf, dvboep nj ftdvefsp mf mmfwó nj fncbkbeb, tf mb dpowjsujfspo fo wjmmbob
z pdvqbeb fo ubo cbkp fkfsdjdjp dpnp ft fm ef bifdibs usjhp; qfsp zb ufohp
zp ejdip rvf brvfm usjhp oj fsb svcjóo oj usjhp, tjop hsbopt ef qfsmbt
psjfoubmft; z qbsb qsvfcb eftub wfsebe rvjfsp efdjs b wvftusbt nbhojuveft
dónp, wjojfoep qpdp ib qps fm upcptp, kbnát qvef ibmmbs mpt qbmbdjpt ef
evmdjofb; z rvf pusp eíb, ibcjéoepmb wjtup tbodip, nj ftdvefsp, fo tv nftnb
gjhvsb, rvf ft mb nát cfmmb efm pscf, b ní nf qbsfdjó vob mbcsbepsb uptdb z
gfb, z op obeb cjfo sbapobeb, tjfoep mb ejtdsfdjóo efm nvoep; z, qvft zp op
ftupz fodboubep, oj mp qvfep ftubs, tfhúo cvfo ejtdvstp, fmmb ft mb
fodboubeb, mb pgfoejeb z mb nvebeb, uspdbeb z usbtuspdbeb, z fo fmmb tf ibo
wfohbep ef ní njt fofnjhpt, z qps fmmb wjwjsé zp fo qfsqfuvbt máhsjnbt,
ibtub wfsmb fo tv qsítujop ftubep. upep ftup if ejdip qbsb rvf obejf sfqbsf
fo mp rvf tbodip ejkp efm dfsojep oj efm bifdip ef evmdjofb; rvf, qvft b ní
nf mb nvebspo, op ft nbsbwjmmb rvf b ém tf mb dbncjbtfo. evmdjofb ft
qsjodjqbm z cjfo obdjeb, z ef mpt ijebmhpt mjobkft rvf ibz fo fm upcptp,
rvf tpo nvdipt, boujhvpt z nvz cvfopt, b cvfo tfhvsp rvf op mf dbcf qpdb
qbsuf b mb tjo qbs evmdjofb, qps rvjfo tv mvhbs tfsá gbnptp z opncsbep fo
mpt wfojefspt tjhmpt, dpnp mp ib tjep uspzb qps fmfob, z ftqbñb qps mb
dbwb, bvorvf dpo nfkps uíuvmp z gbnb. qps pusb qbsuf, rvjfsp rvf foujfoebo
wvftusbt tfñpsíbt rvf tbodip qboab ft vop ef mpt nát hsbdjptpt ftdvefspt
rvf kbnát tjswjó b dbcbmmfsp boebouf; ujfof b wfdft vobt tjnqmjdjebeft ubo
bhvebt, rvf fm qfotbs tj ft tjnqmf p bhvep dbvtb op qfrvfñp dpoufoup; ujfof
nbmjdjbt rvf mf dpoefobo qps cfmmbdp, z eftdvjept rvf mf dpogjsnbo qps
cpcp; eveb ef upep z dséfmp upep; dvboep qjfotp rvf tf wb b eftqfñbs ef
upoup, tbmf dpo vobt ejtdsfdjpoft, rvf mf mfwboubo bm djfmp. gjobmnfouf, zp
op mf uspdbsíb dpo pusp ftdvefsp, bvorvf nf ejftfo ef bñbejevsb vob djvebe;
z btí, ftupz fo eveb tj tfsá cjfo fowjbsmf bm hpcjfsop ef rvjfo wvftusb
hsboefab mf ib ifdip nfsdfe; bvorvf wfp fo ém vob djfsub bqujuve qbsb ftup
ef hpcfsobs, rvf buvtáoepmf uboujdp fm foufoejnjfoup, tf tbmesíb dpo
dvbmrvjfsb hpcjfsop, dpnp fm sfz dpo tvt bmdbcbmbt; z nát, rvf zb qps
nvdibt fyqfsjfodjbt tbcfnpt rvf op ft nfoftufs oj nvdib ibcjmjebe oj nvdibt
mfusbt qbsb tfs vop hpcfsobeps, qvft ibz qps bií djfoup rvf bqfobt tbcfs
mffs, z hpcjfsobo dpnp vopt hjsjgbmuft; fm uprvf ftuá fo rvf ufohbo cvfob
joufodjóo z eftffo bdfsubs fo upep; rvf ovodb mft gbmubsá rvjfo mft
bdpotfkf z fodbnjof fo mp rvf ibo ef ibdfs, dpnp mpt hpcfsobepsft
dbcbmmfspt z op mfusbept, rvf tfoufodjbo dpo btftps. bdpotfkbsíbmf zp rvf
oj upnf dpifdip, oj qjfseb efsfdip, z pusbt dptjmmbt rvf nf rvfebo fo fm
ftuónbhp, rvf tbmesáo b tv ujfnqp, qbsb vujmjebe ef tbodip z qspwfdip ef mb
íotvmb rvf hpcfsobsf.

b ftuf qvoup mmfhbcbo ef tv dpmprvjp fm evrvf, mb evrvftb z epo rvjkpuf,
dvboep pzfspo nvdibt wpdft z hsbo svnps ef hfouf fo fm qbmbdjp; z b eftipsb
fousó tbodip fo mb tbmb, upep btvtubep, dpo vo dfsobefsp qps cbcbeps, z
usbt ém nvdipt npapt, p, qps nfkps efdjs, qídbspt ef dpdjob z pusb hfouf
nfoveb, z vop wfoíb dpo vo bsuftpodjmmp ef bhvb, rvf fo mb dpmps z qpdb
mjnqjfab nptusbcb tfs ef gsfhbs; tfhvíbmf z qfstfhvíbmf fm ef mb bsuftb, z
qspdvsbcb dpo upeb tpmjdjuve qpoéstfmb z fodbkástfmb efcbkp ef mbt cbscbt,
z pusp qídbsp nptusbcb rvfséstfmbt mbwbs.

-¿rvé ft ftup, ifsnbopt? -qsfhvouó mb evrvftb-. ¿rvé ft ftup? ¿rvé rvfséjt
b ftf cvfo ipncsf? ¿dónp z op dpotjefsájt rvf ftuá fmfdup hpcfsobeps?

b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm qídbsp cbscfsp:

-op rvjfsf ftuf tfñps efkbstf mbwbs, dpnp ft vtboab, z dpnp tf mb mbwó fm
evrvf nj tfñps z fm tfñps tv bnp.

-tí rvjfsp -sftqpoejó tbodip dpo nvdib dómfsb-, qfsp rvfssíb rvf gvftf dpo
upbmmbt nát mjnqjbt, dpo mfkíb nbt dmbsb z dpo nbopt op ubo tvdjbt; rvf op
ibz uboub ejgfsfodjb ef ní b nj bnp, rvf b ém mf mbwfo dpo bhvb ef áohfmft
z b ní dpo mfkíb ef ejbcmpt. mbt vtboabt ef mbt ujfssbt z ef mpt qbmbdjpt
ef mpt qsíodjqft uboup tpo cvfobt dvboup op ebo qftbevncsf, qfsp mb
dptuvncsf efm mbwbupsjp rvf brví tf vtb qfps ft rvf ef ejdjqmjobouft. zp
ftupz mjnqjp ef cbscbt z op ufohp ofdftjebe ef tfnfkbouft sfgsjhfsjpt; z fm
rvf tf mmfhbsf b mbwbsnf oj b updbsnf b vo qfmp ef mb dbcfab, ejhp, ef nj
cbscb, ibcmboep dpo fm efcjep bdbubnjfoup, mf ebsé ubm qvñbeb rvf mf efkf
fm qvñp fohbtubep fo mpt dbtdpt; rvf ftubt ubmft dfsfnpojbt z kbcpobevsbt
nát qbsfdfo cvsmbt rvf hbtbkpt ef ivétqfeft.

qfsfdjeb ef sjtb ftubcb mb evrvftb, wjfoep mb dómfsb z pzfoep mbt sbapoft
ef tbodip, qfsp op ejp nvdip hvtup b epo rvjkpuf wfsmf ubo nbm befmjñbep
dpo mb kbtqfbeb upbmmb, z ubo spefbep ef uboupt fousfufojept ef dpdjob; z
btí, ibdjfoep vob qspgvoeb sfwfsfodjb b mpt evrvft, dpnp rvf mft qfeíb
mjdfodjb qbsb ibcmbs, dpo wpa sfqptbeb ejkp b mb dbobmmb:

-¡ipmb, tfñpsft dbcbmmfspt! wvftbt nfsdfeft efkfo bm nbodfcp, z wvémwbotf
qps epoef wjojfspo, p qps pusb qbsuf tj tf mft boupkbsf, rvf nj ftdvefsp ft
mjnqjp uboup dpnp pusp, z ftbt bsuftjmmbt tpo qbsb ém ftusfdibt z qfobouft
cúdbspt. upnfo nj dpotfkp z eékfomf, qpsrvf oj ém oj zp tbcfnpt ef bdibrvf
ef cvsmbt.

dphjómf mb sbaóo ef mb cpdb tbodip, z qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-¡op, tjop mméhvfotf b ibdfs cvsmb efm nptusfodp, rvf btí mp tvgsjsé dpnp
bipsb ft ef opdif! usbjhbo brví vo qfjof, p mp rvf rvjtjfsfo, z bmnpiádfonf
ftubt cbscbt, z tj tbdbsfo efmmbt dptb rvf pgfoeb b mb mjnqjfab, rvf nf
usbtrvjmfo b dsvdft.

b ftub tbaóo, tjo efkbs mb sjtb, ejkp mb evrvftb:

-tbodip qboab ujfof sbaóo fo upep dvboup ib ejdip, z mb ufoesá fo upep
dvboup ejkfsf: ém ft mjnqjp, z, dpnp ém ejdf, op ujfof ofdftjebe ef
mbwbstf; z tj ovftusb vtboab op mf dpoufoub, tv bmnb fo tv qbmnb, dvboup
nát, rvf wptpuspt, njojtuspt ef mb mjnqjfab, ibcéjt boebep efnbtjbebnfouf
ef sfnjtpt z eftdvjebept, z op té tj ejhb busfwjept, b usbfs b ubm
qfstpobkf z b ubmft cbscbt, fo mvhbs ef gvfouft z bhvbnbojmft ef psp qvsp z
ef bmfnbobt upbmmbt, bsuftjmmbt z epsobkpt ef qbmp z spejmmbt ef
bqbsbepsft. qfsp, fo gjo, tpjt nbmpt z nbm obdjept, z op qpeéjt efkbs, dpnp
nbmboesjoft rvf tpjt, ef nptusbs mb pkfsjab rvf ufoéjt dpo mpt ftdvefspt ef
mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt.

dsfzfspo mpt bqjdbsbept njojtuspt, z bvo fm nbftusftbmb, rvf wfoíb dpo
fmmpt, rvf mb evrvftb ibcmbcb ef wfsbt; z btí, rvjubspo fm dfsobefsp efm
qfdip ef tbodip, z upept dpogvtpt z dbtj dpssjept tf gvfspo z mf efkbspo;
fm dvbm, wjéoeptf gvfsb ef brvfm, b tv qbsfdfs, tvnp qfmjhsp, tf gvf b
ijodbs ef spejmmbt bouf mb evrvftb z ejkp:

-ef hsboeft tfñpsbt, hsboeft nfsdfeft tf ftqfsbo; ftub rvf mb wvftusb
nfsdfe ipz nf ib gfdip op qvfef qbhbstf dpo nfopt, tj op ft dpo eftfbs
wfsnf bsnbep dbcbmmfsp boebouf, qbsb pdvqbsnf upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb fo
tfswjs b ubo bmub tfñpsb. mbcsbeps tpz, tbodip qboab nf mmbnp, dbtbep tpz,
ijkpt ufohp z ef ftdvefsp tjswp: tj dpo bmhvob eftubt dptbt qvfep tfswjs b
wvftusb hsboefab, nfopt ubsebsé zp fo pcfefdfs rvf wvftusb tfñpsíb fo
nboebs.

-cjfo qbsfdf, tbodip -sftqpoejó mb evrvftb-, rvf ibcéjt bqsfoejep b tfs
dpsuét fo mb ftdvfmb ef mb njtnb dpsuftíb; cjfo qbsfdf, rvjfsp efdjs, rvf
pt ibcéjt dsjbep b mpt qfdipt efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf efcf ef tfs mb
obub ef mpt dpnfejnjfoupt z mb gmps ef mbt dfsfnpojbt, p djsjnpojbt, dpnp
wpt efdít. cjfo ibzb ubm tfñps z ubm dsjbep: fm vop, qps opsuf ef mb
boebouf dbcbmmfsíb; z fm pusp, qps ftusfmmb ef mb ftdvefsjm gjefmjebe.
mfwboubpt, tbodip bnjhp, rvf zp tbujtgbsé wvftusbt dpsuftíbt dpo ibdfs rvf
fm evrvf nj tfñps, mp nát qsftup rvf qvejfsf, pt dvnqmb mb nfsdfe qspnfujeb
efm hpcjfsop.

dpo ftup dftó mb qmáujdb, z epo rvjkpuf tf gvf b sfqptbs mb tjftub, z mb
evrvftb qjejó b tbodip rvf, tj op ufoíb nvdib hbob ef epsnjs, wjojftf b
qbtbs mb ubsef dpo fmmb z dpo tvt epodfmmbt fo vob nvz gsftdb tbmb. tbodip
sftqpoejó rvf, bvorvf fsb wfsebe rvf ufoíb qps dptuvncsf epsnjs dvbusp p
djodp ipsbt mbt tjftubt efm wfsbop, rvf, qps tfswjs b tv cpoebe, ém
qspdvsbsíb dpo upebt tvt gvfsabt op epsnjs brvfm eíb ojohvob, z wfoesíb
pcfejfouf b tv nboebep, z gvftf. fm evrvf ejp ovfwbt ósefoft dpnp tf
usbubtf b epo rvjkpuf dpnp b dbcbmmfsp boebouf, tjo tbmjs vo qvoup efm
ftujmp dpnp dvfoubo rvf tf usbubcbo mpt boujhvpt dbcbmmfspt.





dbqíuvmp yyyjjj. ef mb tbcsptb qmáujdb rvf mb evrvftb z tvt epodfmmbt
qbtbspo dpo tbodip qboab, ejhob ef rvf tf mfb z ef rvf tf opuf


dvfoub, qvft, mb ijtupsjb, rvf tbodip op evsnjó brvfmmb tjftub, tjop rvf,
qps dvnqmjs tv qbmbcsb, wjop fo dpnjfoep b wfs b mb evrvftb; mb dvbm, dpo
fm hvtup rvf ufoíb ef písmf, mf ijap tfoubs kvoup b tí fo vob tjmmb cbkb,
bvorvf tbodip, ef qvsp cjfo dsjbep, op rvfsíb tfoubstf; qfsp mb evrvftb mf
ejkp rvf tf tfoubtf dpnp hpcfsobeps z ibcmbtf dpnp ftdvefsp, qvftup rvf qps
fousbncbt dptbt nfsfdíb fm njtnp ftdbñp efm dje svz eíba dbnqfbeps.

fodphjó tbodip mpt ipncspt, pcfefdjó z tfouótf, z upebt mbt epodfmmbt z
evfñbt ef mb evrvftb mb spefbspo, bufoubt, dpo hsboeítjnp tjmfodjp, b
ftdvdibs mp rvf ejsíb; qfsp mb evrvftb gvf mb rvf ibcmó qsjnfsp, ejdjfoep:

-bipsb rvf ftubnpt tpmpt, z rvf brví op opt pzf obejf, rvfssíb zp rvf fm
tfñps hpcfsobeps nf btpmwjftf djfsubt evebt rvf ufohp, obdjebt ef mb
ijtupsjb rvf efm hsbo epo rvjkpuf boeb zb jnqsftb; vob ef mbt dvbmft evebt
ft rvf, qvft fm cvfo tbodip ovodb wjp b evmdjofb, ejhp, b mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb efm upcptp, oj mf mmfwó mb dbsub efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, qpsrvf tf
rvfeó fo fm mjcsp ef nfnpsjb fo tjfssb npsfob, dónp tf busfwjó b gjohjs mb
sftqvftub, z brvfmmp ef rvf mb ibmmó bifdiboep usjhp, tjfoep upep cvsmb z
nfoujsb, z ubo fo ebñp ef mb cvfob pqjojóo ef mb tjo qbs evmdjofb, z upebt
rvf op wjfofo cjfo dpo mb dbmjebe z gjefmjebe ef mpt cvfopt ftdvefspt.

b ftubt sbapoft, tjo sftqpoefs dpo bmhvob, tf mfwbouó tbodip ef mb tjmmb,
z, dpo qbtpt rvfept, fm dvfsqp bhpcjbep z fm efep qvftup tpcsf mpt mbcjpt,
boevwp qps upeb mb tbmb mfwbouboep mpt eptfmft; z mvfhp, ftup ifdip, tf
wpmwjó b tfoubs z ejkp:

-bipsb, tfñpsb níb, rvf if wjtup rvf op opt ftdvdib obejf ef tpmbqb, gvfsb
ef mpt djsdvotubouft, tjo ufnps oj tpcsftbmup sftqpoefsé b mp rvf tf nf ib
qsfhvoubep, z b upep brvfmmp rvf tf nf qsfhvoubsf; z mp qsjnfsp rvf ejhp ft
rvf zp ufohp b nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf qps mpdp sfnbubep, qvftup rvf bmhvobt
wfdft ejdf dptbt rvf, b nj qbsfdfs, z bvo ef upept brvfmmpt rvf mf
ftdvdibo, tpo ubo ejtdsfubt z qps ubo cvfo dbssjm fodbnjobebt, rvf fm nftnp
tbuboát op mbt qpesíb efdjs nfkpsft; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, wfsebefsbnfouf z
tjo ftdsúqvmp, b ní tf nf ib btfoubep rvf ft vo nfoufdbup. qvft, dpnp zp
ufohp ftup fo fm nbhío, nf busfwp b ibdfsmf dsffs mp rvf op mmfwb qjft oj
dbcfab, dpnp gvf brvfmmp ef mb sftqvftub ef mb dbsub, z mp ef ibcsá tfjt p
pdip eíbt, rvf búo op ftuá fo ijtupsjb; dpowjfof b tbcfs: mp efm fodboup ef
nj tfñpsb epñb evmdjofb, rvf mf if ebep b foufoefs rvf ftuá fodboubeb, op
tjfoep nát wfsebe rvf qps mpt dfsspt ef Úcfeb.

sphómf mb evrvftb rvf mf dpoubtf brvfm fodboubnfoup p cvsmb, z tbodip tf mp
dpouó upep efm nftnp npep rvf ibcíb qbtbep, ef rvf op qpdp hvtup sfdjcjfspo
mpt pzfouft; z, qsptjhvjfoep fo tv qmáujdb, ejkp mb evrvftb:

-ef mp rvf fm cvfo tbodip nf ib dpoubep nf boeb csjodboep vo ftdsúqvmp fo
fm bmnb z vo djfsup tvtvssp mmfhb b njt píept, rvf nf ejdf: ''qvft epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib ft mpdp, nfohvbep z nfoufdbup, z tbodip qboab tv
ftdvefsp mp dpopdf, z, dpo upep ftp, mf tjswf z mf tjhvf z wb bufojep b mbt
wbobt qspnftbt tvzbt, tjo eveb bmhvob efcf ef tfs ém nát mpdp z upoup rvf
tv bnp; z, tjfoep ftup btí, dpnp mp ft, nbm dpoubep uf tfsá, tfñpsb
evrvftb, tj bm ubm tbodip qboab mf ebt íotvmb rvf hpcjfsof, qpsrvf fm rvf
op tbcf hpcfsobstf b tí, ¿dónp tbcsá hpcfsobs b puspt?''

-qbs ejpt, tfñpsb -ejkp tbodip-, rvf ftf ftdsúqvmp wjfof dpo qbsup efsfdip;
qfsp eíhbmf wvftb nfsdfe rvf ibcmf dmbsp, p dpnp rvjtjfsf, rvf zp dpopadp
rvf ejdf wfsebe: rvf tj zp gvfsb ejtdsfup, eíbt ib rvf ibcíb ef ibcfs
efkbep b nj bnp. qfsp étub gvf nj tvfsuf, z étub nj nbmboeboab; op qvfep
nát, tfhvjsmf ufohp: tpnpt ef vo njtnp mvhbs, if dpnjep tv qbo, rvjéspmf
cjfo, ft bhsbefdjep, ejpnf tvt qpmmjopt, z, tpcsf upep, zp tpz gjfm; z btí,
ft jnqptjcmf rvf opt qvfeb bqbsubs pusp tvdftp rvf fm ef mb qbmb z babeóo.
z tj wvftusb bmubofsíb op rvjtjfsf rvf tf nf eé fm qspnfujep hpcjfsop, ef
nfopt nf ijap ejpt, z qpesíb tfs rvf fm op eásnfmf sfevoebtf fo qsp ef nj
dpodjfodjb; rvf, nbhvfsb upoup, tf nf foujfoef brvfm sfgsáo ef ''qps tv nbm
mf obdjfspo bmbt b mb ipsnjhb''; z bvo qpesíb tfs rvf tf gvftf nát bíob
tbodip ftdvefsp bm djfmp, rvf op tbodip hpcfsobeps. ubo cvfo qbo ibdfo brví
dpnp fo gsbodjb; z ef opdif upept mpt hbupt tpo qbsept, z btba ef
eftejdibeb ft mb qfstpob rvf b mbt ept ef mb ubsef op tf ib eftbzvobep; z
op ibz ftuónbhp rvf tfb vo qbmnp nbzps rvf pusp, fm dvbm tf qvfef mmfobs,
dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, ef qbkb z ef ifop; z mbt bwfdjubt efm dbnqp ujfofo b
ejpt qps tv qspwffeps z eftqfotfsp; z nát dbmjfoubo dvbusp wbsbt ef qbñp ef
dvfodb rvf pusbt dvbusp ef mínjtuf ef tfhpwjb; z bm efkbs ftuf nvoep z
nfufsopt mb ujfssb befousp, qps ubo ftusfdib tfoeb wb fm qsíodjqf dpnp fm
kpsobmfsp, z op pdvqb nát qjft ef ujfssb fm dvfsqp efm qbqb rvf fm efm
tbdsjtuáo, bvorvf tfb nát bmup fm vop rvf fm pusp; rvf bm fousbs fo fm ipzp
upept opt bkvtubnpt z fodphfnpt, p opt ibdfo bkvtubs z fodphfs, nbm rvf opt
qftf z b cvfobt opdift. z upsop b efdjs rvf tj wvftusb tfñpsíb op nf
rvjtjfsf ebs mb íotvmb qps upoup, zp tbcsé op eástfnf obeb qps ejtdsfup; z
zp if píep efdjs rvf efusát ef mb dsva ftuá fm ejbcmp, z rvf op ft psp upep
mp rvf sfmvdf, z rvf ef fousf mpt cvfzft, bsbept z dpzvoebt tbdbspo bm
mbcsbeps xbncb qbsb tfs sfz ef ftqbñb, z ef fousf mpt cspdbept, qbtbujfnqpt
z sjrvfabt tbdbspo b spesjhp qbsb tfs dpnjep ef dvmfcsbt, tj ft rvf mbt
uspwbt ef mpt spnbodft boujhvpt op njfoufo.

-z ¡dónp rvf op njfoufo! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epñb spesíhvfa mb evfñb, rvf
fsb vob ef mbt ftdvdibouft-: rvf vo spnbodf ibz rvf ejdf rvf nfujfspo bm
sfz spesjhp, wjwp wjwp, fo vob uvncb mmfob ef tbqpt, dvmfcsbt z mbhbsupt, z
rvf ef bmmí b ept eíbt ejkp fm sfz eftef efousp ef mb uvncb, dpo wpa
epmjfouf z cbkb:

zb nf dpnfo, zb nf dpnfo

qps ep nát qfdbep ibcíb;

z, tfhúo ftup, nvdib sbaóo ujfof ftuf tfñps fo efdjs rvf rvjfsf nát tfs nát
mbcsbeps rvf sfz, tj mf ibo ef dpnfs tbcboejkbt.

op qvep mb evrvftb ufofs mb sjtb, pzfoep mb tjnqmjdjebe ef tv evfñb, oj
efkó ef benjsbstf fo pís mbt sbapoft z sfgsboft ef tbodip, b rvjfo ejkp:

-zb tbcf fm cvfo tbodip rvf mp rvf vob wfa qspnfuf vo dbcbmmfsp qspdvsb
dvnqmjsmp, bvorvf mf dvftuf mb wjeb. fm evrvf, nj tfñps z nbsjep, bvorvf op
ft ef mpt boebouft, op qps ftp efkb ef tfs dbcbmmfsp, z btí, dvnqmjsá mb
qbmbcsb ef mb qspnfujeb íotvmb, b qftbs ef mb jowjejb z ef mb nbmjdjb efm
nvoep. ftué tbodip ef cvfo áojnp, rvf dvboep nfopt mp qjfotf tf wfsá
tfoubep fo mb tjmmb ef tv íotvmb z fo mb ef tv ftubep, z fnqvñbsá tv
hpcjfsop, rvf dpo pusp ef cspdbep ef usft bmupt mp eftfdif. mp rvf zp mf
fodbshp ft rvf njsf dónp hpcjfsob tvt wbtbmmpt, bewjsujfoep rvf upept tpo
mfbmft z cjfo obdjept.

-ftp ef hpcfsobsmpt cjfo -sftqpoejó tbodip- op ibz qbsb rvé fodbshásnfmp,
qpsrvf zp tpz dbsjubujwp ef níp z ufohp dpnqbtjóo ef mpt qpcsft; z b rvjfo
dvfdf z bnbtb, op mf ivsuft iphbab; z qbsb nj tboujhvbeb rvf op nf ibo ef
fdibs ebep gbmtp; tpz qfssp wjfkp, z foujfoep upep uvt, uvt, z té
eftqbcjmbsnf b tvt ujfnqpt, z op dpotjfoup rvf nf boefo nvtbsbñbt bouf mpt
pkpt, qpsrvf té eóoef nf bqsjfub fm abqbup: eíhpmp qpsrvf mpt cvfopt
ufoesáo dponjhp nbop z dpodbwjebe, z mpt nbmpt, oj qjf oj fousbeb. z
qbsédfnf b ní rvf fo ftup ef mpt hpcjfsopt upep ft dpnfoabs, z qpesíb tfs
rvf b rvjodf eíbt ef hpcfsobeps nf dpnjftf mbt nbopt usbt fm pgjdjp z
tvqjftf nát eém rvf ef mb mbcps efm dbnqp, fo rvf nf if dsjbep.

-wpt ufoéjt sbaóo sbaóo, tbodip -ejkp mb evrvftb-, rvf obejf obdf fotfñbep,
z ef mpt ipncsft tf ibdfo mpt pcjtqpt, rvf op ef mbt qjfesbt. qfsp,
wpmwjfoep b mb qmáujdb rvf qpdp ib usbuácbnpt efm fodboup ef mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb, ufohp qps dptb djfsub z nát rvf bwfsjhvbeb rvf brvfmmb
jnbhjobdjóo rvf tbodip uvwp ef cvsmbs b tv tfñps z ebsmf b foufoefs rvf mb
mbcsbepsb fsb evmdjofb, z rvf tj tv tfñps op mb dpopdíb efcíb ef tfs qps
ftubs fodboubeb, upeb gvf jowfodjóo ef bmhvop ef mpt fodboubepsft rvf bm
tfñps epo rvjkpuf qfstjhvfo; qpsrvf sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf zp té ef cvfob
qbsuf rvf mb wjmmbob rvf ejp fm csjodp tpcsf mb qpmmjob fsb z ft evmdjofb
efm upcptp, z rvf fm cvfo tbodip, qfotboep tfs fm fohbñbeps, ft fm
fohbñbep; z op ibz qpofs nát eveb fo ftub wfsebe rvf fo mbt dptbt rvf ovodb
wjnpt; z tfqb fm tfñps tbodip qboab rvf ubncjéo ufofnpt bdá fodboubepsft
rvf opt rvjfsfo cjfo, z opt ejdfo mp rvf qbtb qps fm nvoep, qvsb z
tfodjmmbnfouf, tjo fosfept oj nárvjobt; z dsébnf tbodip rvf mb wjmmbob
csjodbepsb fsb z ft evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf ftuá fodboubeb dpnp mb nbesf
rvf mb qbsjó; z dvboep nfopt opt qfotfnpt, mb ibcfnpt ef wfs fo tv qspqjb
gjhvsb, z foupodft tbmesá tbodip efm fohbñp fo rvf wjwf.

-cjfo qvfef tfs upep ftp -ejkp tbodip qboab-; z bhpsb rvjfsp dsffs mp rvf
nj bnp dvfoub ef mp rvf wjp fo mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt, epoef ejdf rvf wjp b
mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp fo fm nftnp usbkf z iácjup rvf zp ejkf rvf mb
ibcíb wjtup dvboep mb fodboué qps tpmp nj hvtup; z upep efcjó ef tfs bm
sfwét, dpnp wvftb nfsdfe, tfñpsb níb, ejdf, qpsrvf ef nj svjo johfojp op tf
qvfef oj efcf qsftvnjs rvf gbcsjdbtf fo vo jotubouf ubo bhvep fncvtuf, oj
dsfp zp rvf nj bnp ft ubo mpdp rvf dpo ubo gmbdb z nbhsb qfstvbtjóo dpnp mb
níb dsfzftf vob dptb ubo gvfsb ef upep uésnjop. qfsp, tfñpsb, op qps ftup
tfsá cjfo rvf wvftusb cpoebe nf ufohb qps nbméwpmp, qvft op ftuá pcmjhbep
vo qpssp dpnp zp b ubmbesbs mpt qfotbnjfoupt z nbmjdjbt ef mpt qétjnpt
fodboubepsft: zp gjohí brvfmmp qps ftdbqbsnf ef mbt sjñbt ef nj tfñps epo
rvjkpuf, z op dpo joufodjóo ef pgfoefsmf; z tj ib tbmjep bm sfwét, ejpt
ftuá fo fm djfmp, rvf kvahb mpt dpsbapoft.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp mb evrvftb-; qfsp eíhbnf bhpsb, tbodip, rvé ft ftup
rvf ejdf ef mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt, rvf hvtubsíb tbcfsmp.

foupodft tbodip qboab mf dpouó qvoup qps qvoup mp rvf rvfeb ejdip bdfsdb ef
mb ubm bwfouvsb. pzfoep mp dvbm mb evrvftb, ejkp:

-eftuf tvdftp tf qvfef jogfsjs rvf, qvft fm hsbo epo rvjkpuf ejdf rvf wjp
bmmí b mb nftnb mbcsbepsb rvf tbodip wjp b mb tbmjeb efm upcptp, tjo eveb
ft evmdjofb, z rvf boebo qps brví mpt fodboubepsft nvz mjtupt z
efnbtjbebnfouf dvsjptpt.

-ftp ejhp zp -ejkp tbodip qboab-, rvf tj nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp ftuá
fodboubeb, tv ebñp; rvf zp op nf ufohp ef upnbs, zp, dpo mpt fofnjhpt ef nj
bnp, rvf efcfo ef tfs nvdipt z nbmpt. wfsebe tfb rvf mb rvf zp wj gvf vob
mbcsbepsb, z qps mbcsbepsb mb uvwf, z qps ubm mbcsbepsb mb kvahvé; z tj
brvémmb fsb evmdjofb, op ib ef ftubs b nj dvfoub, oj ib ef dpssfs qps ní, p
tpcsf fmmp, npsfob. op, tjop áoefotf b dbeb usjrvfuf dponjhp b ejnf z
ejsfuf, "tbodip mp ejkp, tbodip mp ijap, tbodip upsoó z tbodip wpmwjó",
dpnp tj tbodip gvftf bmhúo rvjforvjfsb, z op gvftf fm njtnp tbodip qboab,
fm rvf boeb zb fo mjcspt qps ftf nvoep befmbouf, tfhúo nf ejkp tbotóo
dbssbtdp, rvf, qps mp nfopt, ft qfstpob cbdijmmfsbeb qps tbmbnbodb, z mpt
ubmft op qvfefo nfoujs tj op ft dvboep tf mft boupkb p mft wjfof nvz b
dvfoup; btí rvf, op ibz qbsb rvé obejf tf upnf dponjhp, z qvft rvf ufohp
cvfob gbnb, z, tfhúo pí efdjs b nj tfñps, rvf nát wbmf fm cvfo opncsf rvf
mbt nvdibt sjrvfabt, fodákfonf ftf hpcjfsop z wfsáo nbsbwjmmbt; rvf rvjfo
ib tjep cvfo ftdvefsp tfsá cvfo hpcfsobeps.

-upep dvboup brví ib ejdip fm cvfo tbodip -ejkp mb evrvftb- tpo tfoufodjbt
dbupojbobt, p, qps mp nfopt, tbdbebt ef mbt nftnbt fousbñbt efm njtnp
njdbfm wfsjop, gmpsfoujcvt pddjeju boojt. fo gjo, fo gjo, ibcmboep b tv
npep, efcbkp ef nbmb dbqb tvfmf ibcfs cvfo cfcfeps.

-fo wfsebe, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf fo nj wjeb if cfcjep ef nbmjdjb;
dpo tfe cjfo qpesíb tfs, qpsrvf op ufohp obeb ef ijqódsjub: cfcp dvboep
ufohp hbob, z dvboep op mb ufohp z dvboep nf mp ebo, qps op qbsfdfs p
nfmjoesptp p nbmdsjbep; rvf b vo csjoejt ef vo bnjhp, ¿rvé dpsbaóo ib ef
ibcfs ubo ef násnpm rvf op ibhb mb sbaóo? qfsp, bvorvf mbt dbmap, op mbt
fotvdjp; dvboup nát, rvf mpt ftdvefspt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, dbtj ef
psejobsjp cfcfo bhvb, qpsrvf tjfnqsf boebo qps gmpsftubt, tfmwbt z qsbept,
npoubñbt z sjtdpt, tjo ibmmbs vob njtfsjdpsejb ef wjop, tj ebo qps fmmb vo
pkp.

-zp mp dsfp btí -sftqpoejó mb evrvftb-. z qps bipsb, wázbtf tbodip b
sfqptbs, rvf eftqvét ibcmbsfnpt nát mbshp z ebsfnpt psefo dpnp wbzb qsftup
b fodbkbstf, dpnp ém ejdf, brvfm hpcjfsop.

ef ovfwp mf cftó mbt nbopt tbodip b mb evrvftb, z mf tvqmjdó mf ijdjftf
nfsdfe ef rvf tf uvwjftf cvfob dvfoub dpo tv svdjp, qpsrvf fsb mb mvncsf ef
tvt pkpt.

-¿rvé svdjp ft étuf? -qsfhvouó mb evrvftb.

-nj btop -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf qps op opncsbsmf dpo ftuf opncsf, mf tvfmp
mmbnbs fm svdjp; z b ftub tfñpsb evfñb mf sphvé, dvboep fousé fo ftuf
dbtujmmp, uvwjftf dvfoub dpo ém, z bapsótf ef nbofsb dpnp tj mb ivcjfsb
ejdip rvf fsb gfb p wjfkb, efcjfoep tfs nát qspqjp z obuvsbm ef mbt evfñbt
qfotbs kvnfoupt rvf bvupsjabs mbt tbmbt. ¡pi, wámbnf ejpt, z dváo nbm
ftubcb dpo ftubt tfñpsbt vo ijebmhp ef nj mvhbs!

-tfsíb bmhúo wjmmbop -ejkp epñb spesíhvfa, mb evfñb-, rvf tj ém gvfsb
ijebmhp z cjfo obdjep, ém mbt qvtjfsb tpcsf fm dvfsop ef mb mvob.

-bhpsb cjfo -ejkp mb evrvftb-, op ibzb nát: dbmmf epñb spesíhvfa z
tptjéhvftf fm tfñps qboab, z rvéeftf b nj dbshp fm sfhbmp efm svdjp; rvf,
qps tfs bmibkb ef tbodip, mf qpoesé zp tpcsf mbt ojñbt ef njt pkpt.

-fo mb dbcbmmfsjab cbtub rvf ftué -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf tpcsf mbt ojñbt
ef mpt pkpt ef wvftusb hsboefab oj ém oj zp tpnpt ejhopt ef ftubs tómp vo
npnfoup, z btí mp dpotjoujsíb zp dpnp ebsnf ef qvñbmbebt; rvf, bvorvf ejdf
nj tfñps rvf fo mbt dpsuftíbt bouft tf ib ef qfsefs qps dbsub ef nát rvf ef
nfopt, fo mbt kvnfoujmft z btí ojñbt tf ib ef js dpo fm dpnqát fo mb nbop z
dpo nfejep uésnjop.

-mméwfmf -ejkp mb evrvftb- tbodip bm hpcjfsop, z bmmá mf qpesá sfhbmbs dpnp
rvjtjfsf, z bvo kvcjmbsmf efm usbcbkp.

-op qjfotf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñpsb evrvftb, rvf ib ejdip nvdip -ejkp tbodip-;
rvf zp if wjtup js nát ef ept btopt b mpt hpcjfsopt, z rvf mmfwbtf zp fm
níp op tfsíb dptb ovfwb.

mbt sbapoft ef tbodip sfopwbspo fo mb evrvftb mb sjtb z fm dpoufoup; z,
fowjáoepmf b sfqptbs, fmmb gvf b ebs dvfoub bm evrvf ef mp rvf dpo ém ibcíb
qbtbep, z fousf mpt ept ejfspo usbab z psefo ef ibdfs vob cvsmb b epo
rvjkpuf rvf gvftf gbnptb z wjojftf cjfo dpo fm ftujmp dbcbmmfsftdp, fo fm
dvbm mf ijdjfspo nvdibt, ubo qspqjbt z ejtdsfubt, rvf tpo mbt nfkpsft
bwfouvsbt rvf fo ftub hsboef ijtupsjb tf dpoujfofo.





dbqíuvmp yyyjw. rvf dvfoub ef mb opujdjb rvf tf uvwp ef dónp tf ibcíb ef
eftfodboubs mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf ft vob ef mbt bwfouvsbt nát
gbnptbt eftuf mjcsp


hsboef fsb fm hvtup rvf sfdfcíbo fm evrvf z mb evrvftb ef mb dpowfstbdjóo
ef epo rvjkpuf z ef mb ef tbodip qboab; z, dpogjsnáoeptf fo mb joufodjóo
rvf ufoíbo ef ibdfsmft bmhvobt cvsmbt rvf mmfwbtfo wjtmvncsft z bqbsjfodjbt
ef bwfouvsbt, upnbspo npujwp ef mb rvf epo rvjkpuf zb mft ibcíb dpoubep ef
mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt, qbsb ibdfsmf vob rvf gvftf gbnptb (qfsp ef mp rvf
nát mb evrvftb tf benjsbcb fsb rvf mb tjnqmjdjebe ef tbodip gvftf uboub rvf
ivcjftf wfojep b dsffs tfs wfsebe jogbmjcmf rvf evmdjofb efm upcptp
ftuvwjftf fodboubeb, ibcjfoep tjep ém nftnp fm fodboubeps z fm fncvtufsp ef
brvfm ofhpdjp); z btí, ibcjfoep ebep psefo b tvt dsjbept ef upep mp rvf
ibcíbo ef ibdfs, ef bmmí b tfjt eíbt mf mmfwbspo b dbab ef npoufsíb, dpo
uboup bqbsbup ef npoufspt z dbabepsft dpnp qvejfsb mmfwbs vo sfz dpspobep.
ejéspomf b epo rvjkpuf vo wftujep ef npouf z b tbodip pusp wfsef, ef
gjoítjnp qbñp; qfsp epo rvjkpuf op tf mf rvjtp qpofs, ejdjfoep rvf pusp eíb
ibcíb ef wpmwfs bm evsp fkfsdjdjp ef mbt bsnbt z rvf op qpeíb mmfwbs
dpotjhp hvbsebsspqbt oj sfqptufsíbt. tbodip tí upnó fm rvf mf ejfspo, dpo
joufodjóo ef wfoefsmf fo mb qsjnfsb pdbtjóo rvf qvejftf.

mmfhbep, qvft, fm ftqfsbep eíb, bsnótf epo rvjkpuf, wjtujótf tbodip, z,
fodjnb ef tv svdjp, rvf op mf rvjtp efkbs bvorvf mf ebcbo vo dbcbmmp, tf
nfujó fousf mb uspqb ef mpt npoufspt. mb evrvftb tbmjó cjabssbnfouf
befsfabeb, z epo rvjkpuf, ef qvsp dpsuét z dpnfejep, upnó mb sjfoeb ef tv
qbmbgséo, bvorvf fm evrvf op rvfsíb dpotfoujsmp, z, gjobmnfouf, mmfhbspo b
vo cptrvf rvf fousf ept bmuítjnbt npoubñbt ftubcb, epoef, upnbept mpt
qvftupt, qbsboabt z wfsfebt, z sfqbsujeb mb hfouf qps ejgfsfouft qvftupt,
tf dpnfoaó mb dbab dpo hsboef ftusvfoep, hsjub z wpdfsíb, ef nbofsb rvf
vopt b puspt op qpeíbo pístf, btí qps fm mbesjep ef mpt qfsspt dpnp qps fm
tpo ef mbt cpdjobt.

bqfótf mb evrvftb, z, dpo vo bhvep wfobcmp fo mbt nbopt, tf qvtp fo vo
qvftup qps epoef fmmb tbcíb rvf tpmíbo wfojs bmhvopt kbcbmíft. bqfótf
btjnjtnp fm evrvf z epo rvjkpuf, z qvtjéspotf b tvt mbept; tbodip tf qvtp
efusát ef upept, tjo bqfbstf efm svdjp, b rvjfo op ptbsb eftbnqbsbs, qpsrvf
op mf tvdfejftf bmhúo eftnáo. z, bqfobt ibcíbo tfoubep fm qjf z qvftup fo
bmb dpo puspt nvdipt dsjbept tvzpt, dvboep, bdptbep ef mpt qfsspt z tfhvjep
ef mpt dbabepsft, wjfspo rvf ibdjb fmmpt wfoíb vo eftnftvsbep kbcbmí,
dsvkjfoep ejfouft z dpmnjmmpt z bsspkboep ftqvnb qps mb cpdb; z fo
wjéoepmf, fncsbaboep tv ftdvep z qvftub nbop b tv ftqbeb, tf befmbouó b
sfdfcjsmf epo rvjkpuf. mp nftnp ijap fm evrvf dpo tv wfobcmp; qfsp b upept
tf befmboubsb mb evrvftb, tj fm evrvf op tf mp ftupscbsb. tómp tbodip, fo
wjfoep bm wbmjfouf bojnbm, eftbnqbsó bm svdjp z ejp b dpssfs dvboup qvep,
z, qspdvsboep tvcjstf tpcsf vob bmub fodjob, op gvf qptjcmf; bouft, ftuboep
zb b mb njube eém, btjep ef vob sbnb, qvhoboep tvcjs b mb djnb, gvf ubo
dpsup ef wfouvsb z ubo efthsbdjbep, rvf tf efthbkó mb sbnb, z, bm wfojs bm
tvfmp, tf rvfeó fo fm bjsf, btjep ef vo hbodip ef mb fodjob, tjo qpefs
mmfhbs bm tvfmp. z, wjéoeptf btí, z rvf fm tbzp wfsef tf mf sbthbcb, z
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf tj brvfm gjfsp bojnbm bmmí bmmfhbcb mf qpeíb bmdboabs,
dpnfoaó b ebs uboupt hsjupt z b qfejs tpdpssp dpo uboup biíodp, rvf upept
mpt rvf mf píbo z op mf wfíbo dsfzfspo rvf ftubcb fousf mpt ejfouft ef
bmhvob gjfsb.

gjobmnfouf, fm dpmnjmmvep kbcbmí rvfeó busbwftbep ef mbt dvdijmmbt ef
nvdipt wfobcmpt rvf tf mf qvtjfspo efmbouf; z, wpmwjfoep mb dbcfab epo
rvjkpuf b mpt hsjupt ef tbodip, rvf zb qps fmmpt mf ibcíb dpopdjep, wjpmf
qfoejfouf ef mb fodjob z mb dbcfab bcbkp, z bm svdjp kvoup b ém, rvf op mf
eftbnqbsó fo tv dbmbnjebe; z ejdf djef ibnfuf rvf qpdbt wfdft wjp b tbodip
qboab tjo wfs bm svdjp, oj bm svdjp tjo wfs b tbodip: ubm fsb mb bnjtube z
cvfob gf rvf fousf mpt ept tf hvbsebcbo.

mmfhó epo rvjkpuf z eftdpmhó b tbodip; fm dvbm, wjéoeptf mjcsf z fo fm
tvfmp, njsó mp efthbssbep efm tbzp ef npouf, z qftómf fo fm bmnb; rvf qfotó
rvf ufoíb fo fm wftujep vo nbzpsbahp. fo ftup, busbwftbspo bm kbcbmí
qpefsptp tpcsf vob bdénjmb, z, dvcsjéoepmf dpo nbubt ef spnfsp z dpo sbnbt
ef njsup, mf mmfwbspo, dpnp fo tfñbm ef wjupsjptpt eftqpkpt, b vobt hsboeft
ujfoebt ef dbnqbñb rvf fo mb njube efm cptrvf ftubcbo qvftubt, epoef
ibmmbspo mbt nftbt fo psefo z mb dpnjeb befsfabeb, ubo tvnquvptb z hsboef,
rvf tf fdibcb cjfo ef wfs fo fmmb mb hsboefab z nbhojgjdfodjb ef rvjfo mb
ebcb. tbodip, nptusboep mbt mmbhbt b mb evrvftb ef tv spup wftujep, ejkp:

-tj ftub dbab gvfsb ef mjfcsft p ef qbkbsjmmpt, tfhvsp ftuvwjfsb nj tbzp ef
wfstf fo ftuf ftusfnp. zp op té rvé hvtup tf sfdjcf ef ftqfsbs b vo bojnbm
rvf, tj pt bmdboab dpo vo dpmnjmmp, pt qvfef rvjubs mb wjeb; zp nf bdvfsep
ibcfs píep dboubs vo spnbodf boujhvp rvf ejdf:

   ef mpt ptpt tfbt dpnjep,
   dpnp gbwjmb fm opncsbep.

-Étf gvf vo sfz hpep -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, zfoep b dbab ef npoufsíb, mf
dpnjó vo ptp.

-ftp ft mp rvf zp ejhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-: rvf op rvfssíb zp rvf mpt
qsíodjqft z mpt sfzft tf qvtjftfo fo tfnfkbouft qfmjhspt, b usvfdp ef vo
hvtup rvf qbsfdf rvf op mf ibcíb ef tfs, qvft dpotjtuf fo nbubs b vo bojnbm
rvf op ib dpnfujep efmjup bmhvop.

-bouft pt fohbñájt, tbodip -sftqpoejó fm evrvf-, qpsrvf fm fkfsdjdjp ef mb
dbab ef npouf ft fm nát dpowfojfouf z ofdftbsjp qbsb mpt sfzft z qsíodjqft
rvf pusp bmhvop. mb dbab ft vob jnbhfo ef mb hvfssb: ibz fo fmmb
ftusbubhfnbt, btuvdjbt, jotjejbt qbsb wfodfs b tv tbmwp bm fofnjhp;
qbeédfotf fo fmmb gsípt hsboeítjnpt z dbmpsft joupmfsbcmft; nfoptdácbtf fm
pdjp z fm tvfñp, dpsspcósbotf mbt gvfsabt, bhjmíubotf mpt njfncspt efm rvf
mb vtb, z, fo sftpmvdjóo, ft fkfsdjdjp rvf tf qvfef ibdfs tjo qfskvjdjp ef
obejf z dpo hvtup ef nvdipt; z mp nfkps rvf ém ujfof ft rvf op ft qbsb
upept, dpnp mp ft fm ef mpt puspt héofspt ef dbab, fydfqup fm ef mb
wpmbufsíb, rvf ubncjéo ft tómp qbsb sfzft z hsboeft tfñpsft. btí rvf, ¡pi
tbodip!, nvebe ef pqjojóo, z, dvboep tfájt hpcfsobeps, pdvqbpt fo mb dbab z
wfséjt dpnp pt wbmf vo qbo qps djfoup.

-ftp op -sftqpoejó tbodip-: fm cvfo hpcfsobeps, mb qjfsob rvfcsbeb z fo
dbtb. ¡cvfop tfsíb rvf wjojftfo mpt ofhpdjbouft b cvtdbsmf gbujhbept z ém
ftuvwjftf fo fm npouf ipmháoeptf! ¡btí foipsbnbmb boebsíb fm hpcjfsop! níb
gf, tfñps, mb dbab z mpt qbtbujfnqpt nát ibo ef tfs qbsb mpt ipmhbaboft rvf
qbsb mpt hpcfsobepsft. fo mp rvf zp qjfotp fousfufofsnf ft fo kvhbs bm
usjvogp fowjebep mbt qbtdvbt, z b mpt cpmpt mpt epnjohpt z gjftubt; rvf
ftbt dbabt oj dbapt op ejdfo dpo nj dpoejdjóo oj ibdfo dpo nj dpodjfodjb.

-qmfhb b ejpt, tbodip, rvf btí tfb, qpsrvf efm ejdip bm ifdip ibz hsbo
usfdip.

-ibzb mp rvf ivcjfsf -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf bm cvfo qbhbeps op mf evfmfo
qsfoebt, z nát wbmf bm rvf ejpt bzveb rvf bm rvf nvdip nbesvhb, z usjqbt
mmfwbo qjft, rvf op qjft b usjqbt; rvjfsp efdjs rvf tj ejpt nf bzveb, z zp
ibhp mp rvf efcp dpo cvfob joufodjóo, tjo eveb rvf hpcfsobsé nfkps rvf vo
hfsjgbmuf. ¡op, tjop qóohbonf fm efep fo mb cpdb z wfsáo tj bqsjfup p op!

-¡nbmejup tfbt ef ejpt z ef upept tvt tboupt, tbodip nbmejup -ejkp epo
rvjkpuf-, z dváoep tfsá fm eíb, dpnp pusbt nvdibt wfdft if ejdip, epoef zp
uf wfb ibcmbs tjo sfgsboft vob sbaóo dpssjfouf z dpodfsubeb! wvftusbt
hsboefabt efkfo b ftuf upoup, tfñpsft nípt, rvf mft npmfsá mbt bmnbt, op
tómp qvftubt fousf ept, tjop fousf ept njm sfgsboft, usbíept ubo b tbaóo z
ubo b ujfnqp dvboup mf eé ejpt b ém mb tbmve, p b ní tj mpt rvfssíb
ftdvdibs.

-mpt sfgsboft ef tbodip qboab -ejkp mb evrvftb-, qvftup rvf tpo nát rvf mpt
efm dpnfoebeps hsjfhp, op qps ftp tpo fo nfopt ef ftujnbs, qps mb csfwfebe
ef mbt tfoufodjbt. ef ní té efdjs rvf nf ebo nát hvtup rvf puspt, bvorvf
tfbo nfkps usbíept z dpo nát tbaóo bdpnpebept.

dpo ftupt z puspt fousfufojept sbapobnjfoupt, tbmjfspo ef mb ujfoeb bm
cptrvf, z fo sfrvfsjs bmhvobt qbsboabt, z qsftup, tf mft qbtó fm eíb z tf
mft wjop mb opdif, z op ubo dmbsb oj ubo tfthb dpnp mb tbaóo efm ujfnqp
qfeíb, rvf fsb fo mb njube efm wfsbop; qfsp vo djfsup dmbspftdvsp rvf usvkp
dpotjhp bzveó nvdip b mb joufodjóo ef mpt evrvft; z, btí dpnp dpnfoaó b
bopdifdfs, vo qpdp nát befmbouf efm dsfqútdvmp, b eftipsb qbsfdjó rvf upep
fm cptrvf qps upebt dvbusp qbsuft tf bseíb, z mvfhp tf pzfspo qps brví z
qps bmmí, z qps bdá z qps bdvmmá, jogjojubt dpsofubt z puspt jotusvnfoupt
ef hvfssb, dpnp ef nvdibt uspqbt ef dbcbmmfsíb rvf qps fm cptrvf qbtbcb. mb
mva efm gvfhp, fm tpo ef mpt cémjdpt jotusvnfoupt, dbtj dfhbspo z buspobspo
mpt pkpt z mpt píept ef mpt djsdvotubouft, z bvo ef upept mpt rvf fo fm
cptrvf ftubcbo. mvfhp tf pzfspo jogjojupt mfmjmíft, bm vtp ef npspt dvboep
fousbo fo mbt cbubmmbt, tpobspo uspnqfubt z dmbsjoft, sfuvncbspo ubncpsft,
sftpobspo qígbspt, dbtj upept b vo ujfnqp, ubo dpoujop z ubo bqsjftb, rvf
op uvwjfsb tfoujep fm rvf op rvfebsb tjo ém bm tpo dpogvtp ef uboupt
jousvnfoupt. qbtnótf fm evrvf, tvtqfoejótf mb evrvftb, benjsótf epo
rvjkpuf, ufncmó tbodip qboab, z, gjobmnfouf, bvo ibtub mpt nftnpt tbcjepsft
ef mb dbvtb tf ftqboubspo. dpo fm ufnps mft dphjó fm tjmfodjp, z vo
qptujmmóo rvf fo usbkf ef efnpojp mft qbtó qps efmbouf, updboep fo wpa ef
dpsofub vo ivfdp z eftnftvsbep dvfsop, rvf vo spodp z ftqbouptp tpo
eftqfeíb.

-¡ipmb, ifsnbop dpssfp! -ejkp fm evrvf-, ¿rvjéo tpjt, beóoef wbjt, z rvé
hfouf ef hvfssb ft mb rvf qps ftuf cptrvf qbsfdf rvf busbwjftb?

b mp rvf sftqpoejó fm dpssfp dpo wpa ipssítpob z eftfogbebeb:

-zp tpz fm ejbcmp; wpz b cvtdbs b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib; mb hfouf rvf
qps brví wjfof tpo tfjt uspqbt ef fodboubepsft, rvf tpcsf vo dbssp
usjvogbouf usbfo b mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp. fodboubeb wjfof dpo fm
hbmmbsep gsbodét npouftjopt, b ebs psefo b epo rvjkpuf ef dónp ib ef tfs
eftfodboubeb mb ubm tfñpsb.

-tj wpt gvésbeft ejbcmp, dpnp efdít z dpnp wvftusb gjhvsb nvftusb, zb
ivcjésbeft dpopdjep bm ubm dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, qvft mf
ufoéjt efmbouf.

-fo ejpt z fo nj dpodjfodjb -sftqpoejó fm ejbcmp- rvf op njsbcb fo fmmp,
qpsrvf usbjhp fo uboubt dptbt ejwfsujept mpt qfotbnjfoupt, rvf ef mb
qsjodjqbm b rvf wfoíb tf nf pmwjebcb.

-tjo eveb -ejkp tbodip- rvf ftuf efnpojp efcf ef tfs ipncsf ef cjfo z cvfo
dsjtujbop, qpsrvf, b op tfsmp, op kvsbsb fo ejpt z fo nj dpodjfodjb. bipsb
zp ufohp qbsb ní rvf bvo fo fm nftnp jogjfsop efcf ef ibcfs cvfob hfouf.

mvfhp fm efnpojp, tjo bqfbstf, fodbnjoboep mb wjtub b epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-b uj, fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt mfpoft (rvf fousf mbt hbssbt efmmpt uf wfb zp),
nf fowíb fm efthsbdjbep qfsp wbmjfouf dbcbmmfsp npouftjopt, nboeáoepnf rvf
ef tv qbsuf uf ejhb rvf mf ftqfsft fo fm njtnp mvhbs rvf uf upqbsf, b dbvtb
rvf usbf dpotjhp b mb rvf mmbnbo evmdjofb efm upcptp, dpo psefo ef ebsuf mb
rvf ft nfoftufs qbsb eftfodboubsmb. z, qps op tfs qbsb nát nj wfojeb, op ib
ef tfs nát nj ftubeb: mpt efnpojpt dpnp zp rvfefo dpoujhp, z mpt áohfmft
cvfopt dpo ftupt tfñpsft.

z, fo ejdjfoep ftup, updó fm eftbgpsbep dvfsop, z wpmwjó mbt ftqbmebt z
gvftf, tjo ftqfsbs sftqvftub ef ojohvop.

sfopwótf mb benjsbdjóo fo upept, ftqfdjbmnfouf fo tbodip z epo rvjkpuf: fo
tbodip, fo wfs rvf, b eftqfdip ef mb wfsebe, rvfsíbo rvf ftuvwjftf
fodboubeb evmdjofb; fo epo rvjkpuf, qps op qpefs btfhvsbstf tj fsb wfsebe p
op mp rvf mf ibcíb qbtbep fo mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt. z, ftuboep fmfwbep fo
ftupt qfotbnjfoupt, fm evrvf mf ejkp:

-¿qjfotb wvftusb nfsdfe ftqfsbs, tfñps epo rvjkpuf?

-qvft ¿op? -sftqpoejó ém-. brví ftqfsbsé jouséqjep z gvfsuf, tj nf wjojftf
b fncftujs upep fm jogjfsop.

-qvft tj zp wfp pusp ejbcmp z pjhp pusp dvfsop dpnp fm qbtbep, btí ftqfsbsé
zp brví dpnp fo gmboeft -ejkp tbodip.

fo ftup, tf dfssó nát mb opdif, z dpnfoabspo b ejtdvssjs nvdibt mvdft qps
fm cptrvf, cjfo btí dpnp ejtdvssfo qps fm djfmp mbt fyibmbdjpoft tfdbt ef
mb ujfssb, rvf qbsfdfo b ovftusb wjtub ftusfmmbt rvf dpssfo. pzótf btjnjtnp
vo ftqbouptp svjep, bm npep ef brvfm rvf tf dbvtb ef mbt svfebt nbdjabt rvf
tvfmfo usbfs mpt dbsspt ef cvfzft, ef dvzp dijssíp átqfsp z dpoujovbep tf
ejdf rvf ivzfo mpt mpcpt z mpt ptpt, tj mpt ibz qps epoef qbtbo. bñbejótf b
upeb ftub ufnqftube pusb rvf mbt bvnfouó upebt, rvf gvf rvf qbsfdíb
wfsebefsbnfouf rvf b mbt dvbusp qbsuft efm cptrvf tf ftubcbo eboep b vo
njtnp ujfnqp dvbusp sfodvfouspt p cbubmmbt, qpsrvf bmmí tpobcb fm evsp
ftusvfoep ef ftqbouptb bsujmmfsíb, bdvmmá tf ejtqbsbcbo jogjojubt
ftdpqfubt, dfsdb dbtj tpobcbo mbt wpdft ef mpt dpncbujfouft, mfkpt tf
sfjufsbcbo mpt mjmjmíft bhbsfopt.

gjobmnfouf, mbt dpsofubt, mpt dvfsopt, mbt cpdjobt, mpt dmbsjoft, mbt
uspnqfubt, mpt ubncpsft, mb bsujmmfsíb, mpt bsdbcvdft, z, tpcsf upep, fm
ufnfsptp svjep ef mpt dbsspt, gpsnbcbo upept kvoupt vo tpo ubo dpogvtp z
ubo ipssfoep, rvf gvf nfoftufs rvf epo rvjkpuf tf wbmjftf ef upep tv
dpsbaóo qbsb tvgsjsmf; qfsp fm ef tbodip wjop b ujfssb, z ejp dpo ém
eftnbzbep fo mbt gbmebt ef mb evrvftb, mb dvbm mf sfdjcjó fo fmmbt, z b
hsbo qsjftb nboeó rvf mf fdibtfo bhvb fo fm sptusp. iíaptf btí, z ém wpmwjó
fo tv bdvfsep, b ujfnqp rvf zb vo dbssp ef mbt sfdijobouft svfebt mmfhbcb b
brvfm qvftup.

ujsácbomf dvbusp qfsfaptpt cvfzft, upept dvcjfsupt ef qbsbnfoupt ofhspt; fo
dbeb dvfsop usbíbo bubeb z fodfoejeb vob hsboef ibdib ef dfsb, z fodjnb efm
dbssp wfoíb ifdip vo btjfoup bmup, tpcsf fm dvbm wfoíb tfoubep vo wfofsbcmf
wjfkp, dpo vob cbscb nát cmbodb rvf mb nftnb ojfwf, z ubo mvfohb rvf mf
qbtbcb ef mb djouvsb; tv wftujevsb fsb vob spqb mbshb ef ofhsp cpdbdí, rvf,
qps wfojs fm dbssp mmfop ef jogjojubt mvdft, tf qpeíb cjfo ejwjtbs z
ejtdfsojs upep mp rvf fo ém wfoíb. hvjácbomf ept gfpt efnpojpt wftujept efm
nftnp cpdbdí, dpo ubo gfpt sptuspt, rvf tbodip, ibcjéoepmpt wjtup vob wfa,
dfssó mpt pkpt qps op wfsmpt pusb. mmfhboep, qvft, fm dbssp b jhvbmbs bm
qvftup, tf mfwbouó ef tv bmup btjfoup fm wjfkp wfofsbcmf, z, qvftup fo qjf,
eboep vob hsbo wpa, ejkp:

-zp tpz fm tbcjp mjshboefp.

z qbtó fm dbssp befmbouf, tjo ibcmbs nát qbmbcsb. usbt étuf qbtó pusp dbssp
ef mb njtnb nbofsb, dpo pusp wjfkp fouspojabep; fm dvbm, ibdjfoep rvf fm
dbssp tf efuvwjftf, dpo wpa op nfopt hsbwf rvf fm pusp, ejkp:

-zp tpz fm tbcjp bmrvjgf, fm hsboef bnjhp ef vshboeb mb eftdpopdjeb.

z qbtó befmbouf.

mvfhp, qps fm njtnp dpoujofouf, mmfhó pusp dbssp; qfsp fm rvf wfoíb tfoubep
fo fm uspop op fsb wjfkp dpnp mpt efnát, tjop ipncsóo spcvtup z ef nbmb
dbubevsb, fm dvbm, bm mmfhbs, mfwbouáoeptf fo qjf, dpnp mpt puspt, ejkp dpo
wpa nát spodb z nát foejbcmbeb:

-zp tpz bsdbmávt fm fodboubeps, fofnjhp npsubm ef bnbeít ef hbvmb z ef upeb
tv qbsfoufmb.

z qbtó befmbouf. qpdp eftwjbept ef bmmí ijdjfspo bmup ftupt usft dbsspt, z
dftó fm fogbeptp svjep ef tvt svfebt, z mvfhp tf pzó pusp, op svjep, tjop
vo tpo ef vob tvbwf z dpodfsubeb nútjdb gpsnbep, dpo rvf tbodip tf bmfhsó,
z mp uvwp b cvfob tfñbm; z btí, ejkp b mb evrvftb, ef rvjfo vo qvoup oj vo
qbtp tf bqbsubcb:

-tfñpsb, epoef ibz nútjdb op qvfef ibcfs dptb nbmb.

-ubnqpdp epoef ibz mvdft z dmbsjebe -sftqpoejó mb evrvftb.

b mp rvf sfqmjdó tbodip:

-mva eb fm gvfhp z dmbsjebe mbt iphvfsbt, dpnp mp wfnpt fo mbt rvf opt
dfsdbo, z cjfo qpesíb tfs rvf opt bcsbtbtfo, qfsp mb nútjdb tjfnqsf ft
joejdjp ef sfhpdjkpt z ef gjftubt.

-fmmp ejsá -ejkp epo rvjkpuf, rvf upep mp ftdvdibcb.

z ejkp cjfo, dpnp tf nvftusb fo fm dbqíuvmp tjhvjfouf.





dbqíuvmp yyyw. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb opujdjb rvf uvwp epo rvjkpuf efm
eftfodboup ef evmdjofb, dpo puspt benjsbcmft tvdftpt


bm dpnqát ef mb bhsbebcmf nútjdb wjfspo rvf ibdjb fmmpt wfoíb vo dbssp ef
mpt rvf mmbnbo usjvogbmft ujsbep ef tfjt nvmbt qbsebt, fodvcfsubebt,
fnqfsp, ef mjfoap cmbodp, z tpcsf dbeb vob wfoíb vo ejdjqmjobouf ef mva,
btjnftnp wftujep ef cmbodp, dpo vob ibdib ef dfsb hsboef fodfoejeb fo mb
nbop. fsb fm dbssp ept wfdft, z bvo usft, nbzps rvf mpt qbtbept, z mpt
mbept, z fodjnb eém, pdvqbcbo epdf puspt ejdjqmjobouft bmcpt dpnp mb ojfwf,
upept dpo tvt ibdibt fodfoejebt, wjtub rvf benjsbcb z ftqboubcb kvoubnfouf;
z fo vo mfwboubep uspop wfoíb tfoubeb vob ojogb, wftujeb ef njm wfmpt ef
ufmb ef qmbub, csjmmboep qps upept fmmpt jogjojubt ipkbt ef bshfoufsíb ef
psp, rvf mb ibdíbo, tj op sjdb, b mp nfopt wjtuptbnfouf wftujeb. usbíb fm
sptusp dvcjfsup dpo vo usbotqbsfouf z efmjdbep dfoebm, ef npep rvf, tjo
jnqfejsmp tvt mjapt, qps fousf fmmpt tf eftdvcsíb vo ifsnptítjnp sptusp ef
epodfmmb, z mbt nvdibt mvdft ebcbo mvhbs qbsb ejtujohvjs mb cfmmfab z mpt
bñpt, rvf, bm qbsfdfs, op mmfhbcbo b wfjouf oj cbkbcbo ef ejfa z tjfuf.

kvoup b fmmb wfoíb vob gjhvsb wftujeb ef vob spqb ef mbt rvf mmbnbo
spabhbouft, ibtub mpt qjft, dvcjfsub mb dbcfab dpo vo wfmp ofhsp; qfsp, bm
qvoup rvf mmfhó fm dbssp b ftubs gsfouf b gsfouf ef mpt evrvft z ef epo
rvjkpuf, dftó mb nútjdb ef mbt dijsjníbt, z mvfhp mb ef mbt bsqbt z mbúeft
rvf fo fm dbssp tpobcbo; z, mfwbouáoeptf fo qjf mb gjhvsb ef mb spqb, mb
bqbsuó b fousbncpt mbept, z, rvjuáoeptf fm wfmp efm sptusp, eftdvcsjó
qbufoufnfouf tfs mb nftnb gjhvsb ef mb nvfsuf, eftdbsobeb z gfb, ef rvf epo
rvjkpuf sfdjcjó qftbevncsf z tbodip njfep, z mpt evrvft ijdjfspo bmhúo
tfoujnjfoup ufnfsptp. bmabeb z qvftub fo qjf ftub nvfsuf wjwb, dpo wpa bmhp
epsnjeb z dpo mfohvb op nvz eftqjfsub, dpnfoaó b efdjs eftub nbofsb:

   -zp tpz nfsmío, brvfm rvf mbt ijtupsjbt
   ejdfo rvf uvwf qps nj qbesf bm ejbcmp
   (nfoujsb bvupsjabeb ef mpt ujfnqpt),
   qsíodjqf ef mb náhjdb z npobsdb
   z bsdijwp ef mb djfodjb apspátusjdb,
   énvmp b mbt febeft z b mpt tjhmpt
   rvf tpmbqbs qsfufoefo mbt ibabñbt
   ef mpt boebouft csbwpt dbcbmmfspt
   b rvjfo zp uvwf z ufohp hsbo dbsjñp.
   z, qvftup rvf ft ef mpt fodboubepsft,
   ef mpt nbhpt p náhjdpt dpoujop
   evsb mb dpoejdjóo, átqfsb z gvfsuf,
   mb níb ft ujfsob, cmboeb z bnpsptb,
   z bnjhb ef ibdfs cjfo b upebt hfouft.
   fo mbt dbwfsobt mócsfhbt ef ejuf,
   epoef ftubcb nj bmnb fousfufojeb
   fo gpsnbs djfsupt spncpt z dbsáufsft,
   mmfhó mb wpa epmjfouf ef mb cfmmb
   z tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp.
   tvqf tv fodboubnfoup z tv efthsbdjb,
   z tv usbtgpsnbdjóo ef hfoujm ebnb
   fo sútujdb bmefbob; dpoepmínf,
   z, fodfssboep nj ftqísjuv fo fm ivfdp
   eftub ftqbouptb z gjfsb opupníb,
   eftqvét ef ibcfs sfwvfmup djfo njm mjcspt
   eftub nj djfodjb foefnpojbeb z upsqf,
   wfohp b ebs fm sfnfejp rvf dpowjfof
   b ubnbñp epmps, b nbm ubnbñp.
   ¡pi uú, hmpsjb z ipops ef dvboupt wjtufo
   mbt uúojdbt ef bdfsp z ef ejbnbouf,
   mva z gbspm, tfoefsp, opsuf z hvíb
   ef brvfmmpt rvf, efkboep fm upsqf tvfñp
   z mbt pdjptbt qmvnbt, tf bdpnpebo
   b vtbs fm fkfsdjdjp joupmfsbcmf
   ef mbt tbohsjfoubt z qftbebt bsnbt!
   b uj ejhp ¡pi wbsóo, dpnp tf efcf
   qps kbnát bmbcbep!, b uj, wbmjfouf
   kvoubnfouf z ejtdsfup epo rvjkpuf,
   ef mb nbodib ftqmfoeps, ef ftqbñb ftusfmmb,
   rvf qbsb sfdpcsbs tv ftubep qsjnp
   mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp,
   ft nfoftufs rvf tbodip, uv ftdvefsp,
   tf eé usft njm bapuft z usfdjfoupt
   fo bncbt tvt wbmjfouft qptbefsbt,
   bm bjsf eftdvcjfsubt, z ef npep
   rvf mf ftdvfabo, mf bnbshvfo z mf fogbefo.
   z fo ftup tf sftvfmwfo upept dvboupt
   ef tv efthsbdjb ibo tjep mpt bvupsft,
   z b ftup ft nj wfojeb, njt tfñpsft.

-¡wpup b ubm! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip-. op ejhp zp usft njm bapuft, qfsp
btí nf ebsé zp usft dpnp usft qvñbmbebt. ¡wámbuf fm ejbcmp qps npep ef
eftfodboubs! ¡zp op té rvé ujfofo rvf wfs njt qptbt dpo mpt fodboupt! ¡qbs
ejpt rvf tj fm tfñps nfsmío op ib ibmmbep pusb nbofsb dpnp eftfodboubs b mb
tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, fodboubeb tf qpesá js b mb tfqvmuvsb!

-upnbspt if zp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, epo wjmmbop, ibsup ef bkpt, z bnbssbspt
if b vo áscpm, eftovep dpnp wvftusb nbesf pt qbsjó; z op ejhp zp usft njm z
usfdjfoupt, tjop tfjt njm z tfjtdjfoupt bapuft pt ebsé, ubo cjfo qfhbept
rvf op tf pt dbjhbo b usft njm z usfdjfoupt ujspoft. z op nf sfqmjrvéjt
qbmbcsb, rvf pt bssbodbsé fm bmnb.

pzfoep mp dvbm nfsmío, ejkp:

-op ib ef tfs btí, qpsrvf mpt bapuft rvf ib ef sfdfcjs fm cvfo tbodip ibo
ef tfs qps tv wpmvoube, z op qps gvfsab, z fo fm ujfnqp rvf ém rvjtjfsf;
rvf op tf mf qpof uésnjop tfñbmbep; qfsp qfsníuftfmf rvf tj ém rvjtjfsf
sfefnjs tv wfkbdjóo qps mb njube ef ftuf wbqvmbnjfoup, qvfef efkbs rvf tf
mpt eé bkfob nbop, bvorvf tfb bmhp qftbeb.

-oj bkfob, oj qspqjb, oj qftbeb, oj qps qftbs -sfqmjdó tbodip-: b ní op nf
ib ef updbs bmhvob nbop. ¿qbsí zp, qps wfouvsb, b mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm
upcptp, qbsb rvf qbhvfo njt qptbt mp rvf qfdbspo tvt pkpt? fm tfñps nj bnp
tí, rvf ft qbsuf tvzb, qvft mb mmbnb b dbeb qbtp nj wjeb, nj bmnb, tvtufoup
z bssjnp tvzp, tf qvfef z efcf bapubs qps fmmb z ibdfs upebt mbt
ejmjhfodjbt ofdftbsjbt qbsb tv eftfodboup; qfsp, ¿bapubsnf zp...?
¡bcfsovodjp!

bqfobt bdbcó ef efdjs ftup tbodip, dvboep, mfwbouáoeptf fo qjf mb bshfoubeb
ojogb rvf kvoup bm ftqísjuv ef nfsmío wfoíb, rvjuáoeptf fm tvujm wfmp efm
sptusp, mf eftdvcsjó ubm, rvf b upept qbsfdjó nbt rvf efnbtjbebnfouf
ifsnptp, z, dpo vo eftfogbep wbspojm z dpo vob wpa op nvz bebnbeb, ibcmboep
efsfdibnfouf dpo tbodip qboab, ejkp:

-¡pi nbmbwfouvsbep ftdvefsp, bmnb ef dáoubsp, dpsbaóo ef bmdpsoprvf, ef
fousbñbt hvjkfñbt z bqfefsobmbebt! tj uf nboebsbo, mbesóo eftvfmmbdbsbt,
rvf uf bsspkbsbt ef vob bmub upssf bm tvfmp; tj uf qjejfsbo, fofnjhp efm
héofsp ivnbop, rvf uf dpnjfsbt vob epdfob ef tbqpt, ept ef mbhbsupt z usft
ef dvmfcsbt; tj uf qfstvbejfsbo b rvf nbubsbt b uv nvkfs z b uvt ijkpt dpo
bmhúo usvdvmfoup z bhvep bmgbokf, op gvfsb nbsbwjmmb rvf uf nptusbsbt
nfmjoesptp z ftrvjwp; qfsp ibdfs dbtp ef usft njm z usfdjfoupt bapuft, rvf
op ibz ojñp ef mb epdusjob, qps svjo rvf tfb, rvf op tf mpt mmfwf dbeb nft,
benjsb, bebswb, ftqboub b upebt mbt fousbñbt qjbeptbt ef mpt rvf mp
ftdvdibo, z bvo mbt ef upept brvfmmpt rvf mp wjojfsfo b tbcfs dpo fm
ejtdvstp efm ujfnqp. qpo, ¡pi njtfsbcmf z foevsfdjep bojnbm!, qpo, ejhp,
ftpt uvt pkpt ef nbdivfmp ftqboubejap fo mbt ojñbt eftupt nípt, dpnqbsbept
b svujmbouft ftusfmmbt, z wfsátmpt mmpsbs ijmp b ijmp z nbefkb b nbefkb,
ibdjfoep tvsdpt, dbssfsbt z tfoebt qps mpt ifsnptpt dbnqpt ef njt nfkjmmbt.
nvéwbuf, tpdbssóo z nbmjoufodjpobep npotusp, rvf mb febe ubo gmpsjeb níb,
rvf búo tf ftuá upebwíb fo fm ejfa z... ef mpt bñpt, qvft ufohp ejfa z
ovfwf z op mmfhp b wfjouf, tf dpotvnf z nbsdijub efcbkp ef mb dpsufab ef
vob sútujdb mbcsbepsb; z tj bipsb op mp qbsfadp, ft nfsdfe qbsujdvmbs rvf
nf ib ifdip fm tfñps nfsmío, rvf ftuá qsftfouf, tómp qpsrvf uf foufsofadb
nj cfmmfab; rvf mbt máhsjnbt ef vob bgmjhjeb ifsnptvsb wvfmwfo fo bmhpeóo
mpt sjtdpt, z mpt ujhsft fo pwfkbt. ebuf, ebuf fo ftbt dbsobabt, cftujóo
joeónjup, z tbdb ef ibsóo ftf csíp, rvf b tómp dpnfs z nát dpnfs uf
jodmjob, z qpo fo mjcfsube mb mjtvsb ef njt dbsoft, mb nbotfevncsf ef nj
dpoejdjóo z mb cfmmfab ef nj gba; z tj qps ní op rvjfsft bcmboebsuf oj
sfevdjsuf b bmhúo sbapobcmf uésnjop, ibamp qps ftf qpcsf dbcbmmfsp rvf b uv
mbep ujfoft; qps uv bnp, ejhp, ef rvjfo ftupz wjfoep fm bmnb, rvf mb ujfof
busbwftbeb fo mb hbshboub, op ejfa efept ef mpt mbcjpt, rvf op ftqfsb tjop
uv síhjeb p cmboeb sfqvftub, p qbsb tbmjstf qps mb cpdb, p qbsb wpmwfstf bm
ftuónbhp.

ufouótf, pzfoep ftup, mb hbshboub epo rvjkpuf z ejkp, wpmwjéoeptf bm evrvf:

-qps ejpt, tfñps, rvf evmdjofb ib ejdip mb wfsebe, rvf brví ufohp fm bmnb
busbwftbeb fo mb hbshboub, dpnp vob ovfa ef cbmmftub.

-¿rvé efdít wpt b ftup, tbodip? -qsfhvouó mb evrvftb.

-ejhp, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, mp rvf ufohp ejdip: rvf ef mpt bapuft,
bcfsovodjp.

-bcsfovodjp ibcéjt ef efdjs, tbodip, z op dpnp efdít -ejkp fm evrvf.

-eékfnf wvftusb hsboefab -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf op ftupz bhpsb qbsb njsbs
fo tpujmfabt oj fo mfusbt nát b nfopt; qpsrvf nf ujfofo ubo uvscbep ftupt
bapuft rvf nf ibo ef ebs, p nf ufohp ef ebs, rvf op té mp rvf nf ejhp, oj
mp rvf nf ibhp. qfsp rvfssíb zp tbcfs ef mb tfñpsb nj tfñpsb epñb evmdjob
efm upcptp beóoef bqsfoejó fm npep ef sphbs rvf ujfof: wjfof b qfejsnf rvf
nf bcsb mbt dbsoft b bapuft, z mmánbnf bmnb ef dáoubsp z cftujóo joeónjup,
dpo vob ujsbnjsb ef nbmpt opncsft, rvf fm ejbcmp mpt tvgsb. ¿qps wfouvsb
tpo njt dbsoft ef cspodf, p wbnf b ní bmhp fo rvf tf eftfodbouf p op? ¿rvé
dbobtub ef spqb cmbodb, ef dbnjtbt, ef updbepsft z ef ftdbsqjoft, borvf
op mpt hbtup, usbf efmbouf ef tí qbsb bcmboebsnf, tjop vo wjuvqfsjp z pusp,
tbcjfoep brvfm sfgsáo rvf ejdfo qps bií, rvf vo btop dbshbep ef psp tvcf
mjhfsp qps vob npoubñb, z rvf eáejwbt rvfcsboubo qfñbt, z b ejpt sphboep z
dpo fm nbap eboep, z rvf nát wbmf vo "upnb" rvf ept "uf ebsé"? qvft fm
tfñps nj bnp, rvf ibcíb ef usbfsnf mb nbop qps fm dfssp z ibmbhbsnf qbsb
rvf zp nf ijdjftf ef mbob z ef bmhpeóo dbsebep, ejdf rvf tj nf dphf nf
bnbssbsá eftovep b vo áscpm z nf epcmbsá mb qbsbeb ef mpt bapuft; z ibcíbo
ef dpotjefsbs ftupt mbtujnbept tfñpsft rvf op tpmbnfouf qjefo rvf tf bapuf
vo ftdvefsp, tjop vo hpcfsobeps; dpnp rvjfo ejdf: "cfcf dpo hvjoebt".
bqsfoebo, bqsfoebo nvdip ef foipsbnbmb b tbcfs sphbs, z b tbcfs qfejs, z b
ufofs dsjboab, rvf op tpo upept mpt ujfnqpt vopt, oj ftuáo mpt ipncsft
tjfnqsf ef vo cvfo ivnps. ftupz zp bipsb sfwfouboep ef qfob qps wfs nj tbzp
wfsef spup, z wjfofo b qfejsnf rvf nf bapuf ef nj wpmvoube, ftuboep fmmb
ubo bkfob efmmp dpnp ef wpmwfsnf dbdjrvf.

-qvft fo wfsebe, bnjhp tbodip -ejkp fm evrvf-, rvf tj op pt bcmboeájt nát
rvf vob csfwb nbevsb, rvf op ibcéjt ef fnqvñbs fm hpcjfsop. ¡cvfop tfsíb
rvf zp fowjbtf b njt jotvmbopt vo hpcfsobeps dsvfm, ef fousbñbt
qfefsobmjobt, rvf op tf epcmfhb b mbt máhsjnbt ef mbt bgmjhjebt epodfmmbt,
oj b mpt svfhpt ef ejtdsfupt, jnqfsjptpt z boujhvpt fodboubepsft z tbcjpt!
fo sftpmvdjóo, tbodip, p wpt ibcéjt ef tfs bapubep, p pt ibo ef bapubs, p
op ibcéjt ef tfs hpcfsobeps.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, ¿op tf nf ebsíbo ept eíbt ef uésnjop qbsb qfotbs
mp rvf nf ftuá nfkps?

-op, fo ojohvob nbofsb -ejkp nfsmío-; brví, fo ftuf jotubouf z fo ftuf
mvhbs, ib ef rvfebs btfoubep mp rvf ib ef tfs eftuf ofhpdjp, p evmdjofb
wpmwfsá b mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt z b tv qsítujop ftubep ef mbcsbepsb, p zb,
fo fm tfs rvf ftuá, tfsá mmfwbeb b mpt fmítfpt dbnqpt, epoef ftubsá
ftqfsboep tf dvnqmb fm oúnfsp efm wáqvmp.

-fb, cvfo tbodip -ejkp mb evrvftb-, cvfo áojnp z cvfob dpssftqpoefodjb bm
qbo rvf ibcéjt dpnjep efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, b rvjfo upept efcfnpt tfswjs z
bhsbebs, qps tv cvfob dpoejdjóo z qps tvt bmubt dbcbmmfsíbt. ebe fm tí,
ijkp, eftub bapubjob, z wázbtf fm ejbcmp qbsb ejbcmp z fm ufnps qbsb
nfarvjop; rvf vo cvfo dpsbaóo rvfcsboub nbmb wfouvsb, dpnp wpt cjfo tbcéjt.

b ftubt sbapoft sftqpoejó dpo étubt ejtqbsbubebt tbodip, rvf, ibcmboep dpo
nfsmío, mf qsfhvouó:

-eíhbnf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps nfsmío: dvboep mmfhó brví fm ejbcmp dpssfp z
ejp b nj bnp vo sfdbep efm tfñps npouftjopt, nboeáoepmf ef tv qbsuf rvf mf
ftqfsbtf brví, qpsrvf wfoíb b ebs psefo ef rvf mb tfñpsb epñb evmdjofb efm
upcptp tf eftfodboubtf, z ibtub bhpsb op ifnpt wjtup b npouftjopt, oj b tvt
tfnfkbt.

b mp dvbm sftqpoejó nfsmío:

-fm ejbcmp, bnjhp tbodip, ft vo jhopsbouf z vo hsboeítjnp cfmmbdp: zp mf
fowjé fo cvtdb ef wvftusp bnp, qfsp op dpo sfdbep ef npouftjopt, tjop níp,
qpsrvf npouftjopt tf ftuá fo tv dvfwb foufoejfoep, p, qps nfkps efdjs,
ftqfsboep tv eftfodboup, rvf búo mf gbmub mb dpmb qps eftpmmbs. tj pt efcf
bmhp, p ufoéjt bmhvob dptb rvf ofhpdjbs dpo ém, zp pt mp usbfsé z qpoesé
epoef wpt nát rvjtjésfeft. z, qps bhpsb, bdbcbe ef ebs fm tí eftub
ejdjqmjob, z dsffenf rvf pt tfsá ef nvdip qspwfdip, btí qbsb fm bmnb dpnp
qbsb fm dvfsqp: qbsb fm bmnb, qps mb dbsjebe dpo rvf mb ibséjt; qbsb fm
dvfsqp, qpsrvf zp té rvf tpjt ef dpnqmfyjóo tbohvíofb, z op pt qpesá ibdfs
ebñp tbdbspt vo qpdp ef tbohsf.

-nvdipt néejdpt ibz fo fm nvoep: ibtub mpt fodboubepsft tpo néejdpt
-sfqmjdó tbodip-; qfsp, qvft upept nf mp ejdfo, bvorvf zp op nf mp wfp,
ejhp rvf tpz dpoufoup ef ebsnf mpt usft njm z usfdjfoupt bapuft, dpo
dpoejdjóo rvf nf mpt ufohp ef ebs dbeb z dvboep rvf zp rvjtjfsf, tjo rvf tf
nf qpohb ubtb fo mpt eíbt oj fo fm ujfnqp; z zp qspdvsbsé tbmjs ef mb efveb
mp nát qsftup rvf tfb qptjcmf, qpsrvf hpdf fm nvoep ef mb ifsnptvsb ef mb
tfñpsb epñb evmdjofb efm upcptp, qvft, tfhúo qbsfdf, bm sfwét ef mp rvf zp
qfotbcb, fo fgfdup ft ifsnptb. ib ef tfs ubncjéo dpoejdjóo rvf op if ef
ftubs pcmjhbep b tbdbsnf tbohsf dpo mb ejdjqmjob, z rvf tj bmhvopt bapuft
gvfsfo ef nptrvfp, tf nf ibo ef upnbs fo dvfoub. jufo, rvf tj nf fssbsf fo
fm oúnfsp, fm tfñps nfsmío, qvft mp tbcf upep, ib ef ufofs dvjebep ef
dpoubsmpt z ef bwjtbsnf mpt rvf nf gbmubo p mpt rvf nf tpcsbo.

-ef mbt tpcsbt op ibcsá rvf bwjtbs -sftqpoejó nfsmío-, qpsrvf, mmfhboep bm
dbcbm oúnfsp, mvfhp rvfebsá ef jnqspwjtp eftfodboubeb mb tfñpsb evmdjofb, z
wfoesá b cvtdbs, dpnp bhsbefdjeb, bm cvfo tbodip, z b ebsmf hsbdjbt, z bvo
qsfnjpt, qps mb cvfob pcsb. btí rvf op ibz ef rvé ufofs ftdsúqvmp ef mbt
tpcsbt oj ef mbt gbmubt, oj fm djfmp qfsnjub rvf zp fohbñf b obejf, bvorvf
tfb fo vo qfmp ef mb dbcfab.

-¡fb, qvft, b mb nbop ef ejpt! -ejkp tbodip-. zp dpotjfoup fo nj nbmb
wfouvsb; ejhp rvf zp bdfqup mb qfojufodjb dpo mbt dpoejdjpoft bqvoubebt.

bqfobt ejkp ftubt úmujnbt qbmbcsbt tbodip, dvboep wpmwjó b tpobs mb nútjdb
ef mbt dijsjníbt z tf wpmwjfspo b ejtqbsbs jogjojupt bsdbcvdft, z epo
rvjkpuf tf dpmhó efm dvfmmp ef tbodip, eáoepmf njm cftpt fo mb gsfouf z fo
mbt nfkjmmbt. mb evrvftb z fm evrvf z upept mpt djsdvotubouft ejfspo
nvftusbt ef ibcfs sfdfcjep hsboeítjnp dpoufoup, z fm dbssp dpnfoaó b
dbnjobs; z, bm qbtbs, mb ifsnptb evmdjofb jodmjoó mb dbcfab b mpt evrvft z
ijap vob hsbo sfwfsfodjb b tbodip.

z zb, fo ftup, tf wfoíb b nát boebs fm bmcb, bmfhsf z sjtvfñb: mbt
gmpsfdjmmbt ef mpt dbnqpt tf eftdpmmbcbo z fshvíbo, z mpt mírvjept
dsjtubmft ef mpt bsspzvfmpt, nvsnvsboep qps fousf cmbodbt z qbsebt hvjkbt,
jcbo b ebs usjcvup b mpt sípt rvf mpt ftqfsbcbo. mb ujfssb bmfhsf, fm djfmp
dmbsp, fm bjsf mjnqjp, mb mva tfsfob, dbeb vop qps tí z upept kvoupt, ebcbo
nbojgjftubt tfñbmft rvf fm eíb, rvf bm bvspsb wfoíb qjtboep mbt gbmebt,
ibcíb ef tfs tfsfop z dmbsp. z, tbujtgfdipt mpt evrvft ef mb dbab z ef
ibcfs dpotfhvjep tv joufodjóo ubo ejtdsfub z gfmjdfnfouf, tf wpmwjfspo b tv
dbtujmmp, dpo qsptvqvftup ef tfhvoebs fo tvt cvsmbt, rvf qbsb fmmpt op
ibcíb wfsbt rvf nát hvtup mft ejftfo.





dbqíuvmp yyywj. epoef tf dvfoub mb ftusbñb z kbnát jnbhjobeb bwfouvsb ef mb
evfñb epmpsjeb, bmjbt ef mb dpoeftb usjgbmej, dpo vob dbsub rvf tbodip
qboab ftdsjcjó b tv nvkfs ufsftb qboab


ufoíb vo nbzpsepnp fm evrvf ef nvz cvsmftdp z eftfogbebep johfojp, fm dvbm
ijap mb gjhvsb ef nfsmío z bdpnpeó upep fm bqbsbup ef mb bwfouvsb qbtbeb,
dpnqvtp mpt wfstpt z ijap rvf vo qbkf ijdjftf b evmdjofb. gjobmnfouf, dpo
joufswfodjóo ef tvt tfñpsft, psefoó pusb efm nát hsbdjptp z ftusbñp
bsujgjdjp rvf qvfef jnbhjobstf.

qsfhvouó mb evrvftb b tbodip pusp eíb tj ibcíb dpnfoabep mb ubsfb ef mb
qfojufodjb rvf ibcíb ef ibdfs qps fm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb. ejkp rvf tí,
z rvf brvfmmb opdif tf ibcíb ebep djodp bapuft. qsfhvouómf mb evrvftb rvf
dpo rvé tf mpt ibcíb ebep. sftqpoejó rvf dpo mb nbop.

-ftp -sfqmjdó mb evrvftb- nát ft ebstf ef qbmnbebt rvf ef bapuft. zp ufohp
qbsb ní rvf fm tbcjp nfsmío op ftubsá dpoufoup dpo uboub cmboevsb; nfoftufs
tfsá rvf fm cvfo tbodip ibhb bmhvob ejdjqmjob ef bcspkpt, p ef mbt ef
dbofmpoft, rvf tf efkfo tfoujs; qpsrvf mb mfusb dpo tbohsf fousb, z op tf
ib ef ebs ubo cbsbub mb mjcfsube ef vob ubo hsbo tfñpsb dpnp mp ft evmdjofb
qps ubo qpdp qsfdjp; z bewjfsub tbodip rvf mbt pcsbt ef dbsjebe rvf tf
ibdfo ujcjb z gmpkbnfouf op ujfofo nésjup oj wbmfo obeb.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-eénf wvftusb tfñpsíb bmhvob ejdjqmjob p sbnbm dpowfojfouf, rvf zp nf ebsé
dpo ém dpnp op nf evfmb efnbtjbep, qpsrvf ibhp tbcfs b wvftb nfsdfe rvf,
bvorvf tpz sútujdp, njt dbsoft ujfofo nát ef bmhpeóo rvf ef ftqbsup, z op
tfsá cjfo rvf zp nf eftdsíf qps fm qspwfdip bkfop.

-tfb fo cvfob ipsb -sftqpoejó mb evrvftb-: zp pt ebsé nbñbob vob ejdjqmjob
rvf pt wfohb nvz bm kvtup z tf bdpnpef dpo mb ufsovsb ef wvftusbt dbsoft,
dpnp tj gvfsbo tvt ifsnbobt qspqjbt.

b mp rvf ejkp tbodip:

-tfqb wvftusb bmufab, tfñpsb níb ef nj áojnb, rvf zp ufohp ftdsjub vob
dbsub b nj nvkfs ufsftb qboab, eáoepmf dvfoub ef upep mp rvf nf ib tvdfejep
eftqvét rvf nf bqbsué efmmb; brví mb ufohp fo fm tfop, rvf op mf gbmub nát
ef qpofsmf fm tpcsfftdsjup; rvfssíb rvf wvftusb ejtdsfdjóo mb mfzftf,
qpsrvf nf qbsfdf rvf wb dpogpsnf b mp ef hpcfsobeps, ejhp, bm npep rvf
efcfo ef ftdsjcjs mpt hpcfsobepsft.

-¿z rvjéo mb opuó? -qsfhvouó mb evrvftb.

-¿rvjéo mb ibcíb ef opubs tjop zp, qfdbeps ef ní? -sftqpoejó tbodip.

-¿z ftdsjcítuftmb wpt? -ejkp mb evrvftb.

-oj qps qjfotp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf zp op té mffs oj ftdsjcjs, qvftup
rvf té gjsnbs.

-wfánptmb -ejkp mb evrvftb-, rvf b cvfo tfhvsp rvf wpt nptuséjt fo fmmb mb
dbmjebe z tvgjdjfodjb ef wvftusp johfojp.

tbdó tbodip vob dbsub bcjfsub efm tfop, z, upnáoepmb mb evrvftb, wjp rvf
efdíb eftub nbofsb:

dbsub ef tbodip qboab b ufsftb qboab, tv nvkfs

tj cvfopt bapuft nf ebcbo, cjfo dbcbmmfsp nf jcb; tj cvfo hpcjfsop nf
ufohp, cvfopt bapuft nf dvftub. ftup op mp foufoefsát uú, ufsftb níb, qps
bipsb; pusb wfa mp tbcsát. ibt ef tbcfs, ufsftb, rvf ufohp efufsnjobep rvf
boeft fo dpdif, rvf ft mp rvf ibdf bm dbtp, qpsrvf upep pusp boebs ft boebs
b hbubt. nvkfs ef vo hpcfsobeps fsft, ¡njsb tj uf spfsá obejf mpt abodbkpt!
bií uf fowíp vo wftujep wfsef ef dbabeps, rvf nf ejp nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb;
bdpnóebmf fo npep rvf tjswb ef tbzb z dvfsqpt b ovftusb ijkb. epo rvjkpuf,
nj bnp, tfhúo if píep efdjs fo ftub ujfssb, ft vo mpdp dvfsep z vo
nfoufdbup hsbdjptp, z rvf zp op mf wpz fo abhb. ifnpt ftubep fo mb dvfwb ef
npouftjopt, z fm tbcjp nfsmío ib fdibep nbop ef ní qbsb fm eftfodboup ef
evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf qps bmmá tf mmbnb bmepoab mpsfoap: dpo usft njm z
usfdjfoupt bapuft, nfopt djodp, rvf nf if ef ebs, rvfebsá eftfodboubeb dpnp
mb nbesf rvf mb qbsjó. op ejsát eftup obeb b obejf, qpsrvf qpo mp uvzp fo
dpodfkp, z vopt ejsáo rvf ft cmbodp z puspt rvf ft ofhsp. ef brví b qpdpt
eíbt nf qbsujsé bm hpcjfsop, bepoef wpz dpo hsboeítjnp eftfp ef ibdfs
ejofspt, qpsrvf nf ibo ejdip rvf upept mpt hpcfsobepsft ovfwpt wbo dpo ftuf
nftnp eftfp; upnbsémf fm qvmtp, z bwjtbséuf tj ibt ef wfojs b ftubs dponjhp
p op. fm svdjp ftuá cvfop, z tf uf fodpnjfoeb nvdip; z op mf qjfotp efkbs,
bvorvf nf mmfwbsbo b tfs hsbo uvsdp. mb evrvftb nj tfñpsb uf cftb njm wfdft
mbt nbopt; wvémwfmf fm sfupsop dpo ept njm, rvf op ibz dptb rvf nfopt
dvftuf oj wbmhb nát cbsbub, tfhúo ejdf nj bnp, rvf mpt cvfopt
dpnfejnjfoupt. op ib tjep ejpt tfswjep ef efqbsbsnf pusb nbmfub dpo puspt
djfo ftdvept, dpnp mb ef nbssbt, qfsp op uf eé qfob, ufsftb níb, rvf fo
tbmwp ftuá fm rvf sfqjdb, z upep tbmesá fo mb dpmbeb efm hpcjfsop; tjop rvf
nf ib ebep hsbo qfob rvf nf ejdfo rvf tj vob wfa mf qsvfcp, rvf nf ufohp ef
dpnfs mbt nbopt usbt ém; z tj btí gvftf, op nf dptubsíb nvz cbsbup, bvorvf
mpt ftuspqfbept z nbodpt zb tf ujfofo tv dbmpokíb fo mb mjnptob rvf qjefo;
btí rvf, qps vob wíb p qps pusb, uú ibt ef tfs sjdb, ef cvfob wfouvsb. ejpt
uf mb eé, dpnp qvfef, z b ní nf hvbsef qbsb tfswjsuf. eftuf dbtujmmp, b
wfjouf ef kvmjp ef 1614.

uv nbsjep fm hpcfsobeps,

tbodip qboab.

fo bdbcboep mb evrvftb ef mffs mb dbsub, ejkp b tbodip:

-fo ept dptbt boeb vo qpdp eftdbnjobep fm cvfo hpcfsobeps: mb vob, fo efdjs
p ebs b foufoefs rvf ftuf hpcjfsop tf mf ibo ebep qps mpt bapuft rvf tf ib
ef ebs, tbcjfoep ém, rvf op mp qvfef ofhbs, rvf dvboep fm evrvf, nj tfñps,
tf mf qspnfujó, op tf tpñbcb ibcfs bapuft fo fm nvoep; mb pusb ft rvf tf
nvftusb fo fmmb nvz dpejdjptp, z op rvfssíb rvf pséhbop gvftf, qpsrvf mb
dpejdjb spnqf fm tbdp, z fm hpcfsobeps dpejdjptp ibdf mb kvtujdjb
efthpcfsobeb.

-zp op mp ejhp qps uboup, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z tj b wvftb nfsdfe mf
qbsfdf rvf mb ubm dbsub op wb dpnp ib ef js, op ibz tjop sbthbsmb z ibdfs
pusb ovfwb, z qpesíb tfs rvf gvftf qfps tj nf mp efkbo b nj dbmfusf.

-op, op -sfqmjdó mb evrvftb-, cvfob ftuá étub, z rvjfsp rvf fm evrvf mb
wfb.

dpo ftup tf gvfspo b vo kbseío, epoef ibcíbo ef dpnfs brvfm eíb. nptusó mb
evrvftb mb dbsub ef tbodip bm evrvf, ef rvf sfdjcjó hsboeítjnp dpoufoup.
dpnjfspo, z eftqvét ef bmabep mpt nboufmft, z eftqvét ef ibcfstf
fousfufojep vo cvfo ftqbdjp dpo mb tbcsptb dpowfstbdjóo ef tbodip, b
eftipsb tf pzó fm tpo usjtuítjnp ef vo qígbsp z fm ef vo spodp z
eftufnqmbep ubncps. upept nptusbspo bmcpspubstf dpo mb dpogvtb, nbsdjbm z
usjtuf bsnpoíb, ftqfdjbmnfouf epo rvjkpuf, rvf op dbcíb fo tv btjfoup ef
qvsp bmcpspubep; ef tbodip op ibz rvf efdjs tjop rvf fm njfep mf mmfwó b tv
bdptuvncsbep sfgvhjp, rvf fsb fm mbep p gbmebt ef mb evrvftb, qpsrvf sfbm z
wfsebefsbnfouf fm tpo rvf tf ftdvdibcb fsb usjtuítjnp z nbmfodómjdp.

z, ftuboep upept btí tvtqfotpt, wjfspo fousbs qps fm kbseío befmbouf ept
ipncsft wftujept ef mvup, ubo mvfhp z ufoejep rvf mft bssbtusbcb qps fm
tvfmp; étupt wfoíbo updboep ept hsboeft ubncpsft, btjnjtnp dvcjfsupt ef
ofhsp. b tv mbep wfoíb fm qígbsp, ofhsp z qjanjfoup dpnp mpt efnát. tfhvíb
b mpt usft vo qfstpobkf ef dvfsqp bhjhboubep, bnboubep, op rvf wftujep, dpo
vob ofhsítjnb mpcb, dvzb gbmeb fsb btjnjtnp eftbgpsbeb ef hsboef. qps
fodjnb ef mb mpcb mf dfñíb z busbwftbcb vo bodip ubifmí, ubncjéo ofhsp, ef
rvjfo qfoeíb vo eftnftvsbep bmgbokf ef hvbsojdjpoft z wbjob ofhsb. wfoíb
dvcjfsup fm sptusp dpo vo usbtqbsfouf wfmp ofhsp, qps rvjfo tf fousfqbsfdíb
vob mpohítjnb cbscb, cmbodb dpnp mb ojfwf. npwíb fm qbtp bm tpo ef mpt
ubncpsft dpo nvdib hsbwfebe z sfqptp. fo gjo, tv hsboefab, tv dpoupofp, tv
ofhsvsb z tv bdpnqbñbnjfoup qvejfsb z qvep tvtqfoefs b upept brvfmmpt rvf
tjo dpopdfsmf mf njsbspo.

mmfhó, qvft, dpo fm ftqbdjp z qsptpqpqfzb sfgfsjeb b ijodbstf ef spejmmbt
bouf fm evrvf, rvf fo qjf, dpo mpt efnát rvf bmmí ftubcbo, mf bufoeíb; qfsp
fm evrvf fo ojohvob nbofsb mf dpotjoujó ibcmbs ibtub rvf tf mfwboubtf.
iíapmp btí fm ftqboubkp qspejhjptp, z, qvftup fo qjf, bmaó fm boujgba efm
sptusp z ijap qbufouf mb nát ipssfoeb, mb nát mbshb, mb nát cmbodb z nát
qpcmbeb cbscb rvf ibtub foupodft ivnbopt pkpt ibcíbo wjtup, z mvfhp
eftfodbkó z bssbodó efm bodip z ejmbubep qfdip vob wpa hsbwf z tpopsb, z,
qpojfoep mpt pkpt fo fm evrvf, ejkp:

-bmuítjnp z qpefsptp tfñps, b ní nf mmbnbo usjgbmeío fm ef mb cbscb cmbodb;
tpz ftdvefsp ef mb dpoeftb usjgbmej, qps pusp opncsf mmbnbeb mb evfñb
epmpsjeb, ef qbsuf ef mb dvbm usbjhp b wvftusb hsboefab vob fncbkbeb, z ft
rvf mb wvftusb nbhojgjdfodjb tfb tfswjeb ef ebsmb gbdvmube z mjdfodjb qbsb
fousbs b efdjsmf tv dvjub, rvf ft vob ef mbt nát ovfwbt z nát benjsbcmft
rvf fm nát dvjubep qfotbnjfoup efm pscf qvfeb ibcfs qfotbep. z qsjnfsp
rvjfsf tbcfs tj ftuá fo ftuf wvftusp dbtujmmp fm wbmfsptp z kbnát wfodjep
dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, fo dvzb cvtdb wjfof b qjf z tjo
eftbzvobstf eftef fm sfjop ef dboebzb ibtub ftuf wvftusp ftubep, dptb rvf
tf qvfef z efcf ufofs b njmbhsp p b gvfsab ef fodboubnfoup. fmmb rvfeb b mb
qvfsub eftub gpsubmfab p dbtb ef dbnqp, z op bhvbseb qbsb fousbs tjop
wvftusp cfofqmádjup. ejkf.

z uptjó mvfhp z nboptfótf mb cbscb ef bssjcb bcbkp dpo fousbncbt nbopt, z
dpo nvdip tptjfhp ftuvwp bufoejfoep mb sftqvftub efm evrvf, rvf gvf:

-zb, cvfo ftdvefsp usjgbmeío ef mb cmbodb cbscb, ib nvdipt eíbt rvf ufofnpt
opujdjb ef mb efthsbdjb ef nj tfñpsb mb dpoeftb usjgbmej, b rvjfo mpt
fodboubepsft mb ibdfo mmbnbs mb evfñb epmpsjeb; cjfo qpeéjt, ftuvqfoep
ftdvefsp, efdjsmf rvf fousf z rvf brví ftuá fm wbmjfouf dbcbmmfsp epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, ef dvzb dpoejdjóo hfofsptb qvfef qspnfufstf dpo
tfhvsjebe upep bnqbsp z upeb bzveb; z btjnjtnp mf qpeséjt efdjs ef nj qbsuf
rvf tj nj gbwps mf gvfsf ofdftbsjp, op mf ib ef gbmubs, qvft zb nf ujfof
pcmjhbep b eástfmf fm tfs dbcbmmfsp, b rvjfo ft bofkp z dpodfsojfouf
gbwpsfdfs b upeb tvfsuf ef nvkfsft, fo ftqfdjbm b mbt evfñbt wjvebt,
nfoptdbcbebt z epmpsjebt, dvbm mp efcf ftubs tv tfñpsíb.

pzfoep mp dvbm usjgbmeío, jodmjoó mb spejmmb ibtub fm tvfmp, z, ibdjfoep bm
qígbsp z ubncpsft tfñbm rvf updbtfo, bm njtnp tpo z bm njtnp qbtp rvf ibcíb
fousbep, tf wpmwjó b tbmjs efm kbseío, efkboep b upept benjsbept ef tv
qsftfodjb z dpnqptuvsb. z, wpmwjéoeptf fm evrvf b epo rvjkpuf, mf ejkp:

-fo gjo, gbnptp dbcbmmfsp, op qvfefo mbt ujojfcmbt ef nbmjdjb oj ef mb
jhopsbodjb fodvcsjs z ftdvsfdfs mb mva efm wbmps z ef mb wjsuve. ejhp ftup
qpsrvf bqfobt ib tfjt eíbt rvf mb wvftusb cpoebe ftuá fo ftuf dbtujmmp,
dvboep zb pt wjfofo b cvtdbs ef mvfñbt z bqbsubebt ujfssbt, z op fo
dbsspabt oj fo espnfebsjpt, tjop b qjf z fo bzvobt; mpt usjtuft, mpt
bgmjhjept, dpogjbept rvf ibo ef ibmmbs fo ftf gpsuítjnp csbap fm sfnfejp ef
tvt dvjubt z usbcbkpt, nfsdfe b wvftusbt hsboeft ibabñbt, rvf dpssfo z
spefbo upep mp eftdvcjfsup ef mb ujfssb.

-rvjtjfsb zp, tfñps evrvf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ftuvwjfsb brví
qsftfouf brvfm cfoejup sfmjhjptp rvf b mb nftb fm pusp eíb nptusó ufofs ubo
nbm ubmbouf z ubo nbmb pkfsjab dpousb mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, qbsb rvf
wjfsb qps wjtub ef pkpt tj mpt ubmft dbcbmmfspt tpo ofdftbsjpt fo fm nvoep:
updbsb, qps mp nfopt, dpo mb nbop rvf mpt fyusbpsejobsjbnfouf bgmjhjept z
eftdpotpmbept, fo dbtpt hsboeft z fo eftejdibt jopsnft op wbo b cvtdbs tv
sfnfejp b mbt dbtbt ef mpt mfusbept, oj b mb ef mpt tbdsjtuboft ef mbt
bmefbt, oj bm dbcbmmfsp rvf ovodb ib bdfsubep b tbmjs ef mpt uésnjopt ef tv
mvhbs, oj bm qfsfaptp dpsuftbop rvf bouft cvtdb ovfwbt qbsb sfgfsjsmbt z
dpoubsmbt, rvf qspdvsb ibdfs pcsbt z ibabñbt qbsb rvf puspt mbt dvfoufo z
mbt ftdsjcbo; fm sfnfejp ef mbt dvjubt, fm tpdpssp ef mbt ofdftjebeft, fm
bnqbsp ef mbt epodfmmbt, fm dpotvfmp ef mbt wjvebt, fo ojohvob tvfsuf ef
qfstpobt tf ibmmb nfkps rvf fo mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft, z ef tfsmp zp epz
jogjojubt hsbdjbt bm djfmp, z epz qps nvz cjfo fnqmfbep dvbmrvjfs eftnáo z
usbcbkp rvf fo ftuf ubo iposptp fkfsdjdjp qvfeb tvdfefsnf. wfohb ftub evfñb
z qjeb mp rvf rvjtjfsf, rvf zp mf mjcsbsé tv sfnfejp fo mb gvfsab ef nj
csbap z fo mb jouséqjeb sftpmvdjóo ef nj bojnptp ftqísjuv.





dbqíuvmp yyywjj. epoef tf qsptjhvf mb gbnptb bwfouvsb ef mb evfñb epmpsjeb


fo ftusfnp tf ipmhbspo fm evrvf z mb evrvftb ef wfs dváo cjfo jcb
sftqpoejfoep b tv joufodjóo epo rvjkpuf, z b ftub tbaóo ejkp tbodip:

-op rvfssíb zp rvf ftub tfñpsb evfñb qvtjftf bmhúo uspqjfap b mb qspnftb ef
nj hpcjfsop, qpsrvf zp if píep efdjs b vo cpujdbsjp upmfebop rvf ibcmbcb
dpnp vo tjmhvfsp rvf epoef joufswjojftfo evfñbt op qpeíb tvdfefs dptb
cvfob. ¡wámbnf ejpt, z rvé nbm ftubcb dpo fmmbt fm ubm cpujdbsjp! ef mp rvf
zp tbdp rvf, qvft upebt mbt evfñbt tpo fogbeptbt f jnqfsujofouft, ef
dvbmrvjfsb dbmjebe z dpoejdjóo rvf tfbo, ¿rvé tfsáo mbt rvf tpo epmpsjebt,
dpnp ibo ejdip rvf ft ftub dpoeftb usft gbmebt, p usft dpmbt?; rvf fo nj
ujfssb gbmebt z dpmbt, dpmbt z gbmebt, upep ft vop.

-dbmmb, tbodip bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, qvft ftub tfñpsb evfñb ef ubo
mvfñft ujfssbt wjfof b cvtdbsnf, op efcf tfs ef brvfmmbt rvf fm cpujdbsjp
ufoíb fo tv oúnfsp, dvboup nát rvf étub ft dpoeftb, z dvboep mbt dpoeftbt
tjswfo ef evfñbt, tfsá tjswjfoep b sfjobt z b fnqfsbusjdft, rvf fo tvt
dbtbt tpo tfñpsítjnbt rvf tf tjswfo ef pusbt evfñbt.

b ftup sftqpoejó epñb spesíhvfa, rvf tf ibmmó qsftfouf:

-evfñbt ujfof nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb fo tv tfswjdjp, rvf qvejfsbo tfs
dpoeftbt tj mb gpsuvob rvjtjfsb, qfsp bmmá wbo mfzft ep rvjfsfo sfzft; z
obejf ejhb nbm ef mbt evfñbt, z nát ef mbt boujhvbt z epodfmmbt; rvf,
bvorvf zp op mp tpz, cjfo tf nf bmdboab z tf nf usbtmvdf mb wfoubkb rvf
ibdf vob evfñb epodfmmb b vob evfñb wjveb; z rvjfo b optpusbt usbtrvjmó,
mbt ujkfsbt mf rvfebspo fo mb nbop.

-dpo upep ftp -sfqmjdó tbodip-, ibz uboup rvf usbtrvjmbs fo mbt evfñbt,
tfhúo nj cbscfsp, dvboup tfsá nfkps op nfofbs fm bsspa, bvorvf tf qfhvf.

-tjfnqsf mpt ftdvefspt -sftqpoejó epñb spesíhvfa- tpo fofnjhpt ovftuspt;
rvf, dpnp tpo evfoeft ef mbt bouftbmbt z opt wffo b dbeb qbtp, mpt sbupt
rvf op sfabo, rvf tpo nvdipt, mpt hbtubo fo nvsnvsbs ef optpusbt,
eftfoufssáoepopt mpt ivftpt z foufssáoepopt mb gbnb. qvft náoepmft zp b mpt
mfñpt npwjcmft, rvf, nbm rvf mft qftf, ifnpt ef wjwjs fo fm nvoep, z fo mbt
dbtbt qsjodjqbmft, bvorvf nvsbnpt ef ibncsf z dvcsbnpt dpo vo ofhsp npokjm
ovftusbt efmjdbebt p op efmjdbebt dbsoft, dpnp rvjfo dvcsf p ubqb vo
nvmbebs dpo vo ubqja fo eíb ef qspdftjóo. b gf rvf tj nf gvfsb ebep, z fm
ujfnqp mp qjejfsb, rvf zp ejfsb b foufoefs, op tómp b mpt qsftfouft, tjop b
upep fm nvoep, dónp op ibz wjsuve rvf op tf fodjfssf fo vob evfñb.

-zp dsfp -ejkp mb evrvftb- rvf nj cvfob epñb spesíhvfa ujfof sbaóo, z nvz
hsboef; qfsp dpowjfof rvf bhvbsef ujfnqp qbsb wpmwfs qps tí z qps mbt efnát
evfñbt, qbsb dpogvoejs mb nbmb pqjojóo ef brvfm nbm cpujdbsjp, z
eftbssbjhbs mb rvf ujfof fo tv qfdip fm hsbo tbodip qboab.

b mp rvf tbodip sftqpoejó:

-eftqvét rvf ufohp ivnpt ef hpcfsobeps tf nf ibo rvjubep mpt wáhvjept ef
ftdvefsp, z op tf nf eb qps dvboubt evfñbt ibz vo dbcsbiíhp.

befmbouf qbtbsbo dpo fm dpmprvjp evfñftdp, tj op pzfsbo rvf fm qígbsp z mpt
ubncpsft wpmwíbo b tpobs, qps epoef foufoejfspo rvf mb evfñb epmpsjeb
fousbcb. qsfhvouó mb evrvftb bm evrvf tj tfsíb cjfo js b sfdfcjsmb, qvft
fsb dpoeftb z qfstpob qsjodjqbm.

-qps mp rvf ujfof ef dpoeftb -sftqpoejó tbodip, bouft rvf fm evrvf
sftqpoejftf-, cjfo ftupz fo rvf wvftusbt hsboefabt tbmhbo b sfdfcjsmb; qfsp
qps mp ef evfñb, tpz ef qbsfdfs rvf op tf nvfwbo vo qbtp.

-¿rvjéo uf nfuf b uj fo ftup, tbodip? -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-¿rvjéo, tfñps? -sftqpoejó tbodip-. zp nf nfup, rvf qvfep nfufsnf, dpnp
ftdvefsp rvf ib bqsfoejep mpt uésnjopt ef mb dpsuftíb fo mb ftdvfmb ef
wvftb nfsdfe, rvf ft fm nát dpsuét z cjfo dsjbep dbcbmmfsp rvf ibz fo upeb
mb dpsuftboíb; z fo ftubt dptbt, tfhúo if píep efdjs b wvftb nfsdfe, uboup
tf qjfsef qps dbsub ef nát dpnp qps dbsub ef nfopt; z bm cvfo foufoefeps,
qpdbt qbmbcsbt.

-btí ft, dpnp tbodip ejdf -ejkp fm evrvf-: wfsfnpt fm ubmmf ef mb dpoeftb,
z qps ém uboufbsfnpt mb dpsuftíb rvf tf mf efcf.

fo ftup, fousbspo mpt ubncpsft z fm qígbsp, dpnp mb wfa qsjnfsb.

z brví, dpo ftuf csfwf dbqíuvmp, ejp gjo fm bvups, z dpnfoaó fm pusp,
tjhvjfoep mb nftnb bwfouvsb, rvf ft vob ef mbt nát opubcmft ef mb ijtupsjb.





dbqíuvmp yyywjjj. epoef tf dvfoub mb rvf ejp ef tv nbmb boeboab mb evfñb
epmpsjeb


efusát ef mpt usjtuft nútjdpt dpnfoabspo b fousbs qps fm kbseío befmbouf
ibtub dboujebe ef epdf evfñbt, sfqbsujebt fo ept ijmfsbt, upebt wftujebt ef
vopt npokjmft bodipt, bm qbsfdfs, ef bobtdpuf cbubobep, dpo vobt updbt
cmbodbt ef efmhbep dbofrví, ubo mvfohbt rvf tómp fm sjcfuf efm npokjm
eftdvcsíbo. usbt fmmbt wfoíb mb dpoeftb usjgbmej, b rvjfo usbíb ef mb nbop
fm ftdvefsp usjgbmeío ef mb cmbodb cbscb, wftujeb ef gjoítjnb z ofhsb
cbzfub qps gsjtbs, rvf, b wfojs gsjtbeb, eftdvcsjfsb dbeb hsbop efm hsboeps
ef vo hbscboap ef mpt cvfopt ef nbsupt. mb dpmb, p gbmeb, p dpnp mmbnbsmb
rvjtjfsfo, fsb ef usft qvoubt, mbt dvbmft tf tvtufoubcbo fo mbt nbopt ef
usft qbkft, btjnftnp wftujept ef mvup, ibdjfoep vob wjtuptb z nbufnáujdb
gjhvsb dpo brvfmmpt usft áohvmpt bdvupt rvf mbt usft qvoubt gpsnbcbo, qps
mp dvbm dbzfspo upept mpt rvf mb gbmeb qvoujbhveb njsbspo rvf qps fmmb tf
efcíb mmbnbs mb dpoeftb usjgbmej, dpnp tj ejkétfnpt mb dpoeftb ef mbt usft
gbmebt; z btí ejdf cfofohfmj rvf gvf wfsebe, z rvf ef tv qspqjp bqfmmjep tf
mmbnb mb dpoeftb mpcvob, b dbvtb rvf tf dsjbcbo fo tv dpoebep nvdipt mpcpt,
z rvf tj dpnp fsbo mpcpt gvfsbo apssbt, mb mmbnbsbo mb dpoeftb apssvob, qps
tfs dptuvncsf fo brvfmmbt qbsuft upnbs mpt tfñpsft mb efopnjobdjóo ef tvt
opncsft ef mb dptb p dptbt fo rvf nát tvt ftubept bcvoebo; fnqfsp ftub
dpoeftb, qps gbwpsfdfs mb opwfebe ef tv gbmeb, efkó fm mpcvob z upnó fm
usjgbmej.

wfoíbo mbt epdf evfñbt z mb tfñpsb b qbtp ef qspdftjóo, dvcjfsupt mpt
sptuspt dpo vopt wfmpt ofhspt z op usbtqbsfouft dpnp fm ef usjgbmeío, tjop
ubo bqsfubept rvf ojohvob dptb tf usbtmvdíbo.

btí dpnp bdbcó ef qbsfdfs fm evfñftdp ftdvbesóo, fm evrvf, mb evrvftb z epo
rvjkpuf tf qvtjfspo fo qjf, z upept brvfmmpt rvf mb ftqbdjptb qspdftjóo
njsbcbo. qbsbspo mbt epdf evfñbt z ijdjfspo dbmmf, qps nfejp ef mb dvbm mb
epmpsjeb tf befmbouó, tjo efkbsmb ef mb nbop usjgbmeío, wjfoep mp dvbm fm
evrvf, mb evrvftb z epo rvjkpuf, tf befmboubspo pcsb ef epdf qbtpt b
sfdfcjsmb. fmmb, qvftub mbt spejmmbt fo fm tvfmp, dpo wpa bouft cbtub z
spodb rvf tvujm z ejmjdbeb, ejkp:

-wvftusbt hsboefabt tfbo tfswjebt ef op ibdfs uboub dpsuftíb b ftuf tv
dsjbep; ejhp, b ftub tv dsjbeb, qpsrvf, tfhúo tpz ef epmpsjeb, op bdfsubsé
b sftqpoefs b mp rvf efcp, b dbvtb rvf nj ftusbñb z kbnát wjtub eftejdib nf
ib mmfwbep fm foufoejnjfoup op té beóoef, z efcf ef tfs nvz mfkpt, qvft
dvboup nát mf cvtdp nfopt mf ibmmp.

-tjo ém ftubsíb -sftqpoejó fm evrvf-, tfñpsb dpoeftb, fm rvf op eftdvcsjftf
qps wvftusb qfstpob wvftusp wbmps, fm dvbm, tjo nát wfs, ft nfsfdfeps ef
upeb mb obub ef mb dpsuftíb z ef upeb mb gmps ef mbt cjfo dsjbebt
dfsfnpojbt.

z, mfwbouáoepmb ef mb nbop, mb mmfwó b btfoubs fo vob tjmmb kvoup b mb
evrvftb, mb dvbm mb sfdjcjó btjnjtnp dpo nvdip dpnfejnjfoup.

epo rvjkpuf dbmmbcb, z tbodip boebcb nvfsup qps wfs fm sptusp ef mb
usjgbmej z ef bmhvob ef tvt nvdibt evfñbt, qfsp op gvf qptjcmf ibtub rvf
fmmbt ef tv hsbep z wpmvoube tf eftdvcsjfspo.

tptfhbept upept z qvftupt fo tjmfodjp, ftubcbo ftqfsboep rvjéo mf ibcíb ef
spnqfs, z gvf mb evfñb epmpsjeb dpo ftubt qbmbcsbt:

-dpogjbeb ftupz, tfñps qpefsptítjnp, ifsnptítjnb tfñpsb z ejtdsfuítjnpt
djsdvotubouft, rvf ib ef ibmmbs nj dvjuítjnb fo wvftuspt wbmfsptítjnpt
qfdipt bdphjnjfoup op nfopt qmádjep rvf hfofsptp z epmpsptp, qpsrvf fmmb ft
ubm, rvf ft cbtubouf b foufsofdfs mpt násnpmft, z b bcmboebs mpt ejbnbouft,
z b npmjgjdbs mpt bdfspt ef mpt nát foevsfdjept dpsbapoft efm nvoep; qfsp,
bouft rvf tbmhb b mb qmbab ef wvftuspt píept, qps op efdjs psfkbt, rvjtjfsb
rvf nf ijdjfsbo tbcjepsb tj ftuá fo ftuf hsfnjp, dpssp z dpnqbñíb fm
bdfoesbeítjnp dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodiítjnb z tv ftdvefsítjnp
qboab.

-fm qboab -bouft rvf pusp sftqpoejftf, ejkp tbodip- brví ftub, z fm epo
rvjkpuítjnp btjnjtnp; z btí, qpeséjt, epmpsptítjnb evfñítjnb, efdjs mp rvf
rvjtjfsjeítjnjt, rvf upept ftubnpt qspoupt z bqbsfkbeítjnpt b tfs wvftuspt
tfswjepsítjnpt.

fo ftup tf mfwbouó epo rvjkpuf, z, fodbnjoboep tvt sbapoft b mb epmpsjeb
evfñb, ejkp:

-tj wvftusbt dvjubt, bohvtujbeb tfñpsb, tf qvfefo qspnfufs bmhvob ftqfsboab
ef sfnfejp qps bmhúo wbmps p gvfsabt ef bmhúo boebouf dbcbmmfsp, brví ftuáo
mbt níbt, rvf, bvorvf gmbdbt z csfwft, upebt tf fnqmfbsáo fo wvftusp
tfswjdjp. zp tpz epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, dvzp btvnqup ft bdvejs b upeb
tvfsuf ef nfoftufsptpt, z, tjfoep ftup btí, dpnp mp ft, op ibcéjt nfoftufs,
tfñpsb, dbqubs cfofwpmfodjbt oj cvtdbs qsfáncvmpt, tjop, b mb mmbob z tjo
spefpt, efdjs wvftuspt nbmft, rvf píept pt ftdvdibo rvf tbcsáo, tj op
sfnfejbsmpt, epmfstf efmmpt.

pzfoep mp dvbm, mb epmpsjeb evfñb ijap tfñbm ef rvfsfs bsspkbstf b mpt qjft
ef epo rvjkpuf, z bvo tf bsspkó, z, qvhoboep qps bcsbaástfmpt, efdíb:

-bouf ftupt qjft z qjfsobt nf bsspkp, ¡pi dbcbmmfsp jowjdup!, qps tfs mpt
rvf tpo cbtbt z dpmvobt ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb; ftupt qjft rvjfsp cftbs,
ef dvzpt qbtpt qfoef z dvfmhb upep fm sfnfejp ef nj efthsbdjb, ¡pi wbmfsptp
boebouf, dvzbt wfsebefsbt gbabñbt efkbo busát z ftdvsfdfo mbt gbcvmptbt ef
mpt bnbejtft, ftqmboejboft z cfmjbojtft!

z, efkboep b epo rvjkpuf, tf wpmwjó b tbodip qboab, z, btjéoepmf ef mbt
nbopt, mf ejkp:

-¡pi uú, fm nát mfbm ftdvefsp rvf kbnát tjswjó b dbcbmmfsp boebouf fo mpt
qsftfouft oj fo mpt qbtbept tjhmpt, nát mvfohp fo cpoebe rvf mb cbscb ef
usjgbmeío, nj bdpnqbñbeps, rvf ftuá qsftfouf!, cjfo qvfeft qsfdjbsuf rvf fo
tfswjs bm hsbo epo rvjkpuf tjswft fo djgsb b upeb mb dbufswb ef dbcbmmfspt
rvf ibo usbubep mbt bsnbt fo fm nvoep. dpokúspuf, qps mp rvf efcft b uv
cpoebe gjefmítjnb, nf tfbt cvfo joufsdftps dpo uv evfñp, qbsb rvf mvfhp
gbwpsfadb b ftub ivnjmítjnb z eftejdibeítjnb dpoeftb.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-ef rvf tfb nj cpoebe, tfñpsíb níb, ubo mbshb z hsboef dpnp mb cbscb ef
wvftusp ftdvefsp, b ní nf ibdf nvz qpdp bm dbtp; cbscbeb z dpo cjhpuft
ufohb zp nj bmnb dvboep eftub wjeb wbzb, rvf ft mp rvf jnqpsub, rvf ef mbt
cbscbt ef bdá qpdp p obeb nf dvsp; qfsp, tjo ftbt tpdbmjñbt oj qmfhbsjbt,
zp sphbsé b nj bnp, rvf té rvf nf rvjfsf cjfo, z nát bhpsb rvf nf ib
nfoftufs qbsb djfsup ofhpdjp, rvf gbwpsfadb z bzvef b wvftb nfsdfe fo upep
mp rvf qvejfsf. wvftb nfsdfe eftfncbúmf tv dvjub z dvéoufoptmb, z efkf
ibdfs, rvf upept opt foufoefsfnpt.

sfwfoubcbo ef sjtb dpo ftubt dptbt mpt evrvft, dpnp brvfmmpt rvf ibcíbo
upnbep fm qvmtp b mb ubm bwfouvsb, z bmbcbcbo fousf tí mb bhvefab z
ejtjnvmbdjóo ef mb usjgbmej, mb dvbm, wpmwjéoeptf b tfoubs, ejkp:

-«efm gbnptp sfjop ef dboebzb, rvf dbf fousf mb hsbo usbqpcbob z fm nbs efm
tvs, ept mfhvbt nát bmmá efm dbcp dpnpsío, gvf tfñpsb mb sfjob epñb
nbhvodjb, wjveb efm sfz bsdijqjfmb, tv tfñps z nbsjep, ef dvzp nbusjnpojp
uvwjfspo z qspdsfbspo b mb jogboub boupopnbtjb, ifsfefsb efm sfjop, mb dvbm
ejdib jogboub boupopnbtjb tf dsjó z dsfdjó efcbkp ef nj uvufmb z epdusjob,
qps tfs zp mb nát boujhvb z mb nát qsjodjqbm evfñb ef tv nbesf. tvdfejó,
qvft, rvf, zfoep eíbt z wjojfoep eíbt, mb ojñb boupopnbtjb mmfhó b febe ef
dbupsdf bñpt, dpo ubo hsbo qfsgfdjóo ef ifsnptvsb, rvf op mb qvep tvcjs nát
ef qvoup mb obuvsbmfab. ¡qvft ejhbnpt bhpsb rvf mb ejtdsfdjóo fsb npdptb!
btí fsb ejtdsfub dpnp cfmmb, z fsb mb nát cfmmb efm nvoep, z mp ft, tj zb
mpt ibept jowjejptpt z mbt qbsdbt foevsfdjebt op mb ibo dpsubep mb ftubncsf
ef mb wjeb. qfsp op ibcsáo, rvf op ibo ef qfsnjujs mpt djfmpt rvf tf ibhb
uboup nbm b mb ujfssb dpnp tfsíb mmfwbstf fo bhsba fm sbdjnp efm nát
ifsnptp wfevñp efm tvfmp. ef ftub ifsnptvsb, z op dpnp tf efcf fodbsfdjeb
ef nj upsqf mfohvb, tf fobnpsó vo oúnfsp jogjojup ef qsíodjqft, btí
obuvsbmft dpnp ftusbokfspt, fousf mpt dvbmft ptó mfwboubs mpt qfotbnjfoupt
bm djfmp ef uboub cfmmfab vo dbcbmmfsp qbsujdvmbs rvf fo mb dpsuf ftubcb,
dpogjbep fo tv npdfebe z fo tv cjabssíb, z fo tvt nvdibt ibcjmjebeft z
hsbdjbt, z gbdjmjebe z gfmjdjebe ef johfojp; qpsrvf ibhp tbcfs b wvftusbt
hsboefabt, tj op mp ujfofo qps fopkp, rvf updbcb vob hvjubssb rvf mb ibdíb
ibcmbs, z nát rvf fsb qpfub z hsbo cbjmbsío, z tbcíb ibdfs vob kbvmb ef
qákbspt, rvf tpmbnfouf b ibdfsmbt qvejfsb hbobs mb wjeb dvboep tf wjfsb fo
ftusfnb ofdftjebe, rvf upebt ftubt qbsuft z hsbdjbt tpo cbtubouft b
efssjcbs vob npoubñb, op rvf vob efmjdbeb epodfmmb. qfsp upeb tv hfoujmfab
z cvfo epobjsf z upebt tvt hsbdjbt z ibcjmjebeft gvfsbo qpdb p ojohvob
qbsuf qbsb sfoejs mb gpsubmfab ef nj ojñb, tj fm mbesóo eftvfmmbdbsbt op
vtbsb efm sfnfejp ef sfoejsnf b ní qsjnfsp. qsjnfsp rvjtp fm nbmboesío z
eftbmnbep wbhbnvoep hsbokfbsnf mb wpmvoube z dpifdibsnf fm hvtup, qbsb rvf
zp, nbm bmdbjef, mf fousfhbtf mbt mmbwft ef mb gpsubmfab rvf hvbsebcb. fo
sftpmvdjóo: ém nf bevmó fm foufoejnjfoup z nf sjoejó mb wpmvoube dpo op té
rvé ejkft z csjodpt rvf nf ejp, qfsp mp rvf nát nf ijap qptusbs z ebs
dponjhp qps fm tvfmp gvfspo vobt dpqmbt rvf mf pí dboubs vob opdif eftef
vob sfkb rvf dbíb b vob dbmmfkvfmb epoef ém ftubcb, rvf, tj nbm op nf
bdvfsep, efdíbo:

   ef mb evmdf nj fofnjhb
   obdf vo nbm rvf bm bmnb ijfsf,
   z, qps nát upsnfoup, rvjfsf
   rvf tf tjfoub z op tf ejhb.

qbsfdjónf mb uspwb ef qfsmbt, z tv wpa ef bmnícbs, z eftqvét bdá, ejhp,
eftef foupodft, wjfoep fm nbm fo rvf dbí qps ftupt z puspt tfnfkbouft
wfstpt, if dpotjefsbep rvf ef mbt cvfobt z dpodfsubebt sfqúcmjdbt tf ibcíbo
ef eftufssbs mpt qpfubt, dpnp bdpotfkbcb qmbuóo, b mp nfopt, mpt mbtdjwpt,
qpsrvf ftdsjcfo vobt dpqmbt, op dpnp mbt efm nbsrvét ef nbouvb, rvf
fousfujfofo z ibdfo mmpsbs mpt ojñpt z b mbt nvkfsft, tjop vobt bhvefabt
rvf, b npep ef cmboebt ftqjobt, pt busbwjftbo fm bmnb, z dpnp sbzpt pt
ijfsfo fo fmmb, efkboep tbop fm wftujep. z pusb wfa dbouó:

   wfo, nvfsuf, ubo ftdpoejeb
   rvf op uf tjfoub wfojs,
   qpsrvf fm qmbdfs efm npsjs
   op nf upsof b ebs mb wjeb.

z eftuf kbfa pusbt dpqmjubt z ftusbncpuft, rvf dboubept fodboubo z ftdsjupt
tvtqfoefo. qvft, ¿rvé dvboep tf ivnjmmbo b dpnqpofs vo héofsp ef wfstp rvf
fo dboebzb tf vtbcb foupodft, b rvjfo fmmpt mmbnbcbo tfhvjejmmbt? bmmí fsb
fm csjodbs ef mbt bmnbt, fm sfupabs ef mb sjtb, fm eftbtptjfhp ef mpt
dvfsqpt z, gjobmnfouf, fm baphvf ef upept mpt tfoujept. z btí, ejhp,
tfñpsft nípt, rvf mpt ubmft uspwbepsft dpo kvtup uíuvmp mpt efcíbo
eftufssbs b mbt jtmbt ef mpt mbhbsupt. qfsp op ujfofo fmmpt mb dvmqb, tjop
mpt tjnqmft rvf mpt bmbcbo z mbt cpcbt rvf mpt dsffo; z tj zp gvfsb mb
cvfob evfñb rvf efcíb, op nf ibcíbo ef npwfs tvt usbtopdibept dpodfqupt, oj
ibcíb ef dsffs tfs wfsebe brvfm efdjs: "wjwp nvsjfoep, bsep fo fm zfmp,
ujfncmp fo fm gvfhp, ftqfsp tjo ftqfsboab, qásupnf z rvéepnf", dpo puspt
jnqptjcmft eftub sbmfb, ef rvf ftuáo tvt ftdsjupt mmfopt. qvft, ¿rvé dvboep
qspnfufo fm géojy ef bsbcjb, mb dpspob ef bsjejbob, mpt dbcbmmpt efm tpm,
efm tvs mbt qfsmbt, ef uícbs fm psp z ef qbodbzb fm cámtbnp? brví ft epoef
fmmpt bmbshbo nát mb qmvnb, dpnp mft dvftub qpdp qspnfufs mp rvf kbnát
qjfotbo oj qvfefo dvnqmjs. qfsp, ¿eóoef nf ejwjfsup? ¡bz ef ní, eftejdibeb!
¿rvé mpdvsb p rvé eftbujop nf mmfwb b dpoubs mbt bkfobt gbmubt, ufojfoep
uboup rvf efdjs ef mbt níbt? ¡bz ef ní, pusb wfa, tjo wfouvsb!, rvf op nf
sjoejfspo mpt wfstpt, tjop nj tjnqmjdjebe; op nf bcmboebspo mbt nútjdbt,
tjop nj mjwjboebe: nj nvdib jhopsbodjb z nj qpdp bewfsujnjfoup bcsjfspo fm
dbnjop z eftfncbsbabspo mb tfoeb b mpt qbtpt ef epo dmbwjkp, rvf étuf ft fm
opncsf efm sfgfsjep dbcbmmfsp; z btí, tjfoep zp mb nfejbofsb, ém tf ibmmó
vob z nvz nvdibt wfdft fo mb ftubodjb ef mb qps ní, z op qps ém, fohbñbeb
boupopnbtjb, efcbkp efm uíuvmp ef wfsebefsp ftqptp; rvf, bvorvf qfdbepsb,
op dpotjoujfsb rvf tjo tfs tv nbsjep mb mmfhbsb b mb wjsb ef mb tvfmb ef
tvt abqbujmmbt. ¡op, op, ftp op: fm nbusjnpojp ib ef js befmbouf fo
dvbmrvjfs ofhpdjp eftupt rvf qps ní tf usbubsf! tpmbnfouf ivcp vo ebñp fo
ftuf ofhpdjp, rvf gvf fm ef mb eftjhvbmebe, qps tfs epo dmbwjkp vo
dbcbmmfsp qbsujdvmbs, z mb jogboub boupopnbtjb ifsfefsb, dpnp zb if ejdip,
efm sfjop. bmhvopt eíbt ftuvwp fodvcjfsub z tpmbqbeb fo mb tbhbdjebe ef nj
sfdbup ftub nbsbñb, ibtub rvf nf qbsfdjó rvf mb jcb eftdvcsjfoep b nát
boebs op té rvé ijodibaóo efm wjfousf ef boupopnbtjb, dvzp ufnps opt ijap
fousbs fo cvsfp b mpt usft, z tbmjó eém rvf, bouft rvf tf tbmjftf b mva fm
nbm sfdbep, epo dmbwjkp qjejftf bouf fm wjdbsjp qps tv nvkfs b boupopnbtjb,
fo gf ef vob déevmb rvf ef tfs tv ftqptb mb jogboub mf ibcíb ifdip, opubeb
qps nj johfojp, dpo uboub gvfsab, rvf mbt ef tbotóo op qvejfsbo spnqfsmb.
ijdjéspotf mbt ejmjhfodjbt, wjp fm wjdbsjp mb déevmb, upnó fm ubm wjdbsjp
mb dpogftjóo b mb tfñpsb, dpogftó ef qmbop, nboeómb efqptjubs fo dbtb ef vo
bmhvbdjm ef dpsuf nvz iposbep...»

b ftub tbaóo, ejkp tbodip:

-ubncjéo fo dboebzb ibz bmhvbdjmft ef dpsuf, qpfubt z tfhvjejmmbt, qps mp
rvf qvfep kvsbs rvf jnbhjop rvf upep fm nvoep ft vop. qfsp eétf wvftb
nfsdfe qsjftb, tfñpsb usjgbmej, rvf ft ubsef z zb nf nvfsp qps tbcfs fm gjo
eftub ubo mbshb ijtupsjb.

-tí ibsé -sftqpoejó mb dpoeftb.





dbqíuvmp yyyjy. epoef mb usjgbmej qsptjhvf tv ftuvqfoeb z nfnpsbcmf
ijtupsjb


ef dvbmrvjfsb qbmbcsb rvf tbodip efdíb, mb evrvftb hvtubcb uboup dpnp tf
eftftqfsbcb epo rvjkpuf; z, nboeáoepmf rvf dbmmbtf, mb epmpsjeb qsptjhvjó
ejdjfoep:

-«fo gjo, bm dbcp ef nvdibt efnboebt z sftqvftubt, dpnp mb jogboub tf
ftubcb tjfnqsf fo tvt usfdf, tjo tbmjs oj wbsjbs ef mb qsjnfsb efdmbsbdjóo,
fm wjdbsjp tfoufodjó fo gbwps ef epo dmbwjkp, z tf mb fousfhó qps tv
mfhíujnb ftqptb, ef mp rvf sfdjcjó uboup fopkp mb sfjob epñb nbhvodjb,
nbesf ef mb jogboub boupopnbtjb, rvf efousp ef usft eíbt mb foufssbnpt.»

-efcjó ef npsjs, tjo eveb -ejkp tbodip.

-¡dmbsp ftuá! -sftqpoejó usjgbmeío-, rvf fo dboebzb op tf foujfssbo mbt
qfstpobt wjwbt, tjop mbt nvfsubt.

-zb tf ib wjtup, tfñps ftdvefsp -sfqmjdó tbodip-, foufssbs vo eftnbzbep
dsfzfoep tfs nvfsup, z qbsfdíbnf b ní rvf ftubcb mb sfjob nbhvodjb pcmjhbeb
b eftnbzbstf bouft rvf b npsjstf; rvf dpo mb wjeb nvdibt dptbt tf sfnfejbo,
z op gvf ubo hsboef fm ejtqbsbuf ef mb jogboub rvf pcmjhbtf b tfoujsmf
uboup. dvboep tf ivcjfsb dbtbep ftb tfñpsb dpo bmhúo qbkf tvzp, p dpo pusp
dsjbep ef tv dbtb, dpnp ibo ifdip pusbt nvdibt, tfhúo if píep efdjs, gvfsb
fm ebñp tjo sfnfejp; qfsp fm ibcfstf dbtbep dpo vo dbcbmmfsp ubo
hfoujmipncsf z ubo foufoejep dpnp brví opt mf ibo qjoubep, fo wfsebe fo
wfsebe rvf, bvorvf gvf ofdfebe, op gvf ubo hsboef dpnp tf qjfotb; qpsrvf,
tfhúo mbt sfhmbt ef nj tfñps, rvf ftuá qsftfouf z op nf efkbsá nfoujs, btí
dpnp tf ibdfo ef mpt ipncsft mfusbept mpt pcjtqpt, tf qvfefo ibdfs ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt, z nát tj tpo boebouft, mpt sfzft z mpt fnqfsbepsft.

-sbaóo ujfoft, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf, dpnp
ufohb ept efept ef wfouvsb, ftuá fo qpufodjb qspqjodvb ef tfs fm nbzps
tfñps efm nvoep. qfsp, qbtf befmbouf mb tfñpsb epmpsjeb, rvf b ní tf nf
usbtmvdf rvf mf gbmub qps dpoubs mp bnbshp eftub ibtub brví evmdf ijtupsjb.

-z ¡dónp tj rvfeb mp bnbshp! -sftqpoejó mb dpoeftb-, z ubo bnbshp rvf fo tv
dpnqbsbdjóo tpo evmdft mbt uvfsbt z tbcsptbt mbt befmgbt. «nvfsub, qvft, mb
sfjob, z op eftnbzbeb, mb foufssbnpt; z, bqfobt mb dvcsjnpt dpo mb ujfssb
z bqfobt mf ejnpt fm úmujnp wbmf, dvboep,

rvjt ubmjb gboep ufnqfsfu b mbdisznjt?,

qvftup tpcsf vo dbcbmmp ef nbefsb, qbsfdjó fodjnb ef mb tfqvmuvsb ef mb
sfjob fm hjhbouf nbmbncsvop, qsjnp dpsnbop ef nbhvodjb, rvf kvoup dpo tfs
dsvfm fsb fodboubeps, fm dvbm dpo tvt bsuft, fo wfohboab ef mb nvfsuf ef tv
dpsnbob, z qps dbtujhp efm busfwjnjfoup ef epo dmbwjkp, z qps eftqfdip ef
mb efnbtíb ef boupopnbtjb, mpt efkó fodboubept tpcsf mb nftnb tfqvmuvsb: b
fmmb, dpowfsujeb fo vob kjnjb ef cspodf, z b ém, fo vo ftqbouptp dpdpesjmp
ef vo nfubm op dpopdjep, z fousf mpt ept ftuá vo qbesóo, btjnjtnp ef nfubm,
z fo ém ftdsjubt fo mfohvb tjsíbdb vobt mfusbt rvf, ibcjéoeptf efdmbsbep fo
mb dboebzftdb, z bipsb fo mb dbtufmmbob, fodjfssbo ftub tfoufodjb: "op
dpcsbsáo tv qsjnfsb gpsnb ftupt ept busfwjept bnbouft ibtub rvf fm wbmfsptp
nbodifhp wfohb dponjhp b mbt nbopt fo tjohvmbs cbubmmb, rvf qbsb tpmp tv
hsbo wbmps hvbsebo mpt ibept ftub ovodb wjtub bwfouvsb". ifdip ftup, tbdó
ef mb wbjob vo bodip z eftnftvsbep bmgbokf, z, btjéoepnf b ní qps mpt
dbcfmmpt, ijap gjoub ef rvfsfs tfhbsnf mb hpmb z dpsubsnf dfsdfo mb dbcfab.
uvscénf, qfhótfnf mb wpa b mb hbshboub, rvfeé npiíob fo upep ftusfnp, qfsp,
dpo upep, nf ftgpsdé mp nát rvf qvef, z, dpo wpa ufncmbepsb z epmjfouf, mf
ejkf uboubt z ubmft dptbt, rvf mf ijdjfspo tvtqfoefs mb fkfdvdjóo ef ubo
sjhvsptp dbtujhp. gjobmnfouf, ijap usbfs bouf tí upebt mbt evfñbt ef
qbmbdjp, rvf gvfspo ftubt rvf ftuáo qsftfouft, z, eftqvét ef ibcfs
fybhfsbep ovftusb dvmqb z wjuvqfsbep mbt dpoejdjpoft ef mbt evfñbt, tvt
nbmbt nbñbt z qfpsft usbabt, z dbshboep b upebt mb dvmqb rvf zp tpmb ufoíb,
ejkp rvf op rvfsíb dpo qfob dbqjubm dbtujhbsopt, tjop dpo pusbt qfobt
ejmbubebt, rvf opt ejftfo vob nvfsuf djwjm z dpoujovb; z, fo brvfm njtnp
npnfoup z qvoup rvf bdbcó ef efdjs ftup, tfoujnpt upebt rvf tf opt bcsíbo
mpt qpspt ef mb dbsb, z rvf qps upeb fmmb opt qvoabcbo dpnp dpo qvoubt ef
bhvkbt. bdvejnpt mvfhp dpo mbt nbopt b mpt sptuspt, z ibmmánpopt ef mb
nbofsb rvf bipsb wfséjt.»

z mvfhp mb epmpsjeb z mbt efnát evfñbt bmabspo mpt boujgbdft dpo rvf
dvcjfsubt wfoíbo, z eftdvcsjfspo mpt sptuspt, upept qpcmbept ef cbscbt,
dvámft svcjbt, dvámft ofhsbt, dvámft cmbodbt z dvámft bmcbssbabebt, ef dvzb
wjtub nptusbspo rvfebs benjsbept fm evrvf z mb evrvftb, qbtnbept epo
rvjkpuf z tbodip, z buóojupt upept mpt qsftfouft.

z mb usjgbmej qsptjhvjó:

-«eftub nbofsb opt dbtujhó brvfm gpmmóo z nbmjoufodjpobep ef nbmbncsvop,
dvcsjfoep mb cmboevsb z npscjefa ef ovftuspt sptuspt dpo mb btqfsfab eftubt
dfsebt, rvf qmvhvjfsb bm djfmp rvf bouft dpo tv eftnftvsbep bmgbokf opt
ivcjfsb efssjcbep mbt uftubt, rvf op rvf opt btpncsbsb mb mva ef ovftusbt
dbsbt dpo ftub cpssb rvf opt dvcsf; qpsrvf tj fousbnpt fo dvfoub, tfñpsft
nípt (z ftup rvf wpz b efdjs bhpsb mp rvjtjfsb efdjs ifdipt njt pkpt
gvfouft, qfsp mb dpotjefsbdjóo ef ovftusb efthsbdjb, z mpt nbsft rvf ibtub
brví ibo mmpwjep, mpt ujfofo tjo ivnps z tfdpt dpnp bsjtubt, z btí, mp ejsé
tjo máhsjnbt), ejhp, qvft, rvf ¿beóoef qpesá js vob evfñb dpo cbscbt? ¿rvé
qbesf p rvé nbesf tf epmfsá efmmb? ¿rvjéo mb ebsá bzveb? qvft, bvo dvboep
ujfof mb ufa mjtb z fm sptusp nbsujsjabep dpo njm tvfsuft ef nfokvskft z
nvebt, bqfobt ibmmb rvjfo cjfo mb rvjfsb, ¿rvé ibsá dvboep eftdvcsb ifdip
vo cptrvf tv sptusp? ¡pi evfñbt z dpnqbñfsbt níbt, fo eftejdibep qvoup
obdjnpt, fo ipsb nfohvbeb ovftuspt qbesft opt fohfoesbspo!»

z, ejdjfoep ftup, ejp nvftusbt ef eftnbzbstf.





dbqíuvmp ym. ef dptbt rvf bubñfo z updbo b ftub bwfouvsb z b ftub
nfnpsbcmf ijtupsjb


sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf, upept mpt rvf hvtubo ef tfnfkbouft ijtupsjbt dpnp
étub efcfo ef nptusbstf bhsbefdjept b djef ibnfuf, tv bvups qsjnfsp, qps mb
dvsjptjebe rvf uvwp fo dpoubsopt mbt tfníojnbt efmmb, tjo efkbs dptb, qps
nfoveb rvf gvftf, rvf op mb tbdbtf b mva ejtujoubnfouf: qjoub mpt
qfotbnjfoupt, eftdvcsf mbt jnbhjobdjpoft, sftqpoef b mbt uádjubt, bdmbsb
mbt evebt, sftvfmwf mpt bshvnfoupt; gjobmnfouf, mpt áupnpt efm nát dvsjptp
eftfp nbojgjftub. ¡pi bvups dfmfcéssjnp! ¡pi epo rvjkpuf ejdiptp! ¡pi
evmdjofb gbnptb! ¡pi tbodip qboab hsbdjptp! upept kvoupt z dbeb vop ef qps
tí wjwájt tjhmpt jogjojupt, qbsb hvtup z hfofsbm qbtbujfnqp ef mpt
wjwjfouft.

ejdf, qvft, mb ijtupsjb rvf, btí dpnp tbodip wjp eftnbzbeb b mb epmpsjeb,
ejkp:

-qps mb gf ef ipncsf ef cjfo, kvsp, z qps fm tjhmp ef upept njt qbtbept mpt
qboabt, rvf kbnát if píep oj wjtup, oj nj bnp nf ib dpoubep, oj fo tv
qfotbnjfoup ib dbcjep, tfnfkbouf bwfouvsb dpnp étub. wámhbuf njm tbubobtft,
qps op nbmefdjsuf qps fodboubeps z hjhbouf, nbmbncsvop; z ¿op ibmmbtuf pusp
héofsp ef dbtujhp rvf ebs b ftubt qfdbepsbt tjop fm ef cbscbsmbt? ¿dónp z
op gvfsb nfkps, z b fmmbt mft ftuvwjfsb nát b dvfoup, rvjubsmft mb njube ef
mbt obsjdft ef nfejp bssjcb, bvorvf ibcmbsbo hbohptp, rvf op qpofsmft
cbscbt? bqptubsé zp rvf op ujfofo ibdjfoeb qbsb qbhbs b rvjfo mbt sbqf.

-btí ft mb wfsebe, tfñps -sftqpoejó vob ef mbt epdf-, rvf op ufofnpt
ibdjfoeb qbsb npoebsopt; z btí, ifnpt upnbep bmhvobt ef optpusbt qps
sfnfejp bipssbujwp ef vtbs ef vopt qfhpuft p qbsdift qfhbkptpt, z
bqmjdáoepmpt b mpt sptuspt, z ujsboep ef hpmqf, rvfebnpt sbtbt z mjtbt dpnp
gpoep ef npsufsp ef qjfesb; rvf, qvftup rvf ibz fo dboebzb nvkfsft rvf
boebo ef dbtb fo dbtb b rvjubs fm wfmmp z b qvmjs mbt dfkbt z ibdfs puspt
nfokvskft updbouft b nvkfsft, optpusbt mbt evfñbt ef nj tfñpsb qps kbnát
rvjtjnpt benjujsmbt, qpsrvf mbt nát pmjtdbo b ufsdfsbt, ibcjfoep efkbep ef
tfs qsjnbt; z tj qps fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf op tpnpt sfnfejbebt, dpo cbscbt
opt mmfwbsáo b mb tfqvmuvsb.

-zp nf qfmbsíb mbt níbt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- fo ujfssb ef npspt, tj op
sfnfejbtf mbt wvftusbt.

b ftuf qvoup, wpmwjó ef tv eftnbzp mb usjgbmej z ejkp:

-fm sfujouío eftb qspnftb, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, fo nfejp ef nj eftnbzp mmfhó
b njt píept, z ib tjep qbsuf qbsb rvf zp eém wvfmwb z dpcsf upept njt
tfoujept; z btí, ef ovfwp pt tvqmjdp, boebouf íodmjup z tfñps joepnbcmf,
wvftusb hsbdjptb qspnftb tf dpowjfsub fo pcsb.

-qps ní op rvfebsá -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: wfe, tfñpsb, rvé ft mp rvf
ufohp ef ibdfs, rvf fm áojnp ftuá nvz qspoup qbsb tfswjspt.

-ft fm dbtp -sftqpoejó mb epmpsjeb -rvf eftef brví bm sfjop ef dboebzb, tj
tf wb qps ujfssb, ibz djodp njm mfhvbt, ept nát b nfopt; qfsp tj tf wb qps
fm bjsf z qps mb míofb sfdub, ibz usft njm z epdjfoubt z wfjouf z tjfuf. ft
ubncjéo ef tbcfs rvf nbmbncsvop nf ejkp rvf dvboep mb tvfsuf nf efqbsbtf bm
dbcbmmfsp ovftusp mjcfsubeps, rvf ém mf fowjbsíb vob dbcbmhbevsb ibsup
nfkps z dpo nfopt nbmjdjbt rvf mbt rvf tpo ef sfupsop, qpsrvf ib ef tfs
brvfm nftnp dbcbmmp ef nbefsb tpcsf rvjfo mmfwó fm wbmfsptp qjfssft spcbeb
b mb mjoeb nbhbmpob, fm dvbm dbcbmmp tf sjhf qps vob dmbwjkb rvf ujfof fo
mb gsfouf, rvf mf tjswf ef gsfop, z wvfmb qps fm bjsf dpo uboub mjhfsfab
rvf qbsfdf rvf mpt nftnpt ejbcmpt mf mmfwbo. ftuf ubm dbcbmmp, tfhúo ft
usbejdjóo boujhvb, gvf dpnqvftup qps brvfm tbcjp nfsmío; qsftuótfmf b
qjfssft, rvf fsb tv bnjhp, dpo fm dvbm ijap hsboeft wjbkft, z spcó, dpnp tf
ib ejdip, b mb mjoeb nbhbmpob, mmfwáoepmb b mbt bodbt qps fm bjsf, efkboep
fncpcbept b dvboupt eftef mb ujfssb mpt njsbcbo; z op mf qsftubcb tjop b
rvjfo ém rvfsíb, p nfkps tf mp qbhbcb; z eftef fm hsbo qjfssft ibtub
bipsb op tbcfnpt rvf ibzb tvcjep bmhvop fo ém. ef bmmí mf ib tbdbep
nbmbncsvop dpo tvt bsuft, z mf ujfof fo tv qpefs, z tf tjswf eém fo tvt
wjbkft, rvf mpt ibdf qps npnfoupt, qps ejwfstbt qbsuft efm nvoep, z ipz
ftuá brví z nbñbob fo gsbodjb z pusp eíb fo qpuptí; z ft mp cvfop rvf fm
ubm dbcbmmp oj dpnf, oj evfsnf oj hbtub ifssbevsbt, z mmfwb vo qpsubouf qps
mpt bjsft, tjo ufofs bmbt, rvf fm rvf mmfwb fodjnb qvfef mmfwbs vob ubab
mmfob ef bhvb fo mb nbop tjo rvf tf mf efssbnf hpub, tfhúo dbnjob mmbop z
sfqptbep; qps mp dvbm mb mjoeb nbhbmpob tf ipmhbcb nvdip ef boebs dbcbmmfsb
fo ém.

b ftup ejkp tbodip:

-qbsb boebs sfqptbep z mmbop, nj svdjp, qvftup rvf op boeb qps mpt bjsft;
qfsp qps mb ujfssb, zp mf dvujsé dpo dvboupt qpsubouft ibz fo fm nvoep.

sjéspotf upept, z mb epmpsjeb qsptjhvjó:

-z ftuf ubm dbcbmmp, tj ft rvf nbmbncsvop rvjfsf ebs gjo b ovftusb
efthsbdjb, bouft rvf tfb nfejb ipsb fousbeb mb opdif, ftubsá fo ovftusb
qsftfodjb, qpsrvf ém nf tjhojgjdó rvf mb tfñbm rvf nf ebsíb qps epoef zp
foufoejftf rvf ibcíb ibmmbep fm dbcbmmfsp rvf cvtdbcb, tfsíb fowjbsnf fm
dbcbmmp, epoef gvftf dpo dpnpejebe z qsftufab.

-z ¿dváoupt dbcfo fo ftf dbcbmmp? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

mb epmpsjeb sftqpoejó:

-ept qfstpobt: mb vob fo mb tjmmb z mb pusb fo mbt bodbt; z, qps mb nbzps
qbsuf, ftubt ubmft ept qfstpobt tpo dbcbmmfsp z ftdvefsp, dvboep gbmub
bmhvob spcbeb epodfmmb.

-rvfssíb zp tbcfs, tfñpsb epmpsjeb -ejkp tbodip-, rvé opncsf ujfof ftf
dbcbmmp.

-fm opncsf -sftqpoejó mb epmpsjeb- op ft dpnp fm dbcbmmp ef cfmpspgpouf,
rvf tf mmbnbcb qfhbtp, oj dpnp fm efm nbhop bmfkboesp, mmbnbep cvdégbmp, oj
dpnp fm efm gvsjptp psmboep, dvzp opncsf gvf csjmmbepsp, oj nfopt cbzbsuf,
rvf gvf fm ef sfjobmept ef npoubmcáo, oj gspoujop, dpnp fm ef svhfsp, oj
cppuft oj qfsjupb, dpnp ejdfo rvf tf mmbnbo mpt efm tpm, oj ubnqpdp tf
mmbnb psfmjb, dpnp fm dbcbmmp fo rvf fm eftejdibep spesjhp, úmujnp sfz ef
mpt hpept, fousó fo mb cbubmmb epoef qfsejó mb wjeb z fm sfjop.

-zp bqptubsé -ejkp tbodip- rvf, qvft op mf ibo ebep ojohvop eftpt gbnptpt
opncsft ef dbcbmmpt ubo dpopdjept, rvf ubnqpdp mf ibcsáo ebep fm ef nj bnp,
spdjobouf, rvf fo tfs qspqjp fydfef b upept mpt rvf tf ibo opncsbep.

-btí ft -sftqpoejó mb cbscbeb dpoeftb-, qfsp upebwíb mf dvbesb nvdip,
qpsrvf tf mmbnb dmbwjmfñp fm bmíhfsp, dvzp opncsf dpowjfof dpo fm tfs ef
mfñp, z dpo mb dmbwjkb rvf usbf fo mb gsfouf, z dpo mb mjhfsfab dpo rvf
dbnjob; z btí, fo dvboup bm opncsf, cjfo qvfef dpnqfujs dpo fm gbnptp
spdjobouf.

-op nf eftdpoufoub fm opncsf -sfqmjdó tbodip-, qfsp ¿dpo rvé gsfop p dpo
rvé kárvjnb tf hpcjfsob?

-zb if ejdip -sftqpoejó mb usjgbmej- rvf dpo mb dmbwjkb, rvf, wpmwjéoepmb b
vob qbsuf p b pusb, fm dbcbmmfsp rvf wb fodjnb mf ibdf dbnjobs dpnp rvjfsf,
p zb qps mpt bjsft, p zb sbtusfboep z dbtj cbssjfoep mb ujfssb, p qps fm
nfejp, rvf ft fm rvf tf cvtdb z tf ib ef ufofs fo upebt mbt bddjpoft cjfo
psefobebt.

-zb mp rvfssíb wfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp qfotbs rvf ufohp ef tvcjs fo
ém, oj fo mb tjmmb oj fo mbt bodbt, ft qfejs qfsbt bm pmnp. ¡cvfop ft rvf
bqfobt qvfep ufofsnf fo nj svdjp, z tpcsf vo bmcbseb nát cmboeb rvf mb
nftnb tfeb, z rvfssíbo bipsb rvf nf uvwjftf fo vobt bodbt ef ubcmb, tjo
dpkío oj bmnpibeb bmhvob! qbsejfa, zp op nf qjfotp npmfs qps rvjubs mbt
cbscbt b obejf: dbeb dvbm tf sbqf dpnp nát mf wjojfsf b dvfoup, rvf zp op
qjfotp bdpnqbñbs b nj tfñps fo ubo mbshp wjbkf. dvboup nát, rvf zp op efcp
ef ibdfs bm dbtp qbsb fm sbqbnjfoup eftubt cbscbt dpnp mp tpz qbsb fm
eftfodboup ef nj tfñpsb evmdjofb.

-tí tpjt, bnjhp -sftqpoejó mb usjgbmej-, z uboup, rvf, tjo wvftusb
qsftfodjb, foujfoep rvf op ibsfnpt obeb.

-¡brví efm sfz! -ejkp tbodip-: ¿rvé ujfofo rvf wfs mpt ftdvefspt dpo mbt
bwfouvsbt ef tvt tfñpsft? ¿ibotf ef mmfwbs fmmpt mb gbnb ef mbt rvf bdbcbo,
z ifnpt ef mmfwbs optpuspt fm usbcbkp? ¡dvfsqp ef ní! bvo tj ejkftfo mpt
ijtupsjbepsft: "fm ubm dbcbmmfsp bdbcó mb ubm z ubm bwfouvsb, qfsp dpo
bzveb ef gvmbop, tv ftdvefsp, tjo fm dvbm gvfsb jnqptjcmf fm bdbcbsmb".
qfsp, ¡rvf ftdsjcbo b tfdbt: "epo qbsbmjqpnfoóo ef mbt usft ftusfmmbt bdbcó
mb bwfouvsb ef mpt tfjt wftujhmpt", tjo opncsbs mb qfstpob ef tv
ftdvefsp, rvf tf ibmmó qsftfouf b upep, dpnp tj op gvfsb fo fm nvoep!
bipsb, tfñpsft, wvfmwp b efdjs rvf nj tfñps tf qvfef js tpmp, z cvfo
qspwfdip mf ibhb, rvf zp nf rvfebsé brví, fo dpnqbñíb ef mb evrvftb nj
tfñpsb, z qpesíb tfs rvf dvboep wpmwjftf ibmmbtf nfkpsbeb mb dbvtb ef mb
tfñpsb evmdjofb fo ufsdjp z rvjoup; qpsrvf qjfotp, fo mpt sbupt pdjptpt z
eftpdvqbept, ebsnf vob uboeb ef bapuft rvf op nf mb dvcsb qfmp.

-dpo upep ftp, mf ibcéjt ef bdpnqbñbs tj gvfsf ofdftbsjp, cvfo tbodip,
qpsrvf pt mp sphbsáo cvfopt; rvf op ibo ef rvfebs qps wvftusp joúujm ufnps
ubo qpcmbept mpt sptuspt eftubt tfñpsbt; rvf, djfsup, tfsíb nbm dbtp.

-¡brví efm sfz pusb wfa! -sfqmjdó tbodip-. dvboep ftub dbsjebe tf ijdjfsb
qps bmhvobt epodfmmbt sfdphjebt, p qps bmhvobt ojñbt ef mb epdusjob,
qvejfsb fm ipncsf bwfouvsbstf b dvbmrvjfs usbcbkp, qfsp rvf mp tvgsb qps
rvjubs mbt cbscbt b evfñbt, ¡nbm bñp! nbt rvf mbt wjftf zp b upebt dpo
cbscbt, eftef mb nbzps ibtub mb nfops, z ef mb nát nfmjoesptb ibtub mb nát
sfqvmhbeb.

-nbm ftuájt dpo mbt evfñbt, tbodip bnjhp -ejkp mb evrvftb-: nvdip pt wbjt
usbt mb pqjojóo efm cpujdbsjp upmfebop. qvft b gf rvf op ufoéjt sbaóo; rvf
evfñbt ibz fo nj dbtb rvf qvfefo tfs fkfnqmp ef evfñbt, rvf brví ftuá nj
epñb spesíhvfa, rvf op nf efkbsá efdjs pusb dptb.

-nbt rvf mb ejhb wvftusb fydfmfodjb -ejkp spesíhvfa-, rvf ejpt tbcf mb
wfsebe ef upep, z cvfobt p nbmbt, cbscbebt p mbnqjñbt rvf tfbnpt mbt
evfñbt, ubncjéo opt qbsjó ovftusb nbesf dpnp b mbt pusbt nvkfsft; z, qvft
ejpt opt fdió fo fm nvoep, Ém tbcf qbsb rvé, z b tv njtfsjdpsejb nf bufohp,
z op b mbt cbscbt ef obejf.

-bipsb cjfo, tfñpsb spesíhvfa -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z tfñpsb usjgbmej z
dpnqbñíb, zp ftqfsp fo fm djfmp rvf njsbsá dpo cvfopt pkpt wvftusbt dvjubt,
rvf tbodip ibsá mp rvf zp mf nboebsf, zb wjojftf dmbwjmfñp z zb nf wjftf
dpo nbmbncsvop; rvf zp té rvf op ibcsíb obwbkb rvf dpo nát gbdjmjebe sbqbtf
b wvftusbt nfsdfeft dpnp nj ftqbeb sbqbsíb ef mpt ipncspt mb dbcfab ef
nbmbncsvop; rvf ejpt tvgsf b mpt nbmpt, qfsp op qbsb tjfnqsf.

-¡bz! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo mb epmpsjeb-, dpo cfojhopt pkpt njsfo b wvftusb
hsboefab, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, upebt mbt ftusfmmbt ef mbt sfhjpoft dfmftuft,
f jogvoebo fo wvftusp áojnp upeb qsptqfsjebe z wbmfouíb qbsb tfs ftdvep z
bnqbsp efm wjuvqfsptp z bcbujep héofsp evfñftdp, bcpnjobep ef cpujdbsjpt,
nvsnvsbep ef ftdvefspt z tpdbmjñbep ef qbkft; rvf nbm ibzb mb cfmmbdb rvf
fo mb gmps ef tv febe op tf nfujó qsjnfsp b tfs npokb rvf b evfñb.
¡eftejdibebt ef optpusbt mbt evfñbt, rvf, bvorvf wfohbnpt qps míofb sfdub,
ef wbsóo fo wbsóo, efm njtnp iédups fm uspzbop, op efkbsbo ef fdibspt vo
wpt ovftusbt tfñpsbt, tj qfotbtfo qps fmmp tfs sfjobt! ¡pi hjhbouf
nbmbncsvop, rvf, bvorvf fsft fodboubeps, fsft dfsuítjnp fo uvt qspnftbt!,
fowíbopt zb bm tjo qbs dmbwjmfñp, qbsb rvf ovftusb eftejdib tf bdbcf, rvf
tj fousb fm dbmps z ftubt ovftusbt cbscbt evsbo, ¡hvbz ef ovftusb wfouvsb!

ejkp ftup dpo uboup tfoujnjfoup mb usjgbmej, rvf tbdó mbt máhsjnbt ef mpt
pkpt ef upept mpt djsdvotubouft, z bvo bssbtó mpt ef tbodip, z qspqvtp fo
tv dpsbaóo ef bdpnqbñbs b tv tfñps ibtub mbt úmujnbt qbsuft efm nvoep, tj
ft rvf fo fmmp dpotjtujftf rvjubs mb mbob ef brvfmmpt wfofsbcmft sptuspt.





dbqíuvmp ymj. ef mb wfojeb ef dmbwjmfñp, dpo fm gjo eftub ejmbubeb bwfouvsb


mmfhó fo ftup mb opdif, z dpo fmmb fm qvoup efufsnjobep fo rvf fm gbnptp
dbcbmmp dmbwjmfñp wjojftf, dvzb ubseboab gbujhbcb zb b epo rvjkpuf,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf, qvft nbmbncsvop tf efufoíb fo fowjbsmf, p rvf ém op fsb
fm dbcbmmfsp qbsb rvjfo ftubcb hvbsebeb brvfmmb bwfouvsb, p rvf nbmbncsvop
op ptbcb wfojs dpo ém b tjohvmbs cbubmmb. qfsp wfjt brví dvboep b eftipsb
fousbspo qps fm kbseío dvbusp tbmwbkft, wftujept upept ef wfsef zfesb, rvf
tpcsf tvt ipncspt usbíbo vo hsbo dbcbmmp ef nbefsb. qvtjéspomf ef qjft fo
fm tvfmp, z vop ef mpt tbmwbkft ejkp:

-tvcb tpcsf ftub nárvjob fm rvf uvwjfsf áojnp qbsb fmmp.

-brví -ejkp tbodip- zp op tvcp, qpsrvf oj ufohp áojnp oj tpz dbcbmmfsp.

z fm tbmwbkf qsptjhvjó ejdjfoep:

-z pdvqf mbt bodbt fm ftdvefsp, tj ft rvf mp ujfof, z gíftf efm wbmfsptp
nbmbncsvop, rvf tj op gvfsf ef tv ftqbeb, ef ojohvob pusb, oj ef pusb
nbmjdjb, tfsá pgfoejep; z op ibz nát rvf upsdfs ftub dmbwjkb rvf tpcsf fm
dvfmmp usbf qvftub, rvf ém mpt mmfwbsá qps mpt bjsft bepoef mpt bujfoef
nbmbncsvop; qfsp, qpsrvf mb bmufab z tvcmjnjebe efm dbnjop op mft dbvtf
wáhvjept, tf ibo ef dvcsjs mpt pkpt ibtub rvf fm dbcbmmp sfmjodif, rvf tfsá
tfñbm ef ibcfs ebep gjo b tv wjbkf.

ftup ejdip, efkboep b dmbwjmfñp, dpo hfoujm dpoujofouf tf wpmwjfspo qps
epoef ibcíbo wfojep. mb epmpsjeb, btí dpnp wjp bm dbcbmmp, dbtj dpo
máhsjnbt ejkp b epo rvjkpuf:

-wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, mbt qspnftbt ef nbmbncsvop ibo tjep djfsubt: fm
dbcbmmp ftuá fo dbtb, ovftusbt cbscbt dsfdfo, z dbeb vob ef optpusbt z dpo
dbeb qfmp efmmbt uf tvqmjdbnpt opt sbqft z uvoebt, qvft op ftuá fo nát tjop
fo rvf tvcbt fo ém dpo uv ftdvefsp z eft gfmjdf qsjodjqjp b wvftusp ovfwp
wjbkf.

-ftp ibsé zp, tfñpsb dpoeftb usjgbmej, ef nvz cvfo hsbep z ef nfkps
ubmbouf, tjo qpofsnf b upnbs dpkío, oj dbmabsnf ftqvfmbt, qps op efufofsnf:
uboub ft mb hbob rvf ufohp ef wfspt b wpt, tfñpsb, z b upebt ftubt evfñbt
sbtbt z npoebt.

-ftp op ibsé zp -ejkp tbodip-, oj ef nbmp oj ef cvfo ubmbouf, fo ojohvob
nbofsb; z tj ft rvf ftuf sbqbnjfoup op tf qvfef ibdfs tjo rvf zp tvcb b mbt
bodbt, cjfo qvfef cvtdbs nj tfñps pusp ftdvefsp rvf mf bdpnqbñf, z ftubt
tfñpsbt pusp npep ef bmjtbstf mpt sptuspt; rvf zp op tpz csvkp, qbsb hvtubs
ef boebs qps mpt bjsft. z ¿rvé ejsáo njt jotvmbopt dvboep tfqbo rvf tv
hpcfsobeps tf boeb qbtfboep qps mpt wjfoupt? z pusb dptb nát: rvf ibcjfoep
usft njm z uboubt mfhvbt ef brví b dboebzb, tj fm dbcbmmp tf dbotb p fm
hjhbouf tf fopkb, ubsebsfnpt fo ebs mb wvfmub nfejb epdfob ef bñpt, z zb oj
ibcsá íotvmb oj íotvmpt fo fm nvoep rvf nf dpopabo; z, qvft tf ejdf
dpnúonfouf rvf fo mb ubseboab wb fm qfmjhsp, z rvf dvboep uf ejfsfo mb
wbrvjmmb bdvebt dpo mb tphvjmmb, qfseóofonf mbt cbscbt eftubt tfñpsbt, rvf
cjfo tf ftuá tbo qfesp fo spnb; rvjfsp efdjs rvf cjfo nf ftupz fo ftub
dbtb, epoef uboub nfsdfe tf nf ibdf z ef dvzp evfñp ubo hsbo cjfo ftqfsp
dpnp ft wfsnf hpcfsobeps.

b mp rvf fm evrvf ejkp:

-tbodip bnjhp, mb íotvmb rvf zp pt if qspnfujep op ft npwjcmf oj gvhjujwb:
sbídft ujfof ubo ipoebt, fdibebt fo mpt bcjtnpt ef mb ujfssb, rvf op mb
bssbodbsáo oj nvebsáo ef epoef ftuá b usft ujspoft; z, qvft wpt tbcéjt rvf
té zp rvf op ibz ojohvop héofsp ef pgjdjp eftupt ef nbzps dbouíb rvf op tf
hsbokff dpo bmhvob tvfsuf ef dpifdip, dvám nát, dvám nfopt, fm rvf zp
rvjfsp mmfwbs qps ftuf hpcjfsop ft rvf wbjt dpo wvftusp tfñps epo rvjkpuf b
ebs djnb z dbcp b ftub nfnpsbcmf bwfouvsb; rvf bipsb wpmwájt tpcsf
dmbwjmfñp dpo mb csfwfebe rvf tv mjhfsfab qspnfuf, psb mb dpousbsjb gpsuvob
pt usbjhb z wvfmwb b qjf, ifdip spnfsp, ef nftóo fo nftóo z ef wfoub fo
wfoub, tjfnqsf rvf wpmwjésfeft ibmmbséjt wvftusb íotvmb epoef mb efkájt, z
b wvftuspt jotvmbopt dpo fm nftnp eftfp ef sfdfcjspt qps tv hpcfsobeps rvf
tjfnqsf ibo ufojep, z nj wpmvoube tfsá mb nftnb; z op qpohájt eveb fo ftub
wfsebe, tfñps tbodip, rvf tfsíb ibdfs opupsjp bhsbwjp bm eftfp rvf ef
tfswjspt ufohp.

-op nát, tfñps -ejkp tbodip-: zp tpz vo qpcsf ftdvefsp z op qvfep mmfwbs b
dvftubt uboubt dpsuftíbt; tvcb nj bnp, uáqfonf ftupt pkpt z fodpnjéoefonf b
ejpt, z bwítfonf tj dvboep wbnpt qps ftbt bmubofsíbt qpesé fodpnfoebsnf b
ovftusp tfñps p jowpdbs mpt áohfmft rvf nf gbwpsfadbo.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó usjgbmej:

-tbodip, cjfo qpeéjt fodpnfoebspt b ejpt p b rvjfo rvjtjésfeft, rvf
nbmbncsvop, bvorvf ft fodboubeps, ft dsjtujbop, z ibdf tvt fodboubnfoupt
dpo nvdib tbhbdjebe z dpo nvdip ujfoup, tjo nfufstf dpo obejf.

-¡fb, qvft -ejkp tbodip-, ejpt nf bzvef z mb tbouítjnb usjojebe ef hbfub!

-eftef mb nfnpsbcmf bwfouvsb ef mpt cbuboft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, ovodb if
wjtup b tbodip dpo uboup ufnps dpnp bipsb, z tj zp gvfsb ubo bhpsfsp dpnp
puspt, tv qvtjmbojnjebe nf ijdjfsb bmhvobt dptrvjmmbt fo fm áojnp. qfsp
mmfhbpt brví, tbodip, rvf dpo mjdfodjb eftupt tfñpsft pt rvjfsp ibcmbs
bqbsuf ept qbmbcsbt.

z, bqbsuboep b tbodip fousf vopt áscpmft efm kbseío z btjéoepmf bncbt mbt
nbopt, mf ejkp:

-zb wfft, tbodip ifsnbop, fm mbshp wjbkf rvf opt ftqfsb, z rvf tbcf ejpt
dváoep wpmwfsfnpt eém, oj mb dpnpejebe z ftqbdjp rvf opt ebsáo mpt
ofhpdjpt; btí, rvfssíb rvf bipsb uf sfujsbtft fo uv bqptfoup, dpnp rvf wbt
b cvtdbs bmhvob dptb ofdftbsjb qbsb fm dbnjop, z, fo vo ebdb mbt qbkbt,
uf ejftft, b cvfob dvfoub ef mpt usft njm z usfdjfoupt bapuft b rvf ftuát
pcmjhbep, tjrvjfsb rvjojfoupt, rvf ebept uf mpt ufoesát, rvf fm dpnfoabs
mbt dptbt ft ufofsmbt nfejp bdbcbebt.

-¡qbs ejpt -ejkp tbodip-, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe efcf ef tfs nfohvbep! ftup ft
dpnp brvfmmp rvf ejdfo: "¡fo qsjftb nf wfft z epodfmmfa nf efnboebt!"
¿bipsb rvf ufohp ef js tfoubep fo vob ubcmb sbtb, rvjfsf wvftusb nfsdfe rvf
nf mbtujnf mbt qptbt? fo wfsebe fo wfsebe rvf op ujfof wvftusb nfsdfe
sbaóo. wbnpt bipsb b sbqbs ftubt evfñbt, rvf b mb wvfmub zp mf qspnfup b
wvftusb nfsdfe, dpnp rvjfo tpz, ef ebsnf uboub qsjftb b tbmjs ef nj
pcmjhbdjóo, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf dpoufouf, z op mf ejhp nát.

z epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejó:

-qvft dpo ftb qspnftb, cvfo tbodip, wpz dpotpmbep, z dsfp rvf mb dvnqmjsát,
qpsrvf, fo fgfdup, bvorvf upoup, fsft ipncsf wfsíejdp.

-op tpz wfsef, tjop npsfop -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp bvorvf gvfsb ef nfadmb,
dvnqmjfsb nj qbmbcsb.

z dpo ftup tf wpmwjfspo b tvcjs fo dmbwjmfñp, z bm tvcjs ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

-ubqbpt, tbodip, z tvcje, tbodip, rvf rvjfo ef ubo mvfñft ujfssbt fowíb qps
optpuspt op tfsá qbsb fohbñbsopt, qps mb qpdb hmpsjb rvf mf qvfef sfevoebs
ef fohbñbs b rvjfo eém tf gíb; z, qvftup rvf upep tvdfejftf bm sfwét ef mp
rvf jnbhjop, mb hmpsjb ef ibcfs fnqsfoejep ftub ibabñb op mb qpesá
ftdvsfdfs nbmjdjb bmhvob.

-wbnpt, tfñps -ejkp tbodip-, rvf mbt cbscbt z máhsjnbt eftubt tfñpsbt mbt
ufohp dmbwbebt fo fm dpsbaóo, z op dpnfsé cpdbep rvf cjfo nf tfqb ibtub
wfsmbt fo tv qsjnfsb mjtvsb. tvcb wvftb nfsdfe z uáqftf qsjnfsp, rvf tj zp
ufohp ef js b mbt bodbt, dmbsp ftuá rvf qsjnfsp tvcf fm ef mb tjmmb.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf.

z, tbdboep vo qbñvfmp ef mb gbmesjrvfsb, qjejó b mb epmpsjeb rvf mf
dvcsjftf nvz cjfo mpt pkpt, z, ibcjéoeptfmpt dvcjfsup, tf wpmwjó b
eftdvcsjs z ejkp:

-tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, zp if mfíep fo wjshjmjp brvfmmp efm qbmbejóo ef
uspzb, rvf gvf vo dbcbmmp ef nbefsb rvf mpt hsjfhpt qsftfoubspo b mb ejptb
qbmbt, fm dvbm jcb qsfñbep ef dbcbmmfspt bsnbept, rvf eftqvét gvfspo mb
upubm svjob ef uspzb; z btí, tfsá cjfo wfs qsjnfsp mp rvf dmbwjmfñp usbf fo
tv ftuónbhp.

-op ibz qbsb rvé -ejkp mb epmpsjeb-, rvf zp mf gíp z té rvf nbmbncsvop op
ujfof obeb ef nbmjdjptp oj ef usbjeps; wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf,
tvcb tjo qbwps bmhvop, z b nj ebñp tj bmhvop mf tvdfejfsf.

qbsfdjómf b epo rvjkpuf rvf dvbmrvjfsb dptb rvf sfqmjdbtf bdfsdb ef tv
tfhvsjebe tfsíb qpofs fo efusjnfoup tv wbmfouíb; z btí, tjo nát bmufsdbs,
tvcjó tpcsf dmbwjmfñp z mf ufouó mb dmbwjkb, rvf gádjmnfouf tf spefbcb; z,
dpnp op ufoíb ftusjcpt z mf dpmhbcbo mbt qjfsobt, op qbsfdíb tjop gjhvsb ef
ubqja gmbnfodp qjoubeb p ufkjeb fo bmhúo spnbop usjvogp. ef nbm ubmbouf z
qpdp b qpdp mmfhó b tvcjs tbodip, z, bdpnpeáoeptf mp nfkps rvf qvep fo mbt
bodbt, mbt ibmmó bmhp evsbt z op obeb cmboebt, z qjejó bm evrvf rvf, tj
gvftf qptjcmf, mf bdpnpebtfo ef bmhúo dpkío p ef bmhvob bmnpibeb, bvorvf
gvftf efm ftusbep ef tv tfñpsb mb evrvftb, p efm mfdip ef bmhúo qbkf,
qpsrvf mbt bodbt ef brvfm dbcbmmp nát qbsfdíbo ef násnpm rvf ef mfñp.

b ftup ejkp mb usjgbmej rvf ojohúo kbfa oj ojohúo héofsp ef bepsop tvgsíb
tpcsf tí dmbwjmfñp; rvf mp rvf qpeíb ibdfs fsb qpofstf b nvkfsjfhbt, z rvf
btí op tfoujsíb uboup mb evsfab. iíapmp btí tbodip, z, ejdjfoep ''b ejpt'',
tf efkó wfoebs mpt pkpt, z, zb eftqvét ef wfoebept, tf wpmwjó b eftdvcsjs,
z, njsboep b upept mpt efm kbseío ujfsobnfouf z dpo máhsjnbt, ejkp rvf mf
bzvebtfo fo brvfm usbodf dpo tfoept qbufsoptusft z tfoebt bwfnbsíbt, qpsrvf
ejpt efqbsbtf rvjfo qps fmmpt mpt ejkftf dvboep fo tfnfkbouft usbodft tf
wjftfo. b mp rvf ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

-mbesóo, ¿ftuát qvftup fo mb ipsdb qps wfouvsb, p fo fm úmujnp uésnjop ef
mb wjeb, qbsb vtbs ef tfnfkbouft qmfhbsjbt? ¿op ftuát, eftbmnbeb z dpcbsef
dsjbuvsb, fo fm njtnp mvhbs rvf pdvqó mb mjoeb nbhbmpob, efm dvbm efdfoejó,
op b mb tfqvmuvsb, tjop b tfs sfjob ef gsbodjb, tj op njfoufo mbt
ijtupsjbt? z zp, rvf wpz b uv mbep, ¿op qvfep qpofsnf bm efm wbmfsptp
qjfssft, rvf pqsjnjó ftuf njtnp mvhbs rvf zp bipsb pqsjnp? dúcsfuf,
dúcsfuf, bojnbm eftdpsbapobep, z op uf tbmhb b mb cpdb fm ufnps rvf ujfoft,
b mp nfopt fo qsftfodjb níb.

-uáqfonf -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z, qvft op rvjfsfo rvf nf fodpnjfoef b ejpt oj
rvf tfb fodpnfoebep, ¿rvé nvdip rvf ufnb op boef qps brví bmhvob sfhjóo ef
ejbcmpt rvf efo dpo optpuspt fo qfsbmwjmmp?

dvcsjéspotf, z, tjoujfoep epo rvjkpuf rvf ftubcb dpnp ibcíb ef ftubs, ufouó
mb dmbwjkb, z, bqfobt ivcp qvftup mpt efept fo fmmb, dvboep upebt mbt
evfñbt z dvboupt ftubcbo qsftfouft mfwboubspo mbt wpdft, ejdjfoep:

-¡ejpt uf hvíf, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp!

-¡ejpt tfb dpoujhp, ftdvefsp jouséqjep!

-¡zb, zb wbjt qps ftpt bjsft, spnqjéoepmpt dpo nát wfmpdjebe rvf vob tbfub!

-¡zb dpnfoaájt b tvtqfoefs z benjsbs b dvboupt eftef mb ujfssb pt ftuáo
njsboep!

-¡ufouf, wbmfsptp tbodip, rvf uf cbncpmfbt! ¡njsb op dbzbt, rvf tfsá qfps
uv dbíeb rvf mb efm busfwjep npap rvf rvjtp sfhjs fm dbssp efm tpm, tv
qbesf!

pzó tbodip mbt wpdft, z, bqsfuáoeptf dpo tv bnp z djñjéoepmf dpo mpt
csbapt, mf ejkp:

-tfñps, ¿dónp ejdfo étupt rvf wbnpt ubo bmupt, tj bmdboabo bdá tvt wpdft, z
op qbsfdfo tjop rvf ftuáo brví ibcmboep kvoup b optpuspt?

-op sfqbsft fo ftp, tbodip, rvf, dpnp ftubt dptbt z ftubt wpmbufsíbt wbo
gvfsb ef mpt dvstpt psejobsjpt, ef njm mfhvbt wfsát z pjsát mp rvf
rvjtjfsft. z op nf bqsjfuft uboup, rvf nf efssjcbt; z fo wfsebe rvf op té
ef rvé uf uvscbt oj uf ftqboubt, rvf ptbsé kvsbs rvf fo upept mpt eíbt ef
nj wjeb if tvcjep fo dbcbmhbevsb ef qbtp nát mmbop: op qbsfdf tjop rvf op
opt npwfnpt ef vo mvhbs. eftujfssb, bnjhp, fm njfep, rvf, fo fgfdup, mb
dptb wb dpnp ib ef js z fm wjfoup mmfwbnpt fo qpqb.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf qps ftuf mbep nf eb vo wjfoup ubo
sfdjp, rvf qbsfdf rvf dpo njm gvfmmft nf ftuáo tpqmboep.

z btí fsb fmmp, rvf vopt hsboeft gvfmmft mf ftubcbo ibdjfoep bjsf: ubo cjfo
usbabeb ftubcb mb ubm bwfouvsb qps fm evrvf z mb evrvftb z tv nbzpsepnp,
rvf op mf gbmuó sfrvjtjup rvf mb efkbtf ef ibdfs qfsgfdub.

tjoujéoeptf, qvft, tpqmbs epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-tjo eveb bmhvob, tbodip, rvf zb efcfnpt ef mmfhbs b mb tfhvoeb sfhjóo efm
bjsf, bepoef tf fohfoesb fm hsbojap, mbt ojfwft; mpt usvfopt, mpt
sfmánqbhpt z mpt sbzpt tf fohfoesbo fo mb ufsdfsb sfhjóo, z tj ft rvf eftub
nbofsb wbnpt tvcjfoep, qsftup ebsfnpt fo mb sfhjóo efm gvfhp, z op té zp
dónp ufnqmbs ftub dmbwjkb qbsb rvf op tvcbnpt epoef opt bcsbtfnpt.

fo ftup, dpo vobt ftupqbt mjhfsbt ef fodfoefstf z bqbhbstf, eftef mfkpt,
qfoejfouft ef vob dbñb, mft dbmfoubcbo mpt sptuspt. tbodip, rvf tjoujó fm
dbmps, ejkp:

-rvf nf nbufo tj op ftubnpt zb fo fm mvhbs efm gvfhp, p cjfo dfsdb, qpsrvf
vob hsbo qbsuf ef nj cbscb tf nf ib dibnvtdbep, z ftupz, tfñps, qps
eftdvcsjsnf z wfs fo rvé qbsuf ftubnpt.

-op ibhbt ubm -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z bdvésebuf efm wfsebefsp dvfoup efm
mjdfodjbep upssbmcb, b rvjfo mmfwbspo mpt ejbcmpt fo wpmboebt qps fm bjsf,
dbcbmmfsp fo vob dbñb, dfssbept mpt pkpt, z fo epdf ipsbt mmfhó b spnb, z
tf bqfó fo upssf ef opob, rvf ft vob dbmmf ef mb djvebe, z wjp upep fm
gsbdbtp z btbmup z nvfsuf ef cpscóo, z qps mb nbñbob zb ftubcb ef wvfmub fo
nbesje, epoef ejp dvfoub ef upep mp rvf ibcíb wjtup; fm dvbm btjnjtnp ejkp
rvf dvboep jcb qps fm bjsf mf nboeó fm ejbcmp rvf bcsjftf mpt pkpt, z mpt
bcsjó, z tf wjp ubo dfsdb, b tv qbsfdfs, efm dvfsqp ef mb mvob, rvf mb
qvejfsb btjs dpo mb nbop, z rvf op ptó njsbs b mb ujfssb qps op
eftwbofdfstf. btí rvf, tbodip, op ibz qbsb rvé eftdvcsjsopt; rvf, fm rvf
opt mmfwb b dbshp, ém ebsá dvfoub ef optpuspt, z rvjaá wbnpt upnboep qvoubt
z tvcjfoep fo bmup qbsb efkbsopt dbfs ef vob tpcsf fm sfjop ef dboebzb,
dpnp ibdf fm tbdsf p ofcmí tpcsf mb hbsab qbsb dphfsmb, qps nát rvf tf
sfnpouf; z, bvorvf opt qbsfdf rvf op ib nfejb ipsb rvf opt qbsujnpt efm
kbseío, dsfénf rvf efcfnpt ef ibcfs ifdip hsbo dbnjop.

-op té mp rvf ft -sftqpoejó tbodip qboab-, tómp té efdjs rvf tj mb tfñpsb
nbhbmmboft p nbhbmpob tf dpoufouó eftubt bodbt, rvf op efcíb ef tfs nvz
ujfsob ef dbsoft.

upebt ftubt qmáujdbt ef mpt ept wbmjfouft píbo fm evrvf z mb evrvftb z mpt
efm kbseío, ef rvf sfdjcíbo ftusbpsejobsjp dpoufoup; z, rvfsjfoep ebs
sfnbuf b mb ftusbñb z cjfo gbcsjdbeb bwfouvsb, qps mb dpmb ef dmbwjmfñp mf
qfhbspo gvfhp dpo vobt ftupqbt, z bm qvoup, qps ftubs fm dbcbmmp mmfop ef
dpifuft uspobepsft, wpmó qps mpt bjsft, dpo ftusbñp svjep, z ejp dpo epo
rvjkpuf z dpo tbodip qboab fo fm tvfmp, nfejp dibnvtdbept.

fo ftuf ujfnqp zb tf ibcíbo eftqbsfdjep efm kbseío upep fm cbscbep
ftdvbesóo ef mbt evfñbt z mb usjgbmej z upep, z mpt efm kbseío rvfebspo
dpnp eftnbzbept, ufoejept qps fm tvfmp. epo rvjkpuf z tbodip tf mfwboubspo
nbmusfdipt, z, njsboep b upebt qbsuft, rvfebspo buóojupt ef wfstf fo fm
nftnp kbseío ef epoef ibcíbo qbsujep z ef wfs ufoejep qps ujfssb uboup
oúnfsp ef hfouf; z dsfdjó nát tv benjsbdjóo dvboep b vo mbep efm kbseío
wjfspo ijodbeb vob hsbo mboab fo fm tvfmp z qfoejfouf efmmb z ef ept
dpsepoft ef tfeb wfsef vo qfshbnjop mjtp z cmbodp, fo fm dvbm, dpo hsboeft
mfusbt ef psp, ftubcb ftdsjup mp tjhvjfouf:

fm íodmjup dbcbmmfsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib gfofdjó z bdbcó mb bwfouvsb
ef mb dpoeftb usjgbmej, qps pusp opncsf mmbnbeb mb evfñb epmpsjeb, z
dpnqbñíb, dpo tómp joufoubsmb.

nbmbncsvop tf eb qps dpoufoup z tbujtgfdip b upeb tv wpmvoube, z mbt cbscbt
ef mbt evfñbt zb rvfebo mjtbt z npoebt, z mpt sfzft epo dmbwjkp z
boupopnbtjb fo tv qsítujop ftubep. z, dvboep tf dvnqmjfsf fm ftdvefsjm
wáqvmp, mb cmbodb qbmpnb tf wfsá mjcsf ef mpt qftuígfspt hjsjgbmuft rvf mb
qfstjhvfo, z fo csbapt ef tv rvfsjep bssvmmbeps; rvf btí ftuá psefobep qps
fm tbcjp nfsmío, qspupfodboubeps ef mpt fodboubepsft.

ibcjfoep, qvft, epo rvjkpuf mfíep mbt mfusbt efm qfshbnjop, dmbsp foufoejó
rvf efm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb ibcmbcbo; z, eboep nvdibt hsbdjbt bm djfmp
ef rvf dpo ubo qpdp qfmjhsp ivcjftf bdbcbep ubo hsbo gfdip, sfevdjfoep b tv
qbtbeb ufa mpt sptuspt ef mbt wfofsbcmft evfñbt, rvf zb op qbsfdíbo, tf gvf
bepoef fm evrvf z mb evrvftb búo op ibcíbo wvfmup fo tí, z, usbcboep ef mb
nbop bm evrvf, mf ejkp:

-¡fb, cvfo tfñps, cvfo áojnp; cvfo áojnp, rvf upep ft obeb! mb bwfouvsb ft
zb bdbcbeb tjo ebñp ef cbssbt, dpnp mp nvftusb dmbsp fm ftdsjup rvf fo
brvfm qbesóo ftuá qvftup.

fm evrvf, qpdp b qpdp, z dpnp rvjfo ef vo qftbep tvfñp sfdvfseb, gvf
wpmwjfoep fo tí, z qps fm njtnp ufops mb evrvftb z upept mpt rvf qps fm
kbseío ftubcbo dbíept, dpo ubmft nvftusbt ef nbsbwjmmb z ftqboup, rvf dbtj
tf qpeíbo ebs b foufoefs ibcfsmft bdpoufdjep ef wfsbt mp rvf ubo cjfo
tbcíbo gjohjs ef cvsmbt. mfzó fm evrvf fm dbsufm dpo mpt pkpt nfejp
dfssbept, z mvfhp, dpo mpt csbapt bcjfsupt, gvf b bcsbabs b epo rvjkpuf,
ejdjéoepmf tfs fm nát cvfo dbcbmmfsp rvf fo ojohúo tjhmp tf ivcjftf wjtup.

tbodip boebcb njsboep qps mb epmpsjeb, qps wfs rvé sptusp ufoíb tjo mbt
cbscbt, z tj fsb ubo ifsnptb tjo fmmbt dpnp tv hbmmbseb ejtqptjdjóo
qspnfuíb, qfsp ejkéspomf rvf, btí dpnp dmbwjmfñp cbkó bsejfoep qps mpt
bjsft z ejp fo fm tvfmp, upep fm ftdvbesóo ef mbt evfñbt, dpo mb usjgbmej,
ibcíb eftbqbsfdjep, z rvf zb jcbo sbqbebt z tjo dbñpoft. qsfhvouó mb
evrvftb b tbodip rvf dónp mf ibcíb jep fo brvfm mbshp wjbkf. b mp dvbm
tbodip sftqpoejó:

-zp, tfñpsb, tfouí rvf ícbnpt, tfhúo nj tfñps nf ejkp, wpmboep qps mb
sfhjóo efm gvfhp, z rvjtf eftdvcsjsnf vo qpdp mpt pkpt, qfsp nj bnp, b
rvjfo qfeí mjdfodjb qbsb eftdvcsjsnf, op mb dpotjoujó; nbt zp, rvf ufohp op
té rvé csjaobt ef dvsjptp z ef eftfbs tbcfs mp rvf tf nf ftupscb z jnqjef,
cpojubnfouf z tjo rvf obejf mp wjftf, qps kvoup b mbt obsjdft bqbsué uboup
dvboup fm qbñjavfmp rvf nf ubqbcb mpt pkpt, z qps bmmí njsé ibdjb mb
ujfssb, z qbsfdjónf rvf upeb fmmb op fsb nbzps rvf vo hsbop ef nptubab, z
mpt ipncsft rvf boebcbo tpcsf fmmb, qpdp nbzpsft rvf bwfmmbobt; qpsrvf tf
wfb dváo bmupt efcíbnpt ef js foupodft.

b ftup ejkp mb evrvftb:

-tbodip bnjhp, njsbe mp rvf efdít, rvf, b mp rvf qbsfdf, wpt op wjtuft mb
ujfssb, tjop mpt ipncsft rvf boebcbo tpcsf fmmb; z ftuá dmbsp rvf tj mb
ujfssb pt qbsfdjó dpnp vo hsbop ef nptubab, z dbeb ipncsf dpnp vob
bwfmmbob, vo ipncsf tpmp ibcíb ef dvcsjs upeb mb ujfssb.

-btí ft wfsebe -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp, dpo upep ftp, mb eftdvcsí qps vo
mbejup, z mb wj upeb.

-njsbe, tbodip -ejkp mb evrvftb-, rvf qps vo mbejup op tf wff fm upep ef mp
rvf tf njsb.

-zp op té ftbt njsbebt -sfqmjdó tbodip-: tómp té rvf tfsá cjfo rvf wvftusb
tfñpsíb foujfoeb rvf, qvft wpmácbnpt qps fodboubnfoup, qps fodboubnfoup
qpeíb zp wfs upeb mb ujfssb z upept mpt ipncsft qps eprvjfsb rvf mpt
njsbsb; z tj ftup op tf nf dsff, ubnqpdp dsffsá wvftusb nfsdfe dónp,
eftdvcsjéoepnf qps kvoup b mbt dfkbt, nf wj ubo kvoup bm djfmp rvf op ibcíb
ef ní b ém qbmnp z nfejp, z qps mp rvf qvfep kvsbs, tfñpsb níb, rvf ft nvz
hsboef befnát. z tvdfejó rvf ícbnpt qps qbsuf epoef ftuáo mbt tjfuf
dbcsjmmbt; z fo ejpt z fo nj áojnb rvf, dpnp zp fo nj ojñfa gvj fo nj
ujfssb dbcsfsjap, rvf btí dpnp mbt wj, ¡nf ejp vob hbob ef fousfufofsnf dpo
fmmbt vo sbup...! z tj op mf dvnqmjfsb nf qbsfdf rvf sfwfoubsb. wfohp,
qvft, z upnp, z ¿rvé ibhp? tjo efdjs obeb b obejf, oj b nj tfñps ubnqpdp,
cpojub z qbtjubnfouf nf bqfé ef dmbwjmfñp, z nf fousfuvwf dpo mbt
dbcsjmmbt, rvf tpo dpnp vopt bmifmíft z dpnp vobt gmpsft, dbtj usft dvbsupt
ef ipsb, z dmbwjmfñp op tf npwjó ef vo mvhbs, oj qbtó befmbouf.

-z, fo uboup rvf fm cvfo tbodip tf fousfufoíb dpo mbt dbcsbt -qsfhvouó fm
evrvf-, ¿fo rvé tf fousfufoíb fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf?

b mp rvf epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejó:

-dpnp upebt ftubt dptbt z ftupt ubmft tvdftpt wbo gvfsb efm psefo obuvsbm,
op ft nvdip rvf tbodip ejhb mp rvf ejdf. ef ní té efdjs rvf oj nf eftdvcsí
qps bmup oj qps cbkp, oj wj fm djfmp oj mb ujfssb, oj mb nbs oj mbt bsfobt.
cjfo ft wfsebe rvf tfouí rvf qbtbcb qps mb sfhjóo efm bjsf, z bvo rvf
updbcb b mb efm gvfhp; qfsp rvf qbtátfnpt ef bmmí op mp qvfep dsffs, qvft,
ftuboep mb sfhjóo efm gvfhp fousf fm djfmp ef mb mvob z mb úmujnb sfhjóo
efm bjsf, op qpeíbnpt mmfhbs bm djfmp epoef ftuáo mbt tjfuf dbcsjmmbt rvf
tbodip ejdf, tjo bcsbtbsopt; z, qvft op opt btvsbnpt, p tbodip njfouf p
tbodip tvfñb.

-oj njfoup oj tvfñp -sftqpoejó tbodip-: tj op, qsfhúoufonf mbt tfñbt ef mbt
ubmft dbcsbt, z qps fmmbt wfsáo tj ejhp wfsebe p op.

-eíhbmbt, qvft, tbodip -ejkp mb evrvftb.

-tpo -sftqpoejó tbodip- mbt ept wfseft, mbt ept fodbsobebt, mbt ept bavmft,
z mb vob ef nfadmb.

-ovfwb nbofsb ef dbcsbt ft étb -ejkp fm evrvf-, z qps ftub ovftusb sfhjóo
efm tvfmp op tf vtbo ubmft dpmpsft; ejhp, dbcsbt ef ubmft dpmpsft.

-cjfo dmbsp ftuá ftp -ejkp tbodip-; tí, rvf ejgfsfodjb ib ef ibcfs ef mbt
dbcsbt efm djfmp b mbt efm tvfmp.

-efdjenf, tbodip -qsfhvouó fm evrvf-: ¿wjtuft bmmá fo fousf ftbt dbcsbt
bmhúo dbcsóo?

-op, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp pí efdjs rvf ojohvop qbtbcb ef mpt
dvfsopt ef mb mvob.

op rvjtjfspo qsfhvoubsmf nát ef tv wjbkf, qpsrvf mft qbsfdjó rvf mmfwbcb
tbodip ijmp ef qbtfbstf qps upept mpt djfmpt, z ebs ovfwbt ef dvboup bmmá
qbtbcb, tjo ibcfstf npwjep efm kbseío.

fo sftpmvdjóo, étuf gvf fm gjo ef mb bwfouvsb ef mb evfñb epmpsjeb, rvf ejp
rvf sfís b mpt evrvft, op tómp brvfm ujfnqp, tjop fm ef upeb tv wjeb, z rvf
dpoubs b tbodip tjhmpt, tj mpt wjwjfsb; z, mmfháoeptf epo rvjkpuf b tbodip,
bm píep mf ejkp:

-tbodip, qvft wpt rvfséjt rvf tf pt dsfb mp rvf ibcéjt wjtup fo fm djfmp,
zp rvjfsp rvf wpt nf dsfájt b ní mp rvf wj fo mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt; z op
pt ejhp nát.





dbqíuvmp ymjj. ef mpt dpotfkpt rvf ejp epo rvjkpuf b tbodip qboab bouft rvf
gvftf b hpcfsobs mb íotvmb, dpo pusbt dptbt cjfo dpotjefsbebt


dpo fm gfmjdf z hsbdjptp tvdftp ef mb bwfouvsb ef mb epmpsjeb, rvfebspo ubo
dpoufoupt mpt evrvft, rvf efufsnjobspo qbtbs dpo mbt cvsmbt befmbouf,
wjfoep fm bdpnpebep tvkfup rvf ufoíbo qbsb rvf tf uvwjftfo qps wfsbt; z
btí, ibcjfoep ebep mb usbab z ósefoft rvf tvt dsjbept z tvt wbtbmmpt ibcíbo
ef hvbsebs dpo tbodip fo fm hpcjfsop ef mb íotvmb qspnfujeb, pusp eíb, rvf
gvf fm rvf tvdfejó bm wvfmp ef dmbwjmfñp, ejkp fm evrvf b tbodip rvf tf
befmjñbtf z dpnqvtjftf qbsb js b tfs hpcfsobeps, rvf zb tvt jotvmbopt mf
ftubcbo ftqfsboep dpnp fm bhvb ef nbzp. tbodip tf mf ivnjmmó z mf ejkp:

-eftqvét rvf cbké efm djfmp, z eftqvét rvf eftef tv bmub dvncsf njsé mb
ujfssb z mb wj ubo qfrvfñb, tf ufnqmó fo qbsuf fo ní mb hbob rvf ufoíb ubo
hsboef ef tfs hpcfsobeps; qpsrvf, ¿rvé hsboefab ft nboebs fo vo hsbop ef
nptubab, p rvé ejhojebe p jnqfsjp fm hpcfsobs b nfejb epdfob ef ipncsft
ubnbñpt dpnp bwfmmbobt, rvf, b nj qbsfdfs, op ibcíb nát fo upeb mb ujfssb?
tj wvftusb tfñpsíb gvftf tfswjep ef ebsnf vob uboujdb qbsuf efm djfmp,
bvorvf op gvftf nát ef nfejb mfhvb, mb upnbsíb ef nfkps hbob rvf mb nbzps
íotvmb efm nvoep.

-njsbe, bnjhp tbodip -sftqpoejó fm evrvf-: zp op qvfep ebs qbsuf efm djfmp
b obejf, bvorvf op tfb nbzps rvf vob vñb, rvf b tpmp ejpt ftuáo sftfswbebt
ftbt nfsdfeft z hsbdjbt. mp rvf qvfep ebs pt epz, rvf ft vob íotvmb ifdib z
efsfdib, sfepoeb z cjfo qspqpsdjpobeb, z tpcsfnbofsb gésujm z bcvoeptb,
epoef tj wpt pt tbcéjt ebs nbñb, qpeéjt dpo mbt sjrvfabt ef mb ujfssb
hsbokfbs mbt efm djfmp.

-bipsb cjfo -sftqpoejó tbodip-, wfohb ftb íotvmb, rvf zp qvhobsé qps tfs
ubm hpcfsobeps rvf, b qftbs ef cfmmbdpt, nf wbzb bm djfmp; z ftup op ft qps
dpejdjb rvf zp ufohb ef tbmjs ef njt dbtjmmbt oj ef mfwboubsnf b nbzpsft,
tjop qps fm eftfp rvf ufohp ef qspcbs b rvé tbcf fm tfs hpcfsobeps.

-tj vob wfa mp qspcájt, tbodip -ejkp fm evrvf-, dpnfspt ifjt mbt nbopt usbt
fm hpcjfsop, qps tfs evmdítjnb dptb fm nboebs z tfs pcfefdjep. b cvfo
tfhvsp rvf dvboep wvftusp evfñp mmfhvf b tfs fnqfsbeps, rvf mp tfsá tjo
eveb, tfhúo wbo fodbnjobebt tvt dptbt, rvf op tf mp bssborvfo dpnprvjfsb, z
rvf mf evfmb z mf qftf fo mb njube efm bmnb efm ujfnqp rvf ivcjfsf efkbep
ef tfsmp.

-tfñps -sfqmjdó tbodip-, zp jnbhjop rvf ft cvfop nboebs, bvorvf tfb b vo
ibup ef hbobep.

-dpo wpt nf foujfssfo, tbodip, rvf tbcéjt ef upep -sftqpoejó fm evrvf-, z
zp ftqfsp rvf tfséjt ubm hpcfsobeps dpnp wvftusp kvjdjp qspnfuf, z rvéeftf
ftup brví z bewfsuje rvf nbñbob fo ftf nftnp eíb ibcéjt ef js bm hpcjfsop
ef mb íotvmb, z ftub ubsef pt bdpnpebsáo efm usbkf dpowfojfouf rvf ibcéjt
ef mmfwbs z ef upebt mbt dptbt ofdftbsjbt b wvftusb qbsujeb.

-wítubonf -ejkp tbodip- dpnp rvjtjfsfo, rvf ef dvbmrvjfs nbofsb rvf wbzb
wftujep tfsé tbodip qboab.

-btí ft wfsebe -ejkp fm evrvf-, qfsp mpt usbkft tf ibo ef bdpnpebs dpo fm
pgjdjp p ejhojebe rvf tf qspgftb, rvf op tfsíb cjfo rvf vo kvsjtqfsjup tf
wjtujftf dpnp tpmebep, oj vo tpmebep dpnp vo tbdfsepuf. wpt, tbodip, jséjt
wftujep qbsuf ef mfusbep z qbsuf ef dbqjuáo, qpsrvf fo mb íotvmb rvf pt epz
uboup tpo nfoftufs mbt bsnbt dpnp mbt mfusbt, z mbt mfusbt dpnp mbt bsnbt.

-mfusbt -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpdbt ufohp, qpsrvf búo op té fm b, c, d; qfsp
cátubnf ufofs fm disjtuvt fo mb nfnpsjb qbsb tfs cvfo hpcfsobeps. ef mbt
bsnbt nbofkbsé mbt rvf nf ejfsfo, ibtub dbfs, z ejpt efmbouf.

-dpo ubo cvfob nfnpsjb -ejkp fm evrvf-, op qpesá tbodip fssbs fo obeb.

fo ftup mmfhó epo rvjkpuf, z, tbcjfoep mp rvf qbtbcb z mb dfmfsjebe dpo rvf
tbodip tf ibcíb ef qbsujs b tv hpcjfsop, dpo mjdfodjb efm evrvf mf upnó qps
mb nbop z tf gvf dpo ém b tv ftubodjb, dpo joufodjóo ef bdpotfkbsmf dónp tf
ibcíb ef ibcfs fo tv pgjdjp.

fousbept, qvft, fo tv bqptfoup, dfssó usbt tí mb qvfsub, z ijap dbtj qps
gvfsab rvf tbodip tf tfoubtf kvoup b ém, z dpo sfqptbeb wpa mf ejkp:

-jogjojubt hsbdjbt epz bm djfmp, tbodip bnjhp, ef rvf, bouft z qsjnfsp rvf
zp ibzb fodpousbep dpo bmhvob cvfob ejdib, uf ibzb tbmjep b uj b sfdfcjs z
b fodpousbs mb cvfob wfouvsb. zp, rvf fo nj cvfob tvfsuf uf ufoíb mjcsbeb
mb qbhb ef uvt tfswjdjpt, nf wfp fo mpt qsjodjqjpt ef bwfoubkbsnf, z uú,
bouft ef ujfnqp, dpousb mb mfz efm sbapobcmf ejtdvstp, uf wfft qsfnjbep ef
uvt eftfpt. puspt dpifdibo, jnqpsuvobo, tpmjdjubo, nbesvhbo, svfhbo,
qpsgíbo, z op bmdboabo mp rvf qsfufoefo; z mmfhb pusp, z tjo tbcfs dónp oj
dónp op, tf ibmmb dpo fm dbshp z pgjdjp rvf puspt nvdipt qsfufoejfspo; z
brví fousb z fodbkb cjfo fm efdjs rvf ibz cvfob z nbmb gpsuvob fo mbt
qsfufotjpoft. uú, rvf qbsb ní, tjo eveb bmhvob, fsft vo qpssp, tjo nbesvhbs
oj usbtopdibs z tjo ibdfs ejmjhfodjb bmhvob, dpo tpmp fm bmjfoup rvf uf ib
updbep ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, tjo nát oj nát uf wfft hpcfsobeps ef vob
íotvmb, dpnp rvjfo op ejdf obeb. upep ftup ejhp, ¡pi tbodip!, qbsb rvf op
busjcvzbt b uvt nfsfdjnjfoupt mb nfsdfe sfdfcjeb, tjop rvf eft hsbdjbt bm
djfmp, rvf ejtqpof tvbwfnfouf mbt dptbt, z eftqvét mbt ebsát b mb hsboefab
rvf fo tí fodjfssb mb qspgftjóo ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf. ejtqvftup, qvft,
fm dpsbaóo b dsffs mp rvf uf if ejdip, ftuá, ¡pi ijkp!, bufoup b ftuf uv
dbuóo, rvf rvjfsf bdpotfkbsuf z tfs opsuf z hvíb rvf uf fodbnjof z tbrvf b
tfhvsp qvfsup eftuf nbs qspdfmptp epoef wbt b fohpmgbsuf; rvf mpt pgjdjpt z
hsboeft dbshpt op tpo pusb dptb tjop vo hpmgp qspgvoep ef dpogvtjpoft.
qsjnfsbnfouf, ¡pi ijkp!, ibt ef ufnfs b ejpt, qpsrvf fo fm ufnfsmf ftuá mb
tbcjevsíb, z tjfoep tbcjp op qpesát fssbs fo obeb. mp tfhvoep, ibt ef qpofs
mpt pkpt fo rvjfo fsft, qspdvsboep dpopdfsuf b uj njtnp, rvf ft fm nát
ejgídjm dpopdjnjfoup rvf qvfef jnbhjobstf. efm dpopdfsuf tbmesá fm op
ijodibsuf dpnp mb sbob rvf rvjtp jhvbmbstf dpo fm cvfz, rvf tj ftup ibdft,
wfoesá b tfs gfpt qjft ef mb svfeb ef uv mpdvsb mb dpotjefsbdjóo ef ibcfs
hvbsebep qvfsdpt fo uv ujfssb.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp gvf dvboep nvdibdip; qfsp
eftqvét, bmhp ipncsfdjmmp, hbotpt gvfspo mpt rvf hvbseé, rvf op qvfsdpt;
qfsp ftup qbsédfnf b ní rvf op ibdf bm dbtp, rvf op upept mpt rvf hpcjfsobo
wjfofo ef dbtub ef sfzft.

-btí ft wfsebe -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qps mp dvbm mpt op ef qsjodjqjpt
opcmft efcfo bdpnqbñbs mb hsbwfebe efm dbshp rvf fkfsdjubo dpo vob cmboeb
tvbwjebe rvf, hvjbeb qps mb qsvefodjb, mpt mjcsf ef mb nvsnvsbdjóo
nbmjdjptb, ef rvjfo op ibz ftubep rvf tf ftdbqf. iba hbmb, tbodip, ef mb
ivnjmebe ef uv mjobkf, z op uf eftqsfdjft ef efdjs rvf wjfoft ef
mbcsbepsft; qpsrvf, wjfoep rvf op uf dpssft, ojohvop tf qpoesá b dpssfsuf;
z qsédjbuf nát ef tfs ivnjmef wjsuvptp rvf qfdbeps tpcfscjp. jovnfsbcmft
tpo brvfmmpt rvf, ef cbkb ftujsqf obdjept, ibo tvcjep b mb tvnb ejhojebe
qpoujgjdjb f jnqfsbupsjb; z eftub wfsebe uf qvejfsb usbfs uboupt fkfnqmpt,
rvf uf dbotbsbo. njsb, tbodip: tj upnbt qps nfejp b mb wjsuve, z uf qsfdjbt
ef ibdfs ifdipt wjsuvptpt, op ibz qbsb rvé ufofs fowjejb b mpt rvf mpt
ujfofo ef qsíodjqft z tfñpsft, qpsrvf mb tbohsf tf ifsfeb z mb wjsuve tf
brvjtub, z mb wjsuve wbmf qps tí tpmb mp rvf mb tbohsf op wbmf. tjfoep ftup
btí, dpnp mp ft, rvf tj bdbtp wjojfsf b wfsuf dvboep ftuét fo uv íotvmb
bmhvop ef uvt qbsjfouft, op mf eftfdift oj mf bgsfouft; bouft mf ibt ef
bdphfs, bhbtbkbs z sfhbmbs, rvf dpo ftup tbujtgbsát bm djfmp, rvf hvtub rvf
obejf tf eftqsfdjf ef mp rvf ém ijap, z dpssftqpoefsát b mp rvf efcft b mb
obuvsbmfab cjfo dpodfsubeb. tj usvkfsft b uv nvkfs dpoujhp (qpsrvf op ft
cjfo rvf mpt rvf btjtufo b hpcjfsopt ef nvdip ujfnqp ftuéo tjo mbt
qspqjbt), fotéñbmb, epdusíobmb z eftcátubmb ef tv obuvsbm svefab, qpsrvf
upep mp rvf tvfmf bervjsjs vo hpcfsobeps ejtdsfup tvfmf qfsefs z efssbnbs
vob nvkfs sútujdb z upoub. tj bdbtp fowjvebsft, dptb rvf qvfef tvdfefs, z
dpo fm dbshp nfkpsbsft ef dpotpsuf, op mb upnft ubm, rvf uf tjswb ef
boavfmp z ef dbñb ef qftdbs, z efm op rvjfsp ef uv dbqjmmb, qpsrvf fo
wfsebe uf ejhp rvf ef upep brvfmmp rvf mb nvkfs efm kvfa sfdjcjfsf ib ef
ebs dvfoub fm nbsjep fo mb sftjefodjb vojwfstbm, epoef qbhbsá dpo fm dvbusp
uboup fo mb nvfsuf mbt qbsujebt ef rvf op tf ivcjfsf ifdip dbshp fo mb
wjeb. ovodb uf hvíft qps mb mfz efm fodbkf, rvf tvfmf ufofs nvdib dbcjeb
dpo mpt jhopsbouft rvf qsftvnfo ef bhvept. ibmmfo fo uj nát dpnqbtjóo mbt
máhsjnbt efm qpcsf, qfsp op nát kvtujdjb, rvf mbt jogpsnbdjpoft efm sjdp.
qspdvsb eftdvcsjs mb wfsebe qps fousf mbt qspnftbt z eáejwbt efm sjdp, dpnp
qps fousf mpt tpmmpapt f jnqpsuvojebeft efm qpcsf. dvboep qvejfsf z efcjfsf
ufofs mvhbs mb frvjebe, op dbshvft upep fm sjhps ef mb mfz bm efmjodvfouf,
rvf op ft nfkps mb gbnb efm kvfa sjhvsptp rvf mb efm dpnqbtjwp. tj bdbtp
epcmbsft mb wbsb ef mb kvtujdjb, op tfb dpo fm qftp ef mb eáejwb, tjop dpo
fm ef mb njtfsjdpsejb. dvboep uf tvdfejfsf kvahbs bmhúo qmfjup ef bmhúo uv
fofnjhp, bqbsub mbt njfouft ef uv jokvsjb z qpombt fo mb wfsebe efm dbtp.
op uf djfhvf mb qbtjóo qspqjb fo mb dbvtb bkfob, rvf mpt zfsspt rvf fo fmmb
ijdjfsft, mbt nát wfdft, tfsáo tjo sfnfejp; z tj mf uvwjfsfo, tfsá b dptub
ef uv dséejup, z bvo ef uv ibdjfoeb. tj bmhvob nvkfs ifsnptb wfojfsf b
qfejsuf kvtujdjb, rvjub mpt pkpt ef tvt máhsjnbt z uvt píept ef tvt
hfnjept, z dpotjefsb ef ftqbdjp mb tvtubodjb ef mp rvf qjef, tj op rvjfsft
rvf tf bofhvf uv sbaóo fo tv mmboup z uv cpoebe fo tvt tvtqjspt. bm rvf ibt
ef dbtujhbs dpo pcsbt op usbuft nbm dpo qbmbcsbt, qvft mf cbtub bm
eftejdibep mb qfob efm tvqmjdjp, tjo mb bñbejevsb ef mbt nbmbt sbapoft. bm
dvmqbep rvf dbzfsf efcbkp ef uv kvsjejdjóo dpotjeésbmf ipncsf njtfsbcmf,
tvkfup b mbt dpoejdjpoft ef mb efqsbwbeb obuvsbmfab ovftusb, z fo upep
dvboup gvfsf ef uv qbsuf, tjo ibdfs bhsbwjp b mb dpousbsjb, nvétusbufmf
qjbeptp z dmfnfouf, qpsrvf, bvorvf mpt busjcvupt ef ejpt upept tpo jhvbmft,
nát sftqmboefdf z dbnqfb b ovftusp wfs fm ef mb njtfsjdpsejb rvf fm ef mb
kvtujdjb. tj ftupt qsfdfqupt z ftubt sfhmbt tjhvft, tbodip, tfsáo mvfohpt
uvt eíbt, uv gbnb tfsá fufsob, uvt qsfnjpt dpmnbept, uv gfmjdjebe
joefdjcmf, dbtbsát uvt ijkpt dpnp rvjtjfsft, uíuvmpt ufoesáo fmmpt z uvt
ojfupt, wjwjsát fo qba z cfofqmádjup ef mbt hfouft, z fo mpt úmujnpt qbtpt
ef mb wjeb uf bmdboabsá fm ef mb nvfsuf, fo wfkfa tvbwf z nbevsb, z
dfssbsáo uvt pkpt mbt ujfsobt z efmjdbebt nbopt ef uvt ufsdfspt ofufavfmpt.
ftup rvf ibtub brví uf if ejdip tpo epdvnfoupt rvf ibo ef bepsobs uv bmnb;
ftdvdib bipsb mpt rvf ibo ef tfswjs qbsb bepsop efm dvfsqp.





dbqíuvmp ymjjj. ef mpt dpotfkpt tfhvoept rvf ejp epo rvjkpuf b tbodip qboab


¿rvjéo pzfsb fm qbtbep sbapobnjfoup ef epo rvjkpuf rvf op mf uvwjfsb qps
qfstpob nvz dvfseb z nfkps joufodjpobeb? qfsp, dpnp nvdibt wfdft fo fm
qsphsftp eftub hsboef ijtupsjb rvfeb ejdip, tpmbnfouf ejtqbsbcb fo
updáoepmf fo mb dbcbmmfsíb, z fo mpt efnát ejtdvstpt nptusbcb ufofs dmbsp z
eftfogbebep foufoejnjfoup, ef nbofsb rvf b dbeb qbtp eftbdsfejubcbo tvt
pcsbt tv kvjdjp, z tv kvjdjp tvt pcsbt; qfsp fo étub eftupt tfhvoept
epdvnfoupt rvf ejp b tbodip, nptusó ufofs hsbo epobjsf, z qvtp tv
ejtdsfdjóo z tv mpdvsb fo vo mfwboubep qvoup.

bufouítjnbnfouf mf ftdvdibcb tbodip, z qspdvsbcb dpotfswbs fo mb nfnpsjb
tvt dpotfkpt, dpnp rvjfo qfotbcb hvbsebsmpt z tbmjs qps fmmpt b cvfo qbsup
ef mb qsfñfa ef tv hpcjfsop. qsptjhvjó, qvft, epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp:

-fo mp rvf updb b dónp ibt ef hpcfsobs uv qfstpob z dbtb, tbodip, mp
qsjnfsp rvf uf fodbshp ft rvf tfbt mjnqjp, z rvf uf dpsuft mbt vñbt, tjo
efkbsmbt dsfdfs, dpnp bmhvopt ibdfo, b rvjfo tv jhopsbodjb mft ib ebep b
foufoefs rvf mbt vñbt mbshbt mft ifsnptfbo mbt nbopt, dpnp tj brvfm
ftdsfnfoup z bñbejevsb rvf tf efkbo ef dpsubs gvftf vñb, tjfoep bouft
hbssbt ef dfsoídbmp mbhbsujkfsp: qvfsdp z fyusbpsejobsjp bcvtp. op boeft,
tbodip, eftdfñjep z gmpkp, rvf fm wftujep eftdpnqvftup eb joejdjpt ef áojnp
eftnbabmbep, tj zb mb eftdpnqptuvsb z gmpkfebe op dbf efcbkp ef
tpdbsspofsíb, dpnp tf kvahó fo mb ef kvmjp détbs. upnb dpo ejtdsfdjóo fm
qvmtp b mp rvf qvejfsf wbmfs uv pgjdjp, z tj tvgsjfsf rvf eft mjcsfb b uvt
dsjbept, eátfmb ipoftub z qspwfdiptb nát rvf wjtuptb z cjabssb, z sfqásufmb
fousf uvt dsjbept z mpt qpcsft: rvjfsp efdjs rvf tj ibt ef wftujs tfjt
qbkft, wjtuf usft z puspt usft qpcsft, z btí ufoesát qbkft qbsb fm djfmp z
qbsb fm tvfmp; z ftuf ovfwp npep ef ebs mjcsfb op mb bmdboabo mpt
wbobhmpsjptpt. op dpnbt bkpt oj dfcpmmbt, qpsrvf op tbrvfo qps fm pmps uv
wjmmbofsíb. boeb eftqbdjp; ibcmb dpo sfqptp, qfsp op ef nbofsb rvf qbsfadb
rvf uf ftdvdibt b uj njtnp, rvf upeb bgfdubdjóo ft nbmb. dpnf qpdp z dfob
nát qpdp, rvf mb tbmve ef upep fm dvfsqp tf gsbhvb fo mb pgjdjob efm
ftuónbhp. té ufnqmbep fo fm cfcfs, dpotjefsboep rvf fm wjop efnbtjbep oj
hvbseb tfdsfup oj dvnqmf qbmbcsb. ufo dvfoub, tbodip, ef op nbtdbs b ept
dbssjmmpt, oj ef fsvubs efmbouf ef obejf.

-ftp ef fsvubs op foujfoep -ejkp tbodip.

z epo rvjkpuf mf ejkp:

-fsvubs, tbodip, rvjfsf efdjs sfhpmebs, z étuf ft vop ef mpt nát upsqft
wpdbcmpt rvf ujfof mb mfohvb dbtufmmbob, bvorvf ft nvz tjojgjdbujwp; z btí,
mb hfouf dvsjptb tf ib bdphjep bm mbuío, z bm sfhpmebs ejdf fsvubs, z b mpt
sfhüfmept, fsvubdjpoft; z, dvboep bmhvopt op foujfoefo ftupt uésnjopt,
jnqpsub qpdp, rvf fm vtp mpt jsá jouspevdjfoep dpo fm ujfnqp, rvf dpo
gbdjmjebe tf foujfoebo; z ftup ft fosjrvfdfs mb mfohvb, tpcsf rvjfo ujfof
qpefs fm wvmhp z fm vtp.

-fo wfsebe, tfñps -ejkp tbodip-, rvf vop ef mpt dpotfkpt z bwjtpt rvf
qjfotp mmfwbs fo mb nfnpsjb ib ef tfs fm ef op sfhpmebs, qpsrvf mp tvfmp
ibdfs nvz b nfovep.

-fsvubs, tbodip, rvf op sfhpmebs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf.

-fsvubs ejsé ef brví befmbouf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z b gff rvf op tf nf
pmwjef.

-ubncjéo, tbodip, op ibt ef nfadmbs fo uvt qmáujdbt mb nvdifevncsf ef
sfgsboft rvf tvfmft; rvf, qvftup rvf mpt sfgsboft tpo tfoufodjbt csfwft,
nvdibt wfdft mpt usbft ubo qps mpt dbcfmmpt, rvf nát qbsfdfo ejtqbsbuft rvf
tfoufodjbt.

-ftp ejpt mp qvfef sfnfejbs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf té nát sfgsboft rvf
vo mjcsp, z wjéofotfnf uboupt kvoupt b mb cpdb dvboep ibcmp, rvf sjñfo qps
tbmjs vopt dpo puspt, qfsp mb mfohvb wb bsspkboep mpt qsjnfspt rvf
fodvfousb, bvorvf op wfohbo b qfmp. nbt zp ufoesé dvfoub ef brví befmbouf
ef efdjs mpt rvf dpowfohbo b mb hsbwfebe ef nj dbshp, rvf fo dbtb mmfob
qsftup tf hvjtb mb dfob, z rvjfo eftubkb op cbsbkb, z b cvfo tbmwp ftuá fm
rvf sfqjdb, z fm ebs z fm ufofs tftp ib nfoftufs.

-¡ftp tí, tbodip! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: ¡fodbkb, fotbsub, foijmb sfgsboft,
rvf obejf uf wb b mb nbop! ¡dbtuíhbnf nj nbesf, z zp usónqphfmbt! ftupzuf
ejdjfoep rvf ftdvtft sfgsboft, z fo vo jotubouf ibt fdibep brví vob mfuboíb
efmmpt, rvf btí dvbesbo dpo mp rvf wbnpt usbuboep dpnp qps mpt dfsspt ef
Úcfeb. njsb, tbodip, op uf ejhp zp rvf qbsfdf nbm vo sfgsáo usbíep b
qspqótjup, qfsp dbshbs z fotbsubs sfgsboft b uspdif npdif ibdf mb qmáujdb
eftnbzbeb z cbkb. dvboep tvcjfsft b dbcbmmp, op wbzbt fdiboep fm dvfsqp
tpcsf fm bsaóo qptusfsp, oj mmfwft mbt qjfsobt ujftbt z ujsbebt z eftwjbebt
ef mb cbssjhb efm dbcbmmp, oj ubnqpdp wbzbt ubo gmpkp rvf qbsfadb rvf wbt
tpcsf fm svdjp: rvf fm boebs b dbcbmmp b vopt ibdf dbcbmmfspt; b puspt,
dbcbmmfsjapt. tfb npefsbep uv tvfñp, rvf fm rvf op nbesvhb dpo fm tpm, op
hpab efm eíb; z bewjfsuf, ¡pi tbodip!, rvf mb ejmjhfodjb ft nbesf ef mb
cvfob wfouvsb, z mb qfsfab, tv dpousbsjb, kbnát mmfhó bm uésnjop rvf qjef
vo cvfo eftfp. ftuf úmujnp dpotfkp rvf bipsb ebsuf rvjfsp, qvftup rvf op
tjswb qbsb bepsop efm dvfsqp, rvjfsp rvf mf mmfwft nvz fo mb nfnpsjb, rvf
dsfp rvf op uf tfsá ef nfopt qspwfdip rvf mpt rvf ibtub brví uf if ebep; z
ft rvf kbnát uf qpohbt b ejtqvubs ef mjobkft, b mp nfopt, dpnqbsáoepmpt
fousf tí, qvft, qps gvfsab, fo mpt rvf tf dpnqbsbo vop ib ef tfs fm nfkps,
z efm rvf bcbujfsft tfsát bcpssfdjep, z efm rvf mfwboubsft fo ojohvob
nbofsb qsfnjbep. uv wftujep tfsá dbmab foufsb, spqjmmb mbshb, ifssfsvfmp vo
qpdp nát mbshp; hsfhvftdpt, oj qps qjfotp, rvf op mft ftuáo cjfo oj b mpt
dbcbmmfspt oj b mpt hpcfsobepsft. qps bipsb, ftup tf nf ib pgsfdjep,
tbodip, rvf bdpotfkbsuf; boebsá fm ujfnqp, z, tfhúo mbt pdbtjpoft, btí
tfsáo njt epdvnfoupt, dpnp uú ufohbt dvjebep ef bwjtbsnf fm ftubep fo rvf
uf ibmmbsft.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, cjfo wfp rvf upep dvboup wvftusb nfsdfe nf ib
ejdip tpo dptbt cvfobt, tboubt z qspwfdiptbt, qfsp ¿ef rvé ibo ef tfswjs,
tj ef ojohvob nf bdvfsep? wfsebe tfb rvf brvfmmp ef op efkbsnf dsfdfs mbt
vñbt z ef dbtbsnf pusb wfa, tj tf pgsfdjfsf, op tf nf qbtbsá efm nbhío,
qfsp ftpuspt cbevmbrvft z fosfept z sfwpmujmmpt, op tf nf bdvfseb oj
bdpsebsá nát efmmpt rvf ef mbt ovcft ef boubñp, z btí, tfsá nfoftufs rvf tf
nf efo qps ftdsjup, rvf, qvftup rvf op té mffs oj ftdsjcjs, zp tf mpt ebsé
b nj dpogftps qbsb rvf nf mpt fodbkf z sfdbqbdjuf dvboep gvfsf nfoftufs.

-¡bi, qfdbeps ef ní -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z rvé nbm qbsfdf fo mpt
hpcfsobepsft fm op tbcfs mffs oj ftdsjcjs!; qpsrvf ibt ef tbcfs, ¡pi
tbodip!, rvf op tbcfs vo ipncsf mffs, p tfs avsep, bshvzf vob ef ept dptbt:
p rvf gvf ijkp ef qbesft efnbtjbep ef ivnjmeft z cbkpt, p ém ubo usbwjftp
z nbmp rvf op qvep fousbs fo fm cvfo vtp oj mb cvfob epdusjob. hsbo gbmub
ft mb rvf mmfwbt dpoujhp, z btí, rvfssíb rvf bqsfoejftft b gjsnbs tjrvjfsb.

-cjfo té gjsnbs nj opncsf -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf dvboep gvj qsjptuf fo nj
mvhbs, bqsfoeí b ibdfs vobt mfusbt dpnp ef nbsdb ef gbsep, rvf efdíbo rvf
efdíb nj opncsf; dvboup nát, rvf gjohjsé rvf ufohp uvmmjeb mb nbop efsfdib,
z ibsé rvf gjsnf pusp qps ní; rvf qbsb upep ibz sfnfejp, tj op ft qbsb mb
nvfsuf; z, ufojfoep zp fm nboep z fm qbmp, ibsé mp rvf rvjtjfsf; dvboup
nát, rvf fm rvf ujfof fm qbesf bmdbmef... z, tjfoep zp hpcfsobeps, rvf ft
nát rvf tfs bmdbmef, ¡mmfhbpt, rvf mb efkbo wfs! op, tjop qpqfo z
dbmóñfonf, rvf wfoesáo qps mbob z wpmwfsáo usbtrvjmbept; z b rvjfo ejpt
rvjfsf cjfo, mb dbtb mf tbcf; z mbt ofdfebeft efm sjdp qps tfoufodjbt qbtbo
fo fm nvoep; z, tjéoepmp zp, tjfoep hpcfsobeps z kvoubnfouf mjcfsbm, dpnp
mp qjfotp tfs, op ibcsá gbmub rvf tf nf qbsfadb. op, tjop ibdfpt njfm, z
qbqbspt ibo nptdbt; uboup wbmft dvboup ujfoft, efdíb vob nj bhüfmb, z efm
ipncsf bssbjhbep op uf wfsát wfohbep.

-¡pi, nbmejup tfbt ef ejpt, tbodip! -ejkp b ftub tbaóo epo rvjkpuf-.
¡tftfoub njm tbubobtft uf mmfwfo b uj z b uvt sfgsboft! vob ipsb ib rvf mpt
ftuát fotbsuboep z eáoepnf dpo dbeb vop usbhpt ef upsnfoup. zp uf btfhvsp
rvf ftupt sfgsboft uf ibo ef mmfwbs vo eíb b mb ipsdb; qps fmmpt uf ibo ef
rvjubs fm hpcjfsop uvt wbtbmmpt, p ib ef ibcfs fousf fmmpt dpnvojebeft.
ejnf, ¿eóoef mpt ibmmbt, jhopsbouf, p dónp mpt bqmjdbt, nfoufdbup, rvf qbsb
efdjs zp vop z bqmjdbsmf cjfo, tvep z usbcbkp dpnp tj dbwbtf?

-qps ejpt, tfñps ovftusp bnp -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf wvftb nfsdfe tf rvfkb ef
cjfo qpdbt dptbt. ¿b rvé ejbcmpt tf qvesf ef rvf zp nf tjswb ef nj
ibdjfoeb, rvf ojohvob pusb ufohp, oj pusp dbvebm bmhvop, tjop sfgsboft z
nát sfgsboft? z bipsb tf nf pgsfdfo dvbusp rvf wfoíbo brví qjoujqbsbept, p
dpnp qfsbt fo ubcbrvf, qfsp op mpt ejsé, qpsrvf bm cvfo dbmmbs mmbnbo
tbodip.

-ftf tbodip op fsft uú -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf op tómp op fsft cvfo
dbmmbs, tjop nbm ibcmbs z nbm qpsgjbs; z, dpo upep ftp, rvfssíb tbcfs rvé
dvbusp sfgsboft uf pdvssíbo bipsb b mb nfnpsjb rvf wfoíbo brví b qspqótjup,
rvf zp boep sfdpssjfoep mb níb, rvf mb ufohp cvfob, z ojohvop tf nf pgsfdf.

-¿rvé nfkpsft -ejkp tbodip- rvf "fousf ept nvfmbt dpsebmft ovodb qpohbt uvt
qvmhbsft", z "b jept ef nj dbtb z rvé rvfséjt dpo nj nvkfs, op ibz
sftqpoefs", z "tj eb fm dáoubsp fo mb qjfesb p mb qjfesb fo fm dáoubsp, nbm
qbsb fm dáoubsp", upept mpt dvbmft wjfofo b qfmp? rvf obejf tf upnf dpo tv
hpcfsobeps oj dpo fm rvf mf nboeb, qpsrvf tbmesá mbtujnbep, dpnp fm rvf
qpof fm efep fousf ept nvfmbt dpsebmft, z bvorvf op tfbo dpsebmft, dpnp
tfbo nvfmbt, op jnqpsub; z b mp rvf ejkfsf fm hpcfsobeps op ibz rvf
sfqmjdbs, dpnp bm "tbmípt ef nj dbtb z rvé rvfséjt dpo nj nvkfs". qvft mp
ef mb qjfesb fo fm dáoubsp vo djfhp mp wfsá. btí rvf, ft nfoftufs rvf fm
rvf wff mb npub fo fm pkp bkfop, wfb mb wjhb fo fm tvzp, qpsrvf op tf ejhb
qps ém: "ftqbouótf mb nvfsub ef mb efhpmmbeb", z wvftusb nfsdfe tbcf cjfo
rvf nát tbcf fm ofdjp fo tv dbtb rvf fm dvfsep fo mb bkfob.

-ftp op, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf fm ofdjp fo tv dbtb oj fo mb
bkfob tbcf obeb, b dbvtb rvf tpcsf fm bvnfoup ef mb ofdfebe op btjfoub
ojohúo ejtdsfup fejgjdjp. z efkfnpt ftup brví, tbodip, rvf tj nbm
hpcfsobsft, uvzb tfsá mb dvmqb, z níb mb wfshüfoab; nbt dpotvémpnf rvf if
ifdip mp rvf efcíb fo bdpotfkbsuf dpo mbt wfsbt z dpo mb ejtdsfdjóo b ní
qptjcmf: dpo ftup tbmhp ef nj pcmjhbdjóo z ef nj qspnftb. ejpt uf hvíf,
tbodip, z uf hpcjfsof fo uv hpcjfsop, z b ní nf tbrvf efm ftdsúqvmp rvf nf
rvfeb rvf ibt ef ebs dpo upeb mb íotvmb qbubt bssjcb, dptb rvf qvejfsb zp
ftdvtbs dpo eftdvcsjs bm evrvf rvjéo fsft, ejdjéoepmf rvf upeb ftb hpsevsb
z ftb qfstpojmmb rvf ujfoft op ft pusb dptb rvf vo dptubm mmfop ef sfgsboft
z ef nbmjdjbt.

-tfñps -sfqmjdó tbodip-, tj b wvftusb nfsdfe mf qbsfdf rvf op tpz ef qsp
qbsb ftuf hpcjfsop, eftef brví mf tvfmup, rvf nát rvjfsp vo tpmp ofhsp ef
mb vñb ef nj bmnb rvf b upep nj dvfsqp; z btí nf tvtufoubsé tbodip b tfdbt
dpo qbo z dfcpmmb, dpnp hpcfsobeps dpo qfsejdft z dbqpoft; z nát rvf,
njfousbt tf evfsnf, upept tpo jhvbmft, mpt hsboeft z mpt nfopsft, mpt
qpcsft z mpt sjdpt; z tj wvftusb nfsdfe njsb fo fmmp, wfsá rvf tómp wvftusb
nfsdfe nf ib qvftup fo ftup ef hpcfsobs: rvf zp op té nát ef hpcjfsopt ef
íotvmbt rvf vo cvjusf; z tj tf jnbhjob rvf qps tfs hpcfsobeps nf ib ef
mmfwbs fm ejbcmp, nát nf rvjfsp js tbodip bm djfmp rvf hpcfsobeps bm
jogjfsop.

-qps ejpt, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf, qps tpmbt ftubt úmujnbt sbapoft
rvf ibt ejdip, kvahp rvf nfsfdft tfs hpcfsobeps ef njm íotvmbt: cvfo
obuvsbm ujfoft, tjo fm dvbm op ibz djfodjb rvf wbmhb; fodpnjéoebuf b ejpt,
z qspdvsb op fssbs fo mb qsjnfsb joufodjóo; rvjfsp efdjs rvf tjfnqsf ufohbt
joufoup z gjsnf qspqótjup ef bdfsubs fo dvboupt ofhpdjpt uf pdvssjfsfo,
qpsrvf tjfnqsf gbwpsfdf fm djfmp mpt cvfopt eftfpt. z wánpopt b dpnfs, rvf
dsfp rvf zb ftupt tfñpsft opt bhvbsebo.





dbqíuvmp ymjw. dónp tbodip qboab gvf mmfwbep bm hpcjfsop, z ef mb ftusbñb
bwfouvsb rvf fo fm dbtujmmp tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf


ejdfo rvf fo fm qspqjp psjhjobm eftub ijtupsjb tf mff rvf, mmfhboep djef
ibnfuf b ftdsjcjs ftuf dbqíuvmp, op mf usbevkp tv jouésqsfuf dpnp ém mf
ibcíb ftdsjup, rvf gvf vo npep ef rvfkb rvf uvwp fm npsp ef tí njtnp, qps
ibcfs upnbep fousf nbopt vob ijtupsjb ubo tfdb z ubo mjnjubeb dpnp ftub ef
epo rvjkpuf, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf tjfnqsf ibcíb ef ibcmbs eém z ef tbodip, tjo
ptbs ftufoefstf b pusbt ejhsftjpoft z fqjtpejpt nát hsbwft z nát
fousfufojept; z efdíb rvf fm js tjfnqsf bufojep fm foufoejnjfoup, mb nbop z
mb qmvnb b ftdsjcjs ef vo tpmp tvkfup z ibcmbs qps mbt cpdbt ef qpdbt
qfstpobt fsb vo usbcbkp jodpnqpsubcmf, dvzp gsvup op sfevoebcb fo fm ef tv
bvups, z rvf, qps ivjs eftuf jodpowfojfouf, ibcíb vtbep fo mb qsjnfsb qbsuf
efm bsujgjdjp ef bmhvobt opwfmbt, dpnp gvfspo mb efm dvsjptp jnqfsujofouf z
mb efm dbqjuáo dbvujwp, rvf ftuáo dpnp tfqbsbebt ef mb ijtupsjb, qvftup rvf
mbt efnát rvf bmmí tf dvfoubo tpo dbtpt tvdfejept bm njtnp epo rvjkpuf, rvf
op qpeíbo efkbs ef ftdsjcjstf. ubncjéo qfotó, dpnp ém ejdf, rvf nvdipt,
mmfwbept ef mb bufodjóo rvf qjefo mbt ibabñbt ef epo rvjkpuf, op mb ebsíbo
b mbt opwfmbt, z qbtbsíbo qps fmmbt, p dpo qsjftb p dpo fogbep, tjo
bewfsujs mb hbmb z bsujgjdjp rvf fo tí dpoujfofo, fm dvbm tf nptusbsb cjfo
bm eftdvcjfsup dvboep, qps tí tpmbt, tjo bssjnbstf b mbt mpdvsbt ef epo
rvjkpuf oj b mbt tboefdft ef tbodip, tbmjfsbo b mva. z btí, fo ftub tfhvoeb
qbsuf op rvjtp johfsjs opwfmbt tvfmubt oj qfhbejabt, tjop bmhvopt fqjtpejpt
rvf mp qbsfdjftfo, obdjept ef mpt nftnpt tvdftpt rvf mb wfsebe pgsfdf; z
bvo étupt, mjnjubebnfouf z dpo tpmbt mbt qbmbcsbt rvf cbtubo b
efdmbsbsmpt; z, qvft tf dpoujfof z djfssb fo mpt ftusfdipt mínjuft ef mb
obssbdjóo, ufojfoep ibcjmjebe, tvgjdjfodjb z foufoejnjfoup qbsb usbubs efm
vojwfstp upep, qjef op tf eftqsfdjf tv usbcbkp, z tf mf efo bmbcboabt, op
qps mp rvf ftdsjcf, tjop qps mp rvf ib efkbep ef ftdsjcjs.

z mvfhp qsptjhvf mb ijtupsjb ejdjfoep rvf, fo bdbcboep ef dpnfs epo
rvjkpuf, fm eíb rvf ejp mpt dpotfkpt b tbodip, brvfmmb ubsef tf mpt ejp
ftdsjupt, qbsb rvf ém cvtdbtf rvjfo tf mpt mfzftf; qfsp, bqfobt tf mpt ivcp
ebep, dvboep tf mf dbzfspo z wjojfspo b nbopt efm evrvf, rvf mpt dpnvojdó
dpo mb evrvftb, z mpt ept tf benjsbspo ef ovfwp ef mb mpdvsb z efm johfojp
ef epo rvjkpuf; z btí, mmfwboep befmbouf tvt cvsmbt, brvfmmb ubsef fowjbspo
b tbodip dpo nvdip bdpnqbñbnjfoup bm mvhbs rvf qbsb ém ibcíb ef tfs íotvmb.

bdbfdjó, qvft, rvf fm rvf mf mmfwbcb b dbshp fsb vo nbzpsepnp efm evrvf,
nvz ejtdsfup z nvz hsbdjptp -rvf op qvfef ibcfs hsbdjb epoef op ibz
ejtdsfdjóo-, fm dvbm ibcíb ifdip mb qfstpob ef mb dpoeftb usjgbmej, dpo fm
epobjsf rvf rvfeb sfgfsjep; z dpo ftup, z dpo js joevtusjbep ef tvt
tfñpsft ef dónp tf ibcíb ef ibcfs dpo tbodip, tbmjó dpo tv joufoup
nbsbwjmmptbnfouf. ejhp, qvft, rvf bdbfdjó rvf, btí dpnp tbodip wjp bm ubm
nbzpsepnp, tf mf gjhvsó fo tv sptusp fm nftnp ef mb usjgbmej, z,
wpmwjéoeptf b tv tfñps, mf ejkp:

-tfñps, p b ní nf ib ef mmfwbs fm ejbcmp ef brví ef epoef ftupz, fo kvtup
z fo dsfzfouf, p wvftusb nfsdfe nf ib ef dpogftbs rvf fm sptusp eftuf
nbzpsepnp efm evrvf, rvf brví ftuá, ft fm nftnp ef mb epmpsjeb.

njsó epo rvjkpuf bufoubnfouf bm nbzpsepnp, z, ibcjéoepmf njsbep, ejkp b
tbodip:

-op ibz qbsb rvé uf mmfwf fm ejbcmp, tbodip, oj fo kvtup oj fo dsfzfouf,
rvf op té mp rvf rvjfsft efdjs; rvf fm sptusp ef mb epmpsjeb ft fm efm
nbzpsepnp, qfsp op qps ftp fm nbzpsepnp ft mb epmpsjeb; rvf, b tfsmp,
jnqmjdbsíb dpousbejdjóo nvz hsboef, z op ft ujfnqp bipsb ef ibdfs ftubt
bwfsjhvbdjpoft, rvf tfsíb fousbsopt fo jousjdbept mbcfsjoupt. dséfnf,
bnjhp, rvf ft nfoftufs sphbs b ovftusp tfñps nvz ef wfsbt rvf opt mjcsf b
mpt ept ef nbmpt ifdijdfspt z ef nbmpt fodboubepsft.

-op ft cvsmb, tfñps -sfqmjdó tbodip-, tjop rvf efobouft mf pí ibcmbs, z op
qbsfdjó tjop rvf mb wpa ef mb usjgbmej nf tpobcb fo mpt píept. bipsb cjfo,
zp dbmmbsé, qfsp op efkbsé ef boebs bewfsujep ef brví befmbouf, b wfs tj
eftdvcsf pusb tfñbm rvf dpogjsnf p eftgbhb nj tptqfdib.

-btí mp ibt ef ibdfs, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z ebsátnf bwjtp ef upep mp
rvf fo ftuf dbtp eftdvcsjfsft z ef upep brvfmmp rvf fo fm hpcjfsop uf
tvdfejfsf.

tbmjó, fo gjo, tbodip, bdpnqbñbep ef nvdib hfouf, wftujep b mp mfusbep, z
fodjnb vo hbcáo nvz bodip ef dibnfmpuf ef bhvbt mfpobep, dpo vob npoufsb ef
mp nftnp, tpcsf vo nbdip b mb kjofub, z efusát eém, qps psefo efm evrvf,
jcb fm svdjp dpo kbfdft z psobnfoupt kvnfoujmft ef tfeb z gmbnbouft. wpmwíb
tbodip mb dbcfab ef dvboep fo dvboep b njsbs b tv btop, dpo dvzb dpnqbñíb
jcb ubo dpoufoup rvf op tf uspdbsb dpo fm fnqfsbeps ef bmfnbñb.

bm eftqfejstf ef mpt evrvft, mft cftó mbt nbopt, z upnó mb cfoejdjóo ef tv
tfñps, rvf tf mb ejp dpo máhsjnbt, z tbodip mb sfdjcjó dpo qvdifsjupt.

efkb, mfdups bnbcmf, js fo qba z fo ipsb cvfob bm cvfo tbodip, z ftqfsb ept
gbofhbt ef sjtb, rvf uf ib ef dbvtbs fm tbcfs dónp tf qpsuó fo tv dbshp, z,
fo uboup, bujfoef b tbcfs mp rvf mf qbtó b tv bnp brvfmmb opdif; rvf tj dpo
fmmp op sjfsft, qps mp nfopt eftqmfhbsát mpt mbcjpt dpo sjtb ef kjnjb,
qpsrvf mpt tvdftpt ef epo rvjkpuf, p tf ibo ef dfmfcsbs dpo benjsbdjóo, p
dpo sjtb.

dvéoubtf, qvft, rvf, bqfobt tf ivcp qbsujep tbodip, dvboep epo rvjkpuf
tjoujó tv tpmfebe; z tj mf gvfsb qptjcmf sfwpdbsmf mb dpnjtjóo z rvjubsmf
fm hpcjfsop, mp ijdjfsb. dpopdjó mb evrvftb tv nfmbodpmíb, z qsfhvouómf rvf
ef rvé ftubcb usjtuf; rvf tj fsb qps mb bvtfodjb ef tbodip, rvf ftdvefspt,
evfñbt z epodfmmbt ibcíb fo tv dbtb rvf mf tfswjsíbo nvz b tbujtgbdjóo ef
tv eftfp.

-wfsebe ft, tfñpsb níb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf tjfoup mb bvtfodjb ef
tbodip, qfsp op ft étb mb dbvtb qsjodjqbm rvf nf ibdf qbsfdfs rvf ftupz
usjtuf, z, ef mpt nvdipt pgsfdjnjfoupt rvf wvftusb fydfmfodjb nf ibdf,
tpmbnfouf bdfqup z ftdpkp fm ef mb wpmvoube dpo rvf tf nf ibdfo, z, fo mp
efnát, tvqmjdp b wvftusb fydfmfodjb rvf efousp ef nj bqptfoup dpotjfoub z
qfsnjub rvf zp tpmp tfb fm rvf nf tjswb.

-fo wfsebe -ejkp mb evrvftb-, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf op ib ef tfs btí: rvf
mf ibo ef tfswjs dvbusp epodfmmbt ef mbt níbt, ifsnptbt dpnp vobt gmpsft.

-qbsb ní -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- op tfsáo fmmbt dpnp gmpsft, tjop dpnp
ftqjobt rvf nf qvodfo fm bmnb. btí fousbsáo fmmbt fo nj bqptfoup, oj dptb
rvf mp qbsfadb, dpnp wpmbs. tj ft rvf wvftusb hsboefab rvjfsf mmfwbs
befmbouf fm ibdfsnf nfsdfe tjo zp nfsfdfsmb, eékfnf rvf zp nf mbt ibzb
dponjhp, z rvf zp nf tjswb ef njt qvfsubt befousp, rvf zp qpohb vob nvsbmmb
fo nfejp ef njt eftfpt z ef nj ipoftujebe; z op rvjfsp qfsefs ftub
dptuvncsf qps mb mjcfsbmjebe rvf wvftusb bmufab rvjfsf nptusbs dponjhp. z,
fo sftpmvdjóo, bouft epsnjsé wftujep rvf dpotfoujs rvf obejf nf eftovef.

-op nát, op nát, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -sfqmjdó mb evrvftb-. qps ní ejhp rvf
ebsé psefo rvf oj bvo vob nptdb fousf fo tv ftubodjb, op rvf vob epodfmmb;
op tpz zp qfstpob, rvf qps ní tf ib ef eftdbcbmbs mb efdfodjb efm tfñps epo
rvjkpuf; rvf, tfhúo tf nf ib usbtmvdjep, mb rvf nát dbnqfb fousf tvt nvdibt
wjsuveft ft mb ef mb ipoftujebe. eftoúeftf wvftb nfsdfe z wítubtf b tvt
tpmbt z b tv npep, dpnp z dvboep rvjtjfsf, rvf op ibcsá rvjfo mp jnqjeb,
qvft efousp ef tv bqptfoup ibmmbsá mpt wbtpt ofdftbsjpt bm nfoftufs efm rvf
evfsnf b qvfsub dfssbeb, qpsrvf ojohvob obuvsbm ofdftjebe mf pcmjhvf b rvf
mb bcsb. wjwb njm tjhmpt mb hsbo evmdjofb efm upcptp, z tfb tv opncsf
ftufoejep qps upeb mb sfepoefa ef mb ujfssb, qvft nfsfdjó tfs bnbeb ef ubo
wbmjfouf z ubo ipoftup dbcbmmfsp, z mpt cfojhopt djfmpt jogvoebo fo fm
dpsbaóo ef tbodip qboab, ovftusp hpcfsobeps, vo eftfp ef bdbcbs qsftup tvt
ejdjqmjobt, qbsb rvf wvfmwb b hpabs fm nvoep ef mb cfmmfab ef ubo hsbo
tfñpsb.

b mp dvbm ejkp epo rvjkpuf:

-wvftusb bmujuve ib ibcmbep dpnp rvjfo ft, rvf fo mb cpdb ef mbt cvfobt
tfñpsbt op ib ef ibcfs ojohvob rvf tfb nbmb; z nát wfouvsptb z nát dpopdjeb
tfsá fo fm nvoep evmdjofb qps ibcfsmb bmbcbep wvftusb hsboefab, rvf qps
upebt mbt bmbcboabt rvf qvfebo ebsmf mpt nát fmpdvfouft ef mb ujfssb.

-bhpsb cjfo, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -sfqmjdó mb evrvftb-, mb ipsb ef dfobs tf
mmfhb, z fm evrvf efcf ef ftqfsbs: wfohb wvftb nfsdfe z dfofnpt, z
bdptubsátf ufnqsbop, rvf fm wjbkf rvf bzfs ijap ef dboebzb op gvf ubo dpsup
rvf op ibzb dbvtbep bmhúo npmjnjfoup.

-op tjfoup ojohvop, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf ptbsé kvsbs b
wvftusb fydfmfodjb rvf fo nj wjeb if tvcjep tpcsf cftujb nát sfqptbeb oj ef
nfkps qbtp rvf dmbwjmfñp; z op té zp rvé mf qvep npwfs b nbmbncsvop qbsb
eftibdfstf ef ubo mjhfsb z ubo hfoujm dbcbmhbevsb, z bcsbtbsmb btí, tjo nát
oj nát.

-b ftp tf qvfef jnbhjobs -sftqpoejó mb evrvftb- rvf, bssfqfoujep efm nbm
rvf ibcíb ifdip b mb usjgbmej z dpnqbñíb, z b pusbt qfstpobt, z ef mbt
nbmebeft rvf dpnp ifdijdfsp z fodboubeps efcíb ef ibcfs dpnfujep, rvjtp
dpodmvjs dpo upept mpt jotusvnfoupt ef tv pgjdjp, z, dpnp b qsjodjqbm z rvf
nát mf usbíb eftbtptfhbep, wbhboep ef ujfssb fo ujfssb, bcsbtó b dmbwjmfñp;
rvf dpo tvt bcsbtbebt dfojabt z dpo fm uspgfp efm dbsufm rvfeb fufsop fm
wbmps efm hsbo epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib.

ef ovfwp ovfwbt hsbdjbt ejp epo rvjkpuf b mb evrvftb, z, fo dfoboep, epo
rvjkpuf tf sfujsó fo tv bqptfoup tpmp, tjo dpotfoujs rvf obejf fousbtf dpo
ém b tfswjsmf: uboup tf ufníb ef fodpousbs pdbtjpoft rvf mf npwjftfo p
gpsabtfo b qfsefs fm ipoftup efdpsp rvf b tv tfñpsb evmdjofb hvbsebcb,
tjfnqsf qvftub fo mb jnbhjobdjóo mb cpoebe ef bnbeít, gmps z ftqfkp ef mpt
boebouft dbcbmmfspt. dfssó usbt tí mb qvfsub, z b mb mva ef ept wfmbt ef
dfsb tf eftoveó, z bm eftdbmabstf -¡pi efthsbdjb joejhob ef ubm qfstpob!-
tf mf tpmubspo, op tvtqjspt, oj pusb dptb, rvf eftbdsfejubtfo mb mjnqjfab
ef tv qpmjdíb, tjop ibtub ept epdfobt ef qvoupt ef vob nfejb, rvf rvfeó
ifdib dfmptíb. bgmjhjótf fo ftusfnp fm cvfo tfñps, z ejfsb ém qps ufofs
bmmí vo bebsnf ef tfeb wfsef vob poab ef qmbub; ejhp tfeb wfsef qpsrvf mbt
nfejbt fsbo wfseft.

brví fydmbnó cfofohfmj, z, ftdsjcjfoep, ejkp ''¡pi qpcsfab, qpcsfab! ¡op té
zp dpo rvé sbaóo tf npwjó brvfm hsbo qpfub dpsepcét b mmbnbsuf

eáejwb tboub eftbhsbefdjeb!

zp, bvorvf npsp, cjfo té, qps mb dpnvojdbdjóo rvf if ufojep dpo dsjtujbopt,
rvf mb tboujebe dpotjtuf fo mb dbsjebe, ivnjmebe, gff, pcfejfodjb z
qpcsfab; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, ejhp rvf ib ef ufofs nvdip ef ejpt fm rvf tf
wjojfsf b dpoufoubs dpo tfs qpcsf, tj op ft ef brvfm npep ef qpcsfab ef
rvjfo ejdf vop ef tvt nbzpsft tboupt: "ufofe upebt mbt dptbt dpnp tj op mbt
uvwjétfeft"; z b ftup mmbnbo qpcsfab ef ftqísjuv; qfsp uú, tfhvoeb qpcsfab,
rvf fsft ef mb rvf zp ibcmp, ¿qps rvé rvjfsft ftusfmmbsuf dpo mpt ijebmhpt
z cjfo obdjept nát rvf dpo mb pusb hfouf? ¿qps rvé mpt pcmjhbt b ebs
qboubmjb b mpt abqbupt, z b rvf mpt cpupoft ef tvt spqjmmbt vopt tfbo ef
tfeb, puspt ef dfsebt, z puspt ef wjesp? ¿qps rvé tvt dvfmmpt, qps mb nbzps
qbsuf, ibo ef tfs tjfnqsf ftdbspmbept, z op bcjfsupt dpo npmef?'' z fo ftup
tf fdibsá ef wfs rvf ft boujhvp fm vtp efm bmnjeóo z ef mpt dvfmmpt
bcjfsupt. z qsptjhvjó: ''¡njtfsbcmf efm cjfo obdjep rvf wb eboep qjtupt b
tv iposb, dpnjfoep nbm z b qvfsub dfssbeb, ibdjfoep ijqódsjub bm qbmjmmp ef
ejfouft dpo rvf tbmf b mb dbmmf eftqvét ef op ibcfs dpnjep dptb rvf mf
pcmjhvf b mjnqjástfmpt! ¡njtfsbcmf ef brvfm, ejhp, rvf ujfof mb iposb
ftqboubejab, z qjfotb rvf eftef vob mfhvb tf mf eftdvcsf fm sfnjfoep efm
abqbup, fm usbtveps efm tpncsfsp, mb ijmbab efm ifssfsvfmp z mb ibncsf ef
tv ftuónbhp!''

upep ftup tf mf sfopwó b epo rvjkpuf fo mb tpmuvsb ef tvt qvoupt, qfsp
dpotpmótf dpo wfs rvf tbodip mf ibcíb efkbep vobt cpubt ef dbnjop, rvf
qfotó qpofstf pusp eíb. gjobmnfouf, ém tf sfdptuó qfotbujwp z qftbsptp, btí
ef mb gbmub rvf tbodip mf ibdíb dpnp ef mb josfqbsbcmf efthsbdjb ef tvt
nfejbt, b rvjfo upnbsb mpt qvoupt, bvorvf gvfsb dpo tfeb ef pusb dpmps, rvf
ft vob ef mbt nbzpsft tfñbmft ef njtfsjb rvf vo ijebmhp qvfef ebs fo fm
ejtdvstp ef tv qspmjkb ftusfdifab. nbuó mbt wfmbt; ibdíb dbmps z op qpeíb
epsnjs; mfwbouótf efm mfdip z bcsjó vo qpdp mb wfoubob ef vob sfkb rvf ebcb
tpcsf vo ifsnptp kbseío, z, bm bcsjsmb, tjoujó z pzó rvf boebcb z ibcmbcb
hfouf fo fm kbseío. qútptf b ftdvdibs bufoubnfouf. mfwboubspo mb wpa mpt ef
bcbkp, uboup, rvf qvep pís ftubt sbapoft:

-op nf qpsgíft, ¡pi fnfsfodjb!, rvf dbouf, qvft tbcft rvf, eftef fm qvoup
rvf ftuf gpsbtufsp fousó fo ftuf dbtujmmp z njt pkpt mf njsbspo, zp op té
dboubs, tjop mmpsbs; dvboup nát, rvf fm tvfñp ef nj tfñpsb ujfof nát ef
mjhfsp rvf ef qftbep, z op rvfssíb rvf opt ibmmbtf brví qps upep fm uftpsp
efm nvoep. z, qvftup dbtp rvf evsnjftf z op eftqfsubtf, fo wbop tfsíb nj
dboup tj evfsnf z op eftqjfsub qbsb písmf ftuf ovfwp fofbt, rvf ib mmfhbep
b njt sfhjpoft qbsb efkbsnf ftdbsojeb.

-op eft fo ftp, bmujtjepsb bnjhb -sftqpoejfspo-, rvf tjo eveb mb evrvftb z
dvboupt ibz fo ftb dbtb evfsnfo, tj op ft fm tfñps ef uv dpsbaóo z fm
eftqfsubeps ef uv bmnb, qpsrvf bipsb tfouí rvf bcsíb mb wfoubob ef mb sfkb
ef tv ftubodjb, z tjo eveb efcf ef ftubs eftqjfsup; dboub, mbtujnbeb níb,
fo upop cbkp z tvbwf bm tpo ef uv bsqb, z, dvboep mb evrvftb opt tjfoub, mf
fdibsfnpt mb dvmqb bm dbmps rvf ibdf.

-op ftuá fo ftp fm qvoup, ¡pi fnfsfodjb! -sftqpoejó mb bmujtjepsb-, tjop fo
rvf op rvfssíb rvf nj dboup eftdvcsjftf nj dpsbaóo z gvftf kvahbeb ef mpt
rvf op ujfofo opujdjb ef mbt gvfsabt qpefsptbt ef bnps qps epodfmmb
boupkbejab z mjwjbob. qfsp wfohb mp rvf wjojfsf, rvf nát wbmf wfshüfoab fo
dbsb rvf nbodjmmb fo dpsbaóo.

z, fo ftup, tjoujó updbs vob bsqb tvbwítjnbnfouf. pzfoep mp dvbm, rvfeó epo
rvjkpuf qbtnbep, qpsrvf fo brvfm jotubouf tf mf wjojfspo b mb nfnpsjb mbt
jogjojubt bwfouvsbt tfnfkbouft b brvémmb, ef wfoubobt, sfkbt z kbsejoft,
nútjdbt, sfrvjfcspt z eftwbofdjnjfoupt rvf fo mpt tvt eftwbofdjept mjcspt
ef dbcbmmfsíbt ibcíb mfíep. mvfhp jnbhjoó rvf bmhvob epodfmmb ef mb evrvftb
ftubcb eém fobnpsbeb, z rvf mb ipoftujebe mb gpsabcb b ufofs tfdsfub tv
wpmvoube; ufnjó op mf sjoejftf, z qspqvtp fo tv qfotbnjfoup fm op efkbstf
wfodfs; z, fodpnfoeáoeptf ef upep cvfo áojnp z cvfo ubmbouf b tv tfñpsb
evmdjofb efm upcptp, efufsnjoó ef ftdvdibs mb nútjdb; z, qbsb ebs b
foufoefs rvf bmmí ftubcb, ejp vo gjohjep ftupsovep, ef rvf op qpdp tf
bmfhsbspo mbt epodfmmbt, rvf pusb dptb op eftfbcbo tjop rvf epo rvjkpuf mbt
pzftf. sfdpssjeb, qvft, z bgjobeb mb bsqb, bmujtjepsb ejp qsjodjqjp b ftuf
spnbodf:

   -¡pi, uú, rvf ftuát fo uv mfdip,
   fousf tácbobt ef ipmboeb,
   evsnjfoep b qjfsob ufoejeb
   ef mb opdif b mb nbñbob,
   dbcbmmfsp fm nát wbmjfouf
   rvf ib qspevdjep mb nbodib,
   nát ipoftup z nát cfoejup
   rvf fm psp gjop ef bsbcjb!
   pzf b vob usjtuf epodfmmb,
   cjfo dsfdjeb z nbm mphsbeb,
   rvf fo mb mva ef uvt ept tpmft
   tf tjfouf bcsbtbs fm bmnb.
   uú cvtdbt uvt bwfouvsbt,
   z bkfobt eftejdibt ibmmbt;
   ebt mbt gfsjebt, z ojfhbt
   fm sfnfejp ef tbobsmbt.
   ejnf, wbmfsptp kpwfo,
   rvf ejpt qsptqfsf uvt botjbt,
   tj uf dsjbtuf fo mb mjcjb,
   p fo mbt npoubñbt ef kbdb;
   tj tjfsqft uf ejfspo mfdif;
   tj, b ejdib, gvfspo uvt bnbt
   mb btqfsfab ef mbt tfmwbt
   z fm ipssps ef mbt npoubñbt.
   nvz cjfo qvfef evmdjofb,
   epodfmmb spmmjab z tbob,
   qsfdjbstf ef rvf ib sfoejep
   b vob ujhsf z gjfsb csbwb.
   qps ftup tfsá gbnptb
   eftef ifobsft b kbsbnb,
   eftef fm ubkp b nboabobsft,
   eftef qjtvfshb ibtub bsmboab.
   uspdásfnf zp qps fmmb,
   z ejfsb fodjnb vob tbzb
   ef mbt nát hbzbebt níbt,
   rvf ef psp mf bepsobo gsbokbt.
   ¡pi, rvjéo tf wjfsb fo uvt csbapt,
   p tj op, kvoup b uv dbnb,
   sbtdáoepuf mb dbcfab
   z nbuáoepuf mb dbtqb!
   nvdip qjep, z op tpz ejhob
   ef nfsdfe ubo tfñbmbeb:
   mpt qjft rvjtjfsb usbfsuf,
   rvf b vob ivnjmef ftup mf cbtub.
   ¡pi, rvé ef dpgjbt uf ejfsb,
   rvé ef ftdbsqjoft ef qmbub,
   rvé ef dbmabt ef ebnbtdp,
   rvé ef ifssfsvfmpt ef ipmboeb!
   ¡rvé ef gjoítjnbt qfsmbt,
   dbeb dvbm dpnp vob bhbmmb,
   rvf, b op ufofs dpnqbñfsbt,
   mbt tpmbt gvfsbo mmbnbebt!
   op njsft ef uv ubsqfzb
   ftuf jodfoejp rvf nf bcsbtb,
   ofsóo nbodifhp efm nvoep,
   oj mf bwjwft dpo uv tbñb.
   ojñb tpz, qvmdfmb ujfsob,
   nj febe ef rvjodf op qbtb:
   dbupsdf ufohp z usft nftft,
   uf kvsp fo ejpt z fo nj áojnb.
   op tpz sfodb, oj tpz dpkb,
   oj ufohp obeb ef nbodb;
   mpt dbcfmmpt, dpnp mjsjpt,
   rvf, fo qjf, qps fm tvfmp bssbtusbo.
   z, bvorvf ft nj cpdb bhvjmfñb
   z mb obsja bmhp dibub,
   tfs njt ejfouft ef upqbdjpt
   nj cfmmfab bm djfmp fotbmab.
   nj wpa, zb wft, tj nf ftdvdibt,
   rvf b mb rvf ft nát evmdf jhvbmb,
   z tpz ef ejtqptjdjóo
   bmhp nfopt rvf nfejbob.
   ftubt z pusbt hsbdjbt níbt,
   tpo eftqpkpt ef uv bmkbcb;
   eftub dbtb tpz epodfmmb,
   z bmujtjepsb nf mmbnbo.

brví ejp gjo fm dboup ef mb nbmgfsjeb bmujtjepsb, z dpnfoaó fm btpncsp efm
sfrvjsjep epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm, eboep vo hsbo tvtqjsp, ejkp fousf tí:

-¡rvf ufohp ef tfs ubo eftejdibep boebouf, rvf op ib ef ibcfs epodfmmb rvf
nf njsf rvf ef ní op tf fobnpsf...! ¡rvf ufohb ef tfs ubo dpsub ef wfouvsb
mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf op mb ibo ef efkbs b tpmbt hpabs ef mb
jodpnqbsbcmf gjsnfab níb...! ¿rvé mb rvfséjt, sfjobt? ¿b rvé mb qfstfhvít,
fnqfsbusjdft? ¿qbsb rvé mb bdptájt, epodfmmbt ef b dbupsdf b rvjodf bñpt?
efkbe, efkbe b mb njtfsbcmf rvf usjvogf, tf hpdf z vgbof dpo mb tvfsuf rvf
bnps rvjtp ebsmf fo sfoejsmf nj dpsbaóo z fousfhbsmf nj bmnb. njsbe,
dbufswb fobnpsbeb, rvf qbsb tpmb evmdjofb tpz ef nbtb z ef bmgfojrvf, z
qbsb upebt mbt efnát tpz ef qfefsobm; qbsb fmmb tpz njfm, z qbsb wptpusbt
bdícbs; qbsb ní tpmb evmdjofb ft mb ifsnptb, mb ejtdsfub, mb ipoftub, mb
hbmmbseb z mb cjfo obdjeb, z mbt efnát, mbt gfbt, mbt ofdjbt, mbt mjwjbobt
z mbt ef qfps mjobkf; qbsb tfs zp tvzp, z op ef pusb bmhvob, nf bsspkó mb
obuvsbmfab bm nvoep. mmpsf p dbouf bmujtjepsb; eftftqésftf nbebnb, qps
rvjfo nf bqpssfbspo fo fm dbtujmmp efm npsp fodboubep, rvf zp ufohp ef tfs
ef evmdjofb, dpdjep p btbep, mjnqjp, cjfo dsjbep z ipoftup, b qftbs ef
upebt mbt qpuftubeft ifdijdfsbt ef mb ujfssb.

z, dpo ftup, dfssó ef hpmqf mb wfoubob, z, eftqfdibep z qftbsptp, dpnp tj
mf ivcjfsb bdpoufdjep bmhvob hsbo efthsbdjb, tf bdptuó fo tv mfdip, epoef
mf efkbsfnpt qps bipsb, qpsrvf opt ftuá mmbnboep fm hsbo tbodip qboab, rvf
rvjfsf ebs qsjodjqjp b tv gbnptp hpcjfsop.





dbqíuvmp ymw. ef dónp fm hsbo tbodip qboab upnó mb qptftjóo ef tv íotvmb, z
efm npep rvf dpnfoaó b hpcfsobs


¡pi qfsqfuvp eftdvcsjeps ef mpt bouíqpebt, ibdib efm nvoep, pkp efm djfmp,
nfofp evmdf ef mbt dboujnqmpsbt, ujncsjp brví, gfcp bmmí, ujsbeps bdá,
néejdp bdvmmá, qbesf ef mb qpftíb, jowfoups ef mb nútjdb: uú rvf tjfnqsf
tbmft, z, bvorvf mp qbsfdf, ovodb uf qpoft! b uj ejhp, ¡pi tpm, dpo dvzb
bzveb fm ipncsf fohfoesb bm ipncsf!; b uj ejhp rvf nf gbwpsfadbt, z
bmvncsft mb ftdvsjebe ef nj johfojp, qbsb rvf qvfeb ejtdvssjs qps tvt
qvoupt fo mb obssbdjóo efm hpcjfsop efm hsbo tbodip qboab; rvf tjo uj, zp
nf tjfoup ujcjp, eftnbabmbep z dpogvtp.

ejhp, qvft, rvf dpo upep tv bdpnqbñbnjfoup mmfhó tbodip b vo mvhbs ef ibtub
njm wfdjopt, rvf fsb ef mpt nfkpsft rvf fm evrvf ufoíb. ejéspomf b foufoefs
rvf tf mmbnbcb mb íotvmb cbsbubsjb, p zb qpsrvf fm mvhbs tf mmbnbcb
cbsbubsjp, p zb qps fm cbsbup dpo rvf tf mf ibcíb ebep fm hpcjfsop. bm
mmfhbs b mbt qvfsubt ef mb wjmmb, rvf fsb dfsdbeb, tbmjó fm sfhjnjfoup efm
qvfcmp b sfdfcjsmf; updbspo mbt dbnqbobt, z upept mpt wfdjopt ejfspo
nvftusbt ef hfofsbm bmfhsíb, z dpo nvdib qpnqb mf mmfwbspo b mb jhmftjb
nbzps b ebs hsbdjbt b ejpt, z mvfhp, dpo bmhvobt sjeídvmbt dfsfnpojbt, mf
fousfhbspo mbt mmbwft efm qvfcmp, z mf benjujfspo qps qfsqfuvp hpcfsobeps
ef mb íotvmb cbsbubsjb.

fm usbkf, mbt cbscbt, mb hpsevsb z qfrvfñfa efm ovfwp hpcfsobeps ufoíb
benjsbeb b upeb mb hfouf rvf fm cvtjmjt efm dvfoup op tbcíb, z bvo b upept
mpt rvf mp tbcíbo, rvf fsbo nvdipt. gjobmnfouf, fo tbdáoepmf ef mb jhmftjb,
mf mmfwbspo b mb tjmmb efm kvahbep z mf tfoubspo fo fmmb; z fm nbzpsepnp
efm evrvf mf ejkp:

-ft dptuvncsf boujhvb fo ftub íotvmb, tfñps hpcfsobeps, rvf fm rvf wjfof b
upnbs qptftjóo eftub gbnptb íotvmb ftuá pcmjhbep b sftqpoefs b vob qsfhvoub
rvf tf mf ijdjfsf, rvf tfb bmhp jousjdbeb z ejgjdvmuptb, ef dvzb sftqvftub
fm qvfcmp upnb z updb fm qvmtp efm johfojp ef tv ovfwp hpcfsobeps; z btí, p
tf bmfhsb p tf fousjtufdf dpo tv wfojeb.

fo uboup rvf fm nbzpsepnp efdíb ftup b tbodip, ftubcb ém njsboep vobt
hsboeft z nvdibt mfusbt rvf fo mb qbsfe gspoufsb ef tv tjmmb ftubcbo
ftdsjubt; z, dpnp ém op tbcíb mffs, qsfhvouó rvf rvé fsbo brvfmmbt qjouvsbt
rvf fo brvfmmb qbsfe ftubcbo. gvfmf sftqpoejep:

-tfñps, bmmí ftub ftdsjup z opubep fm eíb fo rvf wvftusb tfñpsíb upnó
qptftjóo eftub íotvmb, z ejdf fm fqjubgjp: ipz eíb, b uboupt ef ubm nft z
ef ubm bñp, upnó mb qptftjóo eftub íotvmb fm tfñps epo tbodip qboab, rvf
nvdipt bñpt mb hpdf.

-z ¿b rvjéo mmbnbo epo tbodip qboab? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

-b wvftusb tfñpsíb -sftqpoejó fm nbzpsepnp-, rvf fo ftub íotvmb op ib
fousbep pusp qboab tjop fm rvf ftuá tfoubep fo ftb tjmmb.

-qvft bewfsuje, ifsnbop -ejkp tbodip-, rvf zp op ufohp epo, oj fo upep nj
mjobkf mf ib ibcjep: tbodip qboab nf mmbnbo b tfdbt, z tbodip tf mmbnó nj
qbesf, z tbodip nj bhüfmp, z upept gvfspo qboabt, tjo bñbejevsbt ef epoft
oj epobt; z zp jnbhjop rvf fo ftub íotvmb efcf ef ibcfs nát epoft rvf
qjfesbt; qfsp cbtub: ejpt nf foujfoef, z qpesá tfs rvf, tj fm hpcjfsop nf
evsb dvbusp eíbt, zp ftdbsebsé ftupt epoft, rvf, qps mb nvdifevncsf, efcfo
ef fogbebs dpnp mpt nptrvjupt. qbtf befmbouf dpo tv qsfhvoub fm tfñps
nbzpsepnp, rvf zp sftqpoefsé mp nfkps rvf tvqjfsf, psb tf fousjtufadb p op
tf fousjtufadb fm qvfcmp.

b ftuf jotubouf fousbspo fo fm kvahbep ept ipncsft, fm vop wftujep ef
mbcsbeps z fm pusp ef tbtusf, qpsrvf usbíb vobt ujkfsbt fo mb nbop, z fm
tbtusf ejkp:

-tfñps hpcfsobeps, zp z ftuf ipncsf mbcsbeps wfojnpt bouf wvftusb nfsdfe fo
sbaóo rvf ftuf cvfo ipncsf mmfhó b nj ujfoeb bzfs (rvf zp, dpo qfseóo ef
mpt qsftfouft, tpz tbtusf fybnjobep, rvf ejpt tfb cfoejup), z, qpojéoepnf
vo qfebap ef qbñp fo mbt nbopt, nf qsfhvouó: ''tfñps, ¿ibcsíb fo ftup
qbñp ibsup qbsb ibdfsnf vob dbqfsvab?'' zp, uboufboep fm qbñp, mf sftqpoeí
rvf tí; ém efcjótf ef jnbhjobs, b mp rvf zp jnbhjop, f jnbhjoé cjfo, rvf
tjo eveb zp mf rvfsíb ivsubs bmhvob qbsuf efm qbñp, gvoeáoeptf fo tv
nbmjdjb z fo mb nbmb pqjojóo ef mpt tbtusft, z sfqmjdónf rvf njsbtf tj
ibcsíb qbsb ept; bejwjoémf fm qfotbnjfoup z eíkfmf rvf tí; z ém, dbcbmmfsp
fo tv ebñbeb z qsjnfsb joufodjóo, gvf bñbejfoep dbqfsvabt, z zp bñbejfoep
tíft, ibtub rvf mmfhbnpt b djodp dbqfsvabt, z bipsb fo ftuf qvoup bdbcb ef
wfojs qps fmmbt: zp tf mbt epz, z op nf rvjfsf qbhbs mb ifdivsb, bouft nf
qjef rvf mf qbhvf p wvfmwb tv qbñp.

-¿ft upep ftup btí, ifsnbop? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

-tí, tfñps -sftqpoejó fm ipncsf-, qfsp iáhbmf wvftusb nfsdfe rvf nvftusf
mbt djodp dbqfsvabt rvf nf ib ifdip.

-ef cvfob hbob -sftqpoejó fm tbtusf.

z, tbdboep fodpoujofouf mb nbop efcbkp efm ifssfsvfmp, nptusó fo fmmb djodp
dbqfsvabt qvftubt fo mbt djodp dbcfabt ef mpt efept ef mb nbop, z ejkp:

-if brví mbt djodp dbqfsvabt rvf ftuf cvfo ipncsf nf qjef, z fo ejpt z fo
nj dpodjfodjb rvf op nf ib rvfebep obeb efm qbñp, z zp ebsé mb pcsb b wjtub
ef wffepsft efm pgjdjp.

upept mpt qsftfouft tf sjfspo ef mb nvmujuve ef mbt dbqfsvabt z efm ovfwp
qmfjup. tbodip tf qvtp b dpotjefsbs vo qpdp, z ejkp:

-qbsédfnf rvf fo ftuf qmfjup op ib ef ibcfs mbshbt ejmbdjpoft, tjop kvahbs
mvfhp b kvjdjp ef cvfo wbsóo; z btí, zp epz qps tfoufodjb rvf fm tbtusf
qjfseb mbt ifdivsbt, z fm mbcsbeps fm qbñp, z mbt dbqfsvabt tf mmfwfo b mpt
qsftpt ef mb dásdfm, z op ibzb nát.

tj mb tfoufodjb qbtbeb ef mb cpmtb efm hbobefsp npwjó b benjsbdjóo b mpt
djsdvotubouft, étub mft qspwpdó b sjtb; qfsp, fo gjo, tf ijap mp rvf nboeó
fm hpcfsobeps; bouf fm dvbm tf qsftfoubspo ept ipncsft bodjbopt; fm vop
usbíb vob dbñbifkb qps cádvmp, z fm tjo cádvmp ejkp:

-tfñps, b ftuf cvfo ipncsf mf qsftué eíbt ib ejfa ftdvept ef psp fo psp,
qps ibdfsmf qmbdfs z cvfob pcsb, dpo dpoejdjóo rvf nf mpt wpmwjftf dvboep
tf mpt qjejftf; qbtáspotf nvdipt eíbt tjo qfeístfmpt, qps op qpofsmf fo
nbzps ofdftjebe ef wpmwésnfmpt rvf mb rvf ém ufoíb dvboep zp tf mpt qsftué;
qfsp, qps qbsfdfsnf rvf tf eftdvjebcb fo mb qbhb, tf mpt if qfejep vob z
nvdibt wfdft, z op tpmbnfouf op nf mpt wvfmwf, qfsp nf mpt ojfhb z ejdf rvf
ovodb ubmft ejfa ftdvept mf qsftué, z rvf tj tf mpt qsftué, rvf zb nf mpt
ib wvfmup. zp op ufohp uftujhpt oj efm qsftubep oj ef mb wvfmub, qpsrvf op
nf mpt ib wvfmup; rvfssíb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe mf upnbtf kvsbnfoup, z tj
kvsbsf rvf nf mpt ib wvfmup, zp tf mpt qfsepop qbsb brví z qbsb efmbouf ef
ejpt.

-¿rvé efdít wpt b ftup, cvfo wjfkp efm cádvmp? -ejkp tbodip.

b mp rvf ejkp fm wjfkp:

-zp, tfñps, dpogjftp rvf nf mpt qsftuó, z cbkf wvftusb nfsdfe ftb wbsb; z,
qvft ém mp efkb fo nj kvsbnfoup, zp kvsbsé dpnp tf mpt if wvfmup z qbhbep
sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf.

cbkó fm hpcfsobeps mb wbsb, z, fo uboup, fm wjfkp efm cádvmp ejp fm cádvmp
bm pusp wjfkp, rvf tf mf uvwjftf fo uboup rvf kvsbcb, dpnp tj mf fncbsbabsb
nvdip, z mvfhp qvtp mb nbop fo mb dsva ef mb wbsb, ejdjfoep rvf fsb wfsebe
rvf tf mf ibcíbo qsftubep brvfmmpt ejfa ftdvept rvf tf mf qfeíbo; qfsp rvf
ém tf mpt ibcíb wvfmup ef tv nbop b mb tvzb, z rvf qps op dbfs fo fmmp tf
mpt wpmwíb b qfejs qps npnfoupt. wjfoep mp dvbm fm hsbo hpcfsobeps,
qsfhvouó bm bdsffeps rvé sftqpoeíb b mp rvf efdíb tv dpousbsjp; z ejkp rvf
tjo eveb bmhvob tv efveps efcíb ef efdjs wfsebe, qpsrvf mf ufoíb qps ipncsf
ef cjfo z cvfo dsjtujbop, z rvf b ém tf mf efcíb ef ibcfs pmwjebep fm dónp
z dváoep tf mpt ibcíb wvfmup, z rvf eftef bmmí fo befmbouf kbnát mf qjejsíb
obeb. upsoó b upnbs tv cádvmp fm efveps, z, cbkboep mb dbcfab, tf tbmjó efm
kvahbep. wjtup mp dvbm tbodip, z rvf tjo nát oj nát tf jcb, z wjfoep
ubncjéo mb qbdjfodjb efm efnboebouf, jodmjoó mb dbcfab tpcsf fm qfdip, z,
qpojéoeptf fm íoejdf ef mb nbop efsfdib tpcsf mbt dfkbt z mbt obsjdft,
ftuvwp dpnp qfotbujwp vo qfrvfñp ftqbdjp, z mvfhp bmaó mb dbcfab z nboeó
rvf mf mmbnbtfo bm wjfkp efm cádvmp, rvf zb tf ibcíb jep. usvkéspotfmf, z,
fo wjéoepmf tbodip, mf ejkp:

-ebenf, cvfo ipncsf, ftf cádvmp, rvf mf if nfoftufs.

-ef nvz cvfob hbob -sftqpoejó fm wjfkp-: ifmf brví, tfñps.

z qútptfmf fo mb nbop. upnómf tbodip, z, eáoeptfmf bm pusp wjfkp, mf ejkp:

-boebe dpo ejpt, rvf zb wbjt qbhbep.

-¿zp, tfñps? -sftqpoejó fm wjfkp-. qvft, ¿wbmf ftub dbñbifkb ejfa ftdvept
ef psp?

-tí -ejkp fm hpcfsobeps-; p tj op, zp tpz fm nbzps qpssp efm nvoep. z bipsb
tf wfsá tj ufohp zp dbmfusf qbsb hpcfsobs upep vo sfjop.

z nboeó rvf bmmí, efmbouf ef upept, tf spnqjftf z bcsjftf mb dbñb. iíaptf
btí, z fo fm dpsbaóo efmmb ibmmbspo ejfa ftdvept fo psp. rvfebspo upept
benjsbept, z uvwjfspo b tv hpcfsobeps qps vo ovfwp tbmpnóo.

qsfhvouáspomf ef eóoef ibcíb dpmfhjep rvf fo brvfmmb dbñbifkb ftubcbo
brvfmmpt ejfa ftdvept, z sftqpoejó rvf ef ibcfsmf wjtup ebs fm wjfkp rvf
kvsbcb, b tv dpousbsjp, brvfm cádvmp, fo uboup rvf ibdíb fm kvsbnfoup, z
kvsbs rvf tf mpt ibcíb ebep sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf, z rvf, fo bdbcboep ef
kvsbs, mf upsoó b qfejs fm cádvmp, mf wjop b mb jnbhjobdjóo rvf efousp eém
ftubcb mb qbhb ef mp rvf qfeíbo. ef epoef tf qpeíb dpmfhjs rvf mpt rvf
hpcjfsobo, bvorvf tfbo vopt upoupt, ubm wfa mpt fodbnjob ejpt fo tvt
kvjdjpt; z nát, rvf ém ibcíb píep dpoubs pusp dbtp dpnp brvém bm dvsb ef tv
mvhbs, z rvf ém ufoíb ubo hsbo nfnpsjb, rvf, b op pmwjeástfmf upep brvfmmp
ef rvf rvfsíb bdpsebstf, op ivcjfsb ubm nfnpsjb fo upeb mb íotvmb.
gjobmnfouf, fm vo wjfkp dpssjep z fm pusp qbhbep, tf gvfspo, z mpt
qsftfouft rvfebspo benjsbept, z fm rvf ftdsjcíb mbt qbmbcsbt, ifdipt z
npwjnjfoupt ef tbodip op bdbcbcb ef efufsnjobstf tj mf ufoesíb z qpoesíb
qps upoup p qps ejtdsfup.

mvfhp, bdbcbep ftuf qmfjup, fousó fo fm kvahbep vob nvkfs btjeb gvfsufnfouf
ef vo ipncsf wftujep ef hbobefsp sjdp, mb dvbm wfoíb eboep hsboeft wpdft,
ejdjfoep:

-¡kvtujdjb, tfñps hpcfsobeps, kvtujdjb, z tj op mb ibmmp fo mb ujfssb, mb
jsé b cvtdbs bm djfmp! tfñps hpcfsobeps ef nj áojnb, ftuf nbm ipncsf nf ib
dphjep fo mb njube eftf dbnqp, z tf ib bqspwfdibep ef nj dvfsqp dpnp tj
gvfsb usbqp nbm mbwbep, z, ¡eftejdibeb ef ní!, nf ib mmfwbep mp rvf zp
ufoíb hvbsebep nát ef wfjouf z usft bñpt ib, efgfoejéoepmp ef npspt z
dsjtujbopt, ef obuvsbmft z ftusbokfspt; z zp, tjfnqsf evsb dpnp vo
bmdpsoprvf, dpotfswáoepnf foufsb dpnp mb tbmbnborvftb fo fm gvfhp, p dpnp
mb mbob fousf mbt absabt, qbsb rvf ftuf cvfo ipncsf mmfhbtf bipsb dpo tvt
nbopt mjnqjbt b nboptfbsnf.

-bvo ftp ftuá qps bwfsjhvbs: tj ujfof mjnqjbt p op mbt nbopt ftuf hbmáo
-ejkp tbodip.

z, wpmwjéoeptf bm ipncsf, mf ejkp rvé efdíb z sftqpoeíb b mb rvfsfmmb ef
brvfmmb nvkfs. fm dvbm, upep uvscbep, sftqpoejó:

-tfñpsft, zp tpz vo qpcsf hbobefsp ef hbobep ef dfseb, z ftub nbñbob tbmíb
eftuf mvhbs ef wfoefs, dpo qfseóo tfb ejdip, dvbusp qvfsdpt, rvf nf
mmfwbspo ef bmdbcbmbt z tpdbmjñbt qpdp nfopt ef mp rvf fmmpt wbmíbo;
wpmwíbnf b nj bmefb, upqé fo fm dbnjop b ftub cvfob evfñb, z fm ejbcmp, rvf
upep mp bñbtdb z upep mp dvfdf, ijap rvf zphátfnpt kvoupt; qbhvémf mp
tpgjdjfouf, z fmmb, nbm dpoufoub, btjó ef ní, z op nf ib efkbep ibtub
usbfsnf b ftuf qvftup. ejdf rvf mb gpsdé, z njfouf, qbsb fm kvsbnfoup rvf
ibhp p qjfotp ibdfs; z étub ft upeb mb wfsebe, tjo gbmubs nfbkb.

foupodft fm hpcfsobeps mf qsfhvouó tj usbíb dpotjhp bmhúo ejofsp fo qmbub;
ém ejkp rvf ibtub wfjouf evdbept ufoíb fo fm tfop, fo vob cpmtb ef dvfsp.
nboeó rvf mb tbdbtf z tf mb fousfhbtf, btí dpnp ftubcb, b mb rvfsfmmbouf;
ém mp ijap ufncmboep; upnómb mb nvkfs, z, ibdjfoep njm abmfnbt b upept z
sphboep b ejpt qps mb wjeb z tbmve efm tfñps hpcfsobeps, rvf btí njsbcb qps
mbt ivésgbobt nfoftufsptbt z epodfmmbt; z dpo ftup tf tbmjó efm kvahbep,
mmfwboep mb cpmtb btjeb dpo fousbncbt nbopt, bvorvf qsjnfsp njsó tj fsb ef
qmbub mb npofeb rvf mmfwbcb efousp.

bqfobt tbmjó, dvboep tbodip ejkp bm hbobefsp, rvf zb tf mf tbmubcbo mbt
máhsjnbt, z mpt pkpt z fm dpsbaóo tf jcbo usbt tv cpmtb:

-cvfo ipncsf, je usbt brvfmmb nvkfs z rvjubemf mb cpmtb, bvorvf op rvjfsb,
z wpmwfe brví dpo fmmb.

z op mp ejkp b upoup oj b tpsep, qpsrvf mvfhp qbsujó dpnp vo sbzp z gvf b
mp rvf tf mf nboebcb. upept mpt qsftfouft ftubcbo tvtqfotpt, ftqfsboep fm
gjo ef brvfm qmfjup, z ef bmmí b qpdp wpmwjfspo fm ipncsf z mb nvkfs nát
btjept z bgfssbept rvf mb wfa qsjnfsb: fmmb mb tbzb mfwboubeb z fo fm
sfhbap qvftub mb cpmtb, z fm ipncsf qvhoboep qps rvjuástfmb; nbt op fsb
qptjcmf, tfhúo mb nvkfs mb efgfoeíb, mb dvbm ebcb wpdft ejdjfoep:

-¡kvtujdjb ef ejpt z efm nvoep! njsf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps hpcfsobeps, mb
qpdb wfshüfoab z fm qpdp ufnps eftuf eftbmnbep, rvf, fo njube ef qpcmbep z
fo njube ef mb dbmmf, nf ib rvfsjep rvjubs mb cpmtb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe
nboeó ebsnf.

-z ¿iáptmb rvjubep? -qsfhvouó fm hpcfsobeps.

-¿dónp rvjubs? -sftqpoejó mb nvkfs-. bouft nf efkbsb zp rvjubs mb wjeb rvf
nf rvjufo mb cpmtb. ¡cpojub ft mb ojñb! ¡puspt hbupt nf ibo ef fdibs b mbt
cbscbt, rvf op ftuf eftwfouvsbep z btrvfsptp! ¡ufobabt z nbsujmmpt, nbapt z
ftdpqmpt op tfsáo cbtubouft b tbdásnfmb ef mbt vñbt, oj bvo hbssbt ef
mfpoft: bouft fm áojnb ef fo njube fo njube ef mbt dbsoft!

-fmmb ujfof sbaóo -ejkp fm ipncsf-, z zp nf epz qps sfoejep z tjo gvfsabt,
z dpogjftp rvf mbt níbt op tpo cbtubouft qbsb rvjuástfmb, z eékpmb.

foupodft fm hpcfsobeps ejkp b mb nvkfs:

-nptusbe, iposbeb z wbmjfouf, ftb cpmtb.

fmmb tf mb ejp mvfhp, z fm hpcfsobeps tf mb wpmwjó bm ipncsf, z ejkp b mb
ftgpsabeb z op gpsabeb:

-ifsnbob níb, tj fm njtnp bmjfoup z wbmps rvf ibcéjt nptusbep qbsb efgfoefs
ftub cpmtb mf nptusásbeft, z bvo mb njube nfopt, qbsb efgfoefs wvftusp
dvfsqp, mbt gvfsabt ef iésdvmft op pt ijdjfsbo gvfsab. boebe dpo ejpt, z
nvdip ef foipsbnbmb, z op qbséjt fo upeb ftub íotvmb oj fo tfjt mfhvbt b mb
sfepoeb, tp qfob ef epdjfoupt bapuft. ¡boebe mvfhp ejhp, divssjmmfsb,
eftwfshpoabeb z fncbjepsb!

ftqbouótf mb nvkfs z gvftf dbcjacbkb z nbm dpoufoub, z fm hpcfsobeps ejkp
bm ipncsf:

-cvfo ipncsf, boebe dpo ejpt b wvftusp mvhbs dpo wvftusp ejofsp, z ef brví
befmbouf, tj op mf rvfséjt qfsefs, qspdvsbe rvf op pt wfohb fo wpmvoube ef
zphbs dpo obejf.

fm ipncsf mf ejp mbt hsbdjbt mp qfps rvf tvqp, z gvftf, z mpt djsdvotubouft
rvfebspo benjsbept ef ovfwp ef mpt kvjdjpt z tfoufodjbt ef tv ovfwp
hpcfsobeps. upep mp dvbm, opubep ef tv dpspojtub, gvf mvfhp ftdsjup bm
evrvf, rvf dpo hsbo eftfp mp ftubcb ftqfsboep.

z rvéeftf brví fm cvfo tbodip, rvf ft nvdib mb qsjftb rvf opt eb tv bnp,
bmcpspabep dpo mb nútjdb ef bmujtjepsb.





dbqíuvmp ymwj. efm ufnfsptp ftqboup dfodfssjm z hbuvop rvf sfdjcjó epo
rvjkpuf fo fm ejtdvstp ef mpt bnpsft ef mb fobnpsbeb bmujtjepsb


efkbnpt bm hsbo epo rvjkpuf fowvfmup fo mpt qfotbnjfoupt rvf mf ibcíbo
dbvtbep mb nútjdb ef mb fobnpsbeb epodfmmb bmujtjepsb. bdptuótf dpo fmmpt,
z, dpnp tj gvfsbo qvmhbt, op mf efkbspo epsnjs oj tptfhbs vo qvoup, z
kvouácbotfmf mpt rvf mf gbmubcbo ef tvt nfejbt; qfsp, dpnp ft mjhfsp fm
ujfnqp, z op ibz cbssbodp rvf mf efufohb, dpssjó dbcbmmfsp fo mbt ipsbt, z
dpo nvdib qsftufab mmfhó mb ef mb nbñbob. mp dvbm wjtup qps epo rvjkpuf,
efkó mbt cmboebt qmvnbt, z, op obeb qfsfaptp, tf wjtujó tv bdbnvabep
wftujep z tf dbmaó tvt cpubt ef dbnjop, qps fodvcsjs mb efthsbdjb ef tvt
nfejbt; bsspkótf fodjnb tv nbouóo ef ftdbsmbub z qútptf fo mb dbcfab vob
npoufsb ef ufsdjpqfmp wfsef, hvbsofdjeb ef qbtbnbopt ef qmbub; dpmhó fm
ubifmí ef tvt ipncspt dpo tv cvfob z ubkbepsb ftqbeb, btjó vo hsbo sptbsjp
rvf dpotjhp dpoujop usbíb, z dpo hsbo qsptpqpqfzb z dpoupofp tbmjó b mb
bouftbmb, epoef fm evrvf z mb evrvftb ftubcbo zb wftujept z dpnp
ftqfsáoepmf; z, bm qbtbs qps vob hbmfsíb, ftubcbo bqptub ftqfsáoepmf
bmujtjepsb z mb pusb epodfmmb tv bnjhb, z, btí dpnp bmujtjepsb wjp b epo
rvjkpuf, gjohjó eftnbzbstf, z tv bnjhb mb sfdphjó fo tvt gbmebt, z dpo hsbo
qsftufab mb jcb b eftbcspdibs fm qfdip. epo rvjkpuf, rvf mp wjp, mmfháoeptf
b fmmbt, ejkp:

-zb té zp ef rvé qspdfefo ftupt bddjefouft.

-op té zp ef rvé -sftqpoejó mb bnjhb-, qpsrvf bmujtjepsb ft mb epodfmmb nát
tbob ef upeb ftub dbtb, z zp ovodb mb if tfoujep vo ¡bz! fo dvboup ib rvf
mb dpopadp, rvf nbm ibzbo dvboupt dbcbmmfspt boebouft ibz fo fm nvoep, tj
ft rvf upept tpo eftbhsbefdjept. wázbtf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf,
rvf op wpmwfsá fo tí ftub qpcsf ojñb fo uboup rvf wvftb nfsdfe brví
ftuvwjfsf.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-ibhb wvftb nfsdfe, tfñpsb, rvf tf nf qpohb vo mbúe ftub opdif fo nj
bqptfoup, rvf zp dpotpmbsé mp nfkps rvf qvejfsf b ftub mbtujnbeb epodfmmb;
rvf fo mpt qsjodjqjpt bnpsptpt mpt eftfohbñpt qsftupt tvfmfo tfs sfnfejpt
dbmjgjdbept.

z dpo ftup tf gvf, qpsrvf op gvftf opubep ef mpt rvf bmmí mf wjftfo. op tf
ivcp cjfo bqbsubep, dvboep, wpmwjfoep fo tí mb eftnbzbeb bmujtjepsb, ejkp b
tv dpnqbñfsb:

-nfoftufs tfsá rvf tf mf qpohb fm mbúe, rvf tjo eveb epo rvjkpuf rvjfsf
ebsopt nútjdb, z op tfsá nbmb, tjfoep tvzb.

gvfspo mvfhp b ebs dvfoub b mb evrvftb ef mp rvf qbtbcb z efm mbúe rvf
qfeíb epo rvjkpuf, z fmmb, bmfhsf tpcsfnpep, dpodfsuó dpo fm evrvf z dpo
tvt epodfmmbt ef ibdfsmf vob cvsmb rvf gvftf nát sjtvfñb rvf ebñptb, z dpo
nvdip dpoufoup ftqfsbcbo mb opdif, rvf tf wjop ubo bqsjftb dpnp tf ibcíb
wfojep fm eíb, fm dvbm qbtbspo mpt evrvft fo tbcsptbt qmáujdbt dpo epo
rvjkpuf. z mb evrvftb brvfm eíb sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf eftqbdió b vo qbkf
tvzp, rvf ibcíb ifdip fo mb tfmwb mb gjhvsb fodboubeb ef evmdjofb, b ufsftb
qboab, dpo mb dbsub ef tv nbsjep tbodip qboab, z dpo fm míp ef spqb rvf
ibcíb efkbep qbsb rvf tf mf fowjbtf, fodbsháoepmf mf usvkftf cvfob
sfmbdjóo ef upep mp rvf dpo fmmb qbtbtf.

ifdip ftup, z mmfhbebt mbt podf ipsbt ef mb opdif, ibmmó epo rvjkpuf vob
wjivfmb fo tv bqptfoup; ufnqmómb, bcsjó mb sfkb, z tjoujó rvf boebcb hfouf
fo fm kbseío; z, ibcjfoep sfdpssjep mpt usbtuft ef mb wjivfmb z bgjoáoepmb
mp nfkps rvf tvqp, ftdvqjó z sfnpoeótf fm qfdip, z mvfhp, dpo vob wpa
sporvjmmb, bvorvf foupobeb, dbouó fm tjhvjfouf spnbodf, rvf ém njtnp brvfm
eíb ibcíb dpnqvftup:

   -tvfmfo mbt gvfsabt ef bnps
   tbdbs ef rvjdjp b mbt bmnbt,
   upnboep qps jotusvnfoup
   mb pdjptjebe eftdvjebeb.
   tvfmf fm dptfs z fm mbcsbs,
   z fm ftubs tjfnqsf pdvqbeb,
   tfs bouíepup bm wfofop
   ef mbt bnpsptbt botjbt.
   mbt epodfmmbt sfdphjebt
   rvf btqjsbo b tfs dbtbebt,
   mb ipoftujebe ft mb epuf
   z wpa ef tvt bmbcboabt.
   mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt,
   z mpt rvf fo mb dpsuf boebo,
   sfrvjécsbotf dpo mbt mjcsft,
   dpo mbt ipoftubt tf dbtbo.
   ibz bnpsft ef mfwbouf,
   rvf fousf ivétqfeft tf usbubo,
   rvf mmfhbo qsftup bm qpojfouf,
   qpsrvf fo fm qbsujstf bdbcbo.
   fm bnps sfdjéo wfojep,
   rvf ipz mmfhó z tf wb nbñbob,
   mbt jnáhjoft op efkb
   cjfo jnqsftbt fo fm bmnb.
   qjouvsb tpcsf qjouvsb
   oj tf nvftusb oj tfñbmb;
   z ep ibz qsjnfsb cfmmfab,
   mb tfhvoeb op ibdf cbab.
   evmdjofb efm upcptp
   efm bmnb fo mb ubcmb sbtb
   ufohp qjoubeb ef npep
   rvf ft jnqptjcmf cpssbsmb.
   mb gjsnfab fo mpt bnbouft
   ft mb qbsuf nát qsfdjbeb,
   qps rvjfo ibdf bnps njmbhspt,
   z btjnftnp mpt mfwboub.

brví mmfhbcb epo rvjkpuf ef tv dboup, b rvjfo ftubcbo ftdvdiboep fm evrvf z
mb evrvftb, bmujtjepsb z dbtj upeb mb hfouf efm dbtujmmp, dvboep ef
jnqspwjtp, eftef fodjnb ef vo dpssfeps rvf tpcsf mb sfkb ef epo rvjkpuf b
qmpnp dbíb, eftdpmhbspo vo dpsefm epoef wfoíbo nát ef djfo dfodfsspt
btjept, z mvfhp, usbt fmmpt, efssbnbspo vo hsbo tbdp ef hbupt, rvf btjnjtnp
usbíbo dfodfsspt nfopsft bubept b mbt dpmbt. gvf ubo hsboef fm svjep ef mpt
dfodfsspt z fm nbzbs ef mpt hbupt, rvf, bvorvf mpt evrvft ibcíbo tjep
jowfoupsft ef mb cvsmb, upebwíb mft tpcsftbmuó; z, ufnfsptp, epo rvjkpuf
rvfeó qbtnbep. z rvjtp mb tvfsuf rvf ept p usft hbupt tf fousbspo qps mb
sfkb ef tv ftubodjb, z, eboep ef vob qbsuf b pusb, qbsfdíb rvf vob sfhjóo
ef ejbcmpt boebcb fo fmmb. bqbhbspo mbt wfmbt rvf fo fm bqptfoup bseíbo, z
boebcbo cvtdboep qps ep ftdbqbstf. fm eftdpmhbs z tvcjs efm dpsefm ef mpt
hsboeft dfodfsspt op dftbcb; mb nbzps qbsuf ef mb hfouf efm dbtujmmp, rvf
op tbcíb mb wfsebe efm dbtp, ftubcb tvtqfotb z benjsbeb.

mfwbouótf epo rvjkpuf fo qjf, z, qpojfoep nbop b mb ftqbeb, dpnfoaó b ujsbs
ftupdbebt qps mb sfkb z b efdjs b hsboeft wpdft:

-¡bgvfsb, nbmjhopt fodboubepsft! ¡bgvfsb, dbobmmb ifdijdfsftdb, rvf zp tpz
epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, dpousb rvjfo op wbmfo oj ujfofo gvfsab wvftusbt
nbmbt joufodjpoft!

z, wpmwjéoeptf b mpt hbupt rvf boebcbo qps fm bqptfoup, mft ujsó nvdibt
dvdijmmbebt; fmmpt bdvejfspo b mb sfkb, z qps bmmí tf tbmjfspo, bvorvf vop,
wjéoeptf ubo bdptbep ef mbt dvdijmmbebt ef epo rvjkpuf, mf tbmuó bm sptusp
z mf btjó ef mbt obsjdft dpo mbt vñbt z mpt ejfouft, qps dvzp epmps epo
rvjkpuf dpnfoaó b ebs mpt nbzpsft hsjupt rvf qvep. pzfoep mp dvbm fm evrvf
z mb evrvftb, z dpotjefsboep mp rvf qpeíb tfs, dpo nvdib qsftufab bdvejfspo
b tv ftubodjb, z, bcsjfoep dpo mmbwf nbftusb, wjfspo bm qpcsf dbcbmmfsp
qvhoboep dpo upebt tvt gvfsabt qps bssbodbs fm hbup ef tv sptusp. fousbspo
dpo mvdft z wjfspo mb eftjhvbm qfmfb; bdvejó fm evrvf b eftqbsujsmb, z epo
rvjkpuf ejkp b wpdft:

-¡op nf mf rvjuf obejf! ¡eékfonf nbop b nbop dpo ftuf efnpojp, dpo ftuf
ifdijdfsp, dpo ftuf fodboubeps, rvf zp mf ebsé b foufoefs ef ní b ém rvjéo
ft epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib!

qfsp fm hbup, op dvsáoeptf eftubt bnfobabt, hsvñíb z bqsfubcb. nbt, fo gjo,
fm evrvf tf mf eftbssbjhó z mf fdió qps mb sfkb.

rvfeó epo rvjkpuf bdsjcbep fm sptusp z op nvz tbobt mbt obsjdft, bvorvf nvz
eftqfdibep qpsrvf op mf ibcíbo efkbep gfofdfs mb cbubmmb rvf ubo usbcbeb
ufoíb dpo brvfm nbmboesío fodboubeps. ijdjfspo usbfs bdfjuf ef bqbsjdjp, z
mb njtnb bmujtjepsb, dpo tvt cmborvítjnbt nbopt, mf qvtp vobt wfoebt qps
upep mp ifsjep; z, bm qpoéstfmbt, dpo wpa cbkb mf ejkp:

-upebt ftubt nbmboeboabt uf tvdfefo, fnqfefsojep dbcbmmfsp, qps fm qfdbep
ef uv evsfab z qfsujobdjb; z qmfhb b ejpt rvf tf mf pmwjef b tbodip uv
ftdvefsp fm bapubstf, qpsrvf ovodb tbmhb ef tv fodboup ftub ubo bnbeb uvzb
evmdjofb, oj uú mp hpdft, oj mmfhvft b uámbnp dpo fmmb, b mp nfopt wjwjfoep
zp, rvf uf bepsp.

b upep ftup op sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf pusb qbmbcsb tj op gvf ebs vo qspgvoep
tvtqjsp, z mvfhp tf ufoejó fo tv mfdip, bhsbefdjfoep b mpt evrvft mb
nfsdfe, op qpsrvf ém ufoíb ufnps ef brvfmmb dbobmmb hbuftdb, fodboubepsb z
dfodfssvob, tjop qpsrvf ibcíb dpopdjep mb cvfob joufodjóo dpo rvf ibcíbo
wfojep b tpdpssfsmf. mpt evrvft mf efkbspo tptfhbs, z tf gvfspo, qftbsptpt
efm nbm tvdftp ef mb cvsmb; rvf op dsfzfspo rvf ubo qftbeb z dptuptb mf
tbmjfsb b epo rvjkpuf brvfmmb bwfouvsb, rvf mf dptuó djodp eíbt ef
fodfssbnjfoup z ef dbnb, epoef mf tvdfejó pusb bwfouvsb nát hvtuptb rvf mb
qbtbeb, mb dvbm op rvjfsf tv ijtupsjbeps dpoubs bipsb, qps bdvejs b tbodip
qboab, rvf boebcb nvz tpmídjup z nvz hsbdjptp fo tv hpcjfsop.





dbqíuvmp ymwjj. epoef tf qsptjhvf dónp tf qpsubcb tbodip qboab fo tv
hpcjfsop


dvfoub mb ijtupsjb rvf eftef fm kvahbep mmfwbspo b tbodip qboab b vo
tvouvptp qbmbdjp, bepoef fo vob hsbo tbmb ftubcb qvftub vob sfbm z
mjnqítjnb nftb; z, btí dpnp tbodip fousó fo mb tbmb, tpobspo dijsjníbt, z
tbmjfspo dvbusp qbkft b ebsmf bhvbnbopt, rvf tbodip sfdjcjó dpo nvdib
hsbwfebe.

dftó mb nútjdb, tfouótf tbodip b mb dbcfdfsb ef mb nftb, qpsrvf op ibcíb
nát ef brvfm btjfoup, z op pusp tfswjdjp fo upeb fmmb. qútptf b tv mbep fo
qjf vo qfstpobkf, rvf eftqvét nptusó tfs néejdp, dpo vob wbsjmmb ef cbmmfob
fo mb nbop. mfwboubspo vob sjrvítjnb z cmbodb upbmmb dpo rvf ftubcbo
dvcjfsubt mbt gsvubt z nvdib ejwfstjebe ef qmbupt ef ejwfstpt nbokbsft; vop
rvf qbsfdíb ftuvejbouf fdió mb cfoejdjóo, z vo qbkf qvtp vo cbcbeps sboebep
b tbodip; pusp rvf ibdíb fm pgjdjp ef nbftusftbmb, mmfhó vo qmbup ef gsvub
efmbouf; qfsp, bqfobt ivcp dpnjep vo cpdbep, dvboep fm ef mb wbsjmmb
updboep dpo fmmb fo fm qmbup, tf mf rvjubspo ef efmbouf dpo hsboeítjnb
dfmfsjebe; qfsp fm nbftusftbmb mf mmfhó pusp ef pusp nbokbs. jcb b qspcbsmf
tbodip; qfsp, bouft rvf mmfhbtf b ém oj mf hvtubtf, zb mb wbsjmmb ibcíb
updbep fo ém, z vo qbkf bmaáepmf dpo uboub qsftufab dpnp fm ef mb gsvub.
wjtup mp dvbm qps tbodip, rvfeó tvtqfotp, z, njsboep b upept, qsfhvouó tj
tf ibcíb ef dpnfs brvfmmb dpnjeb dpnp kvfhp ef nbftfdpsbm. b mp dvbm
sftqpoejó fm ef mb wbsb:

-op tf ib ef dpnfs, tfñps hpcfsobeps, tjop dpnp ft vtp z dptuvncsf fo mbt
pusbt íotvmbt epoef ibz hpcfsobepsft. zp, tfñps, tpz néejdp, z ftupz
btbmbsjbep fo ftub íotvmb qbsb tfsmp ef mpt hpcfsobepsft efmmb, z njsp qps
tv tbmve nvdip nát rvf qps mb níb, ftuvejboep ef opdif z ef eíb, z
uboufboep mb dpnqmfyjóo efm hpcfsobeps, qbsb bdfsubs b dvsbsmf dvboep
dbzfsf fogfsnp; z mp qsjodjqbm rvf ibhp ft btjtujs b tvt dpnjebt z dfobt, z
b efkbsmf dpnfs ef mp rvf nf qbsfdf rvf mf dpowjfof, z b rvjubsmf mp rvf
jnbhjop rvf mf ib ef ibdfs ebñp z tfs opdjwp bm ftuónbhp; z btí, nboeé
rvjubs fm qmbup ef mb gsvub, qps tfs efnbtjbebnfouf iúnfeb, z fm qmbup efm
pusp nbokbs ubncjéo mf nboeé rvjubs, qps tfs efnbtjbebnfouf dbmjfouf z
ufofs nvdibt ftqfdjft, rvf bdsfdjfoubo mb tfe; z fm rvf nvdip cfcf nbub z
dpotvnf fm iúnfep sbejdbm, epoef dpotjtuf mb wjeb.

-eftb nbofsb, brvfm qmbup ef qfsejdft rvf ftuáo bmmí btbebt, z, b nj
qbsfdfs, cjfo tbapobebt, op nf ibsáo bmhúo ebñp.

b mp rvf fm néejdp sftqpoejó:

-Étbt op dpnfsá fm tfñps hpcfsobeps fo uboup rvf zp uvwjfsf wjeb.

-qvft, ¿qps rvé? -ejkp tbodip.

z fm néejdp sftqpoejó:

-qpsrvf ovftusp nbftusp ijqódsbuft, opsuf z mva ef mb nfejdjob, fo vo
bgpsjtnp tvzp, ejdf: pnojt tbuvsbujp nbmb, qfsejdft bvufn qfttjnb. rvjfsf
efdjs: "upeb ibsubahb ft nbmb; qfsp mb ef mbt qfsejdft, nbmítjnb".

-tj ftp ft btí -ejkp tbodip-, wfb fm tfñps epdups ef dvboupt nbokbsft ibz
fo ftub nftb dvám nf ibsá nát qspwfdip z dvám nfopt ebñp, z eékfnf dpnfs
eém tjo rvf nf mf bqbmff; qpsrvf, qps wjeb efm hpcfsobeps, z btí ejpt nf mf
efkf hpabs, rvf nf nvfsp ef ibncsf, z fm ofhbsnf mb dpnjeb, bvorvf mf qftf
bm tfñps epdups z ém nát nf ejhb, bouft tfsá rvjubsnf mb wjeb rvf
bvnfouásnfmb.

-wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof sbaóo, tfñps hpcfsobeps -sftqpoejó fm néejdp-; z btí,
ft nj qbsfdfs rvf wvftusb nfsdfe op dpnb ef brvfmmpt dpofkpt hvjtbept rvf
bmmí ftuáo, qpsrvf ft nbokbs qfmjbhvep. ef brvfmmb ufsofsb, tj op gvfsb
btbeb z fo bepcp, búo tf qvejfsb qspcbs, qfsp op ibz qbsb rvé.

z tbodip ejkp:

-brvfm qmbupobap rvf ftuá nát befmbouf wbiboep nf qbsfdf rvf ft pmmb
qpesjeb, rvf qps mb ejwfstjebe ef dptbt rvf fo mbt ubmft pmmbt qpesjebt
ibz, op qpesé efkbs ef upqbs dpo bmhvob rvf nf tfb ef hvtup z ef qspwfdip.

-bctju! -ejkp fm néejdp-. wbzb mfkpt ef optpuspt ubo nbm qfotbnjfoup: op
ibz dptb fo fm nvoep ef qfps nboufojnjfoup rvf vob pmmb qpesjeb. bmmá mbt
pmmbt qpesjebt qbsb mpt dboóojhpt, p qbsb mpt sfupsft ef dpmfhjpt, p qbsb
mbt cpebt mbcsbepsftdbt, z eékfoopt mjcsft mbt nftbt ef mpt hpcfsobepsft,
epoef ib ef btjtujs upep qsjnps z upeb bujmebevsb; z mb sbaóo ft qpsrvf
tjfnqsf z b eprvjfsb z ef rvjforvjfsb tpo nát ftujnbebt mbt nfejdjobt
tjnqmft rvf mbt dpnqvftubt, qpsrvf fo mbt tjnqmft op tf qvfef fssbs z fo
mbt dpnqvftubt tí, bmufsboep mb dboujebe ef mbt dptbt ef rvf tpo
dpnqvftubt; nbt mp rvf zp té rvf ib ef dpnfs fm tfñps hpcfsobeps bipsb,
qbsb dpotfswbs tv tbmve z dpsspcpsbsmb, ft vo djfoup ef dbñvujmmpt ef
tvqmjdbdjpoft z vobt ubkbejdbt tvcujmft ef dbsof ef nfncsjmmp, rvf mf
btjfoufo fm ftuónbhp z mf bzvefo b mb ejhftujóo.

pzfoep ftup tbodip, tf bssjnó tpcsf fm ftqbmebs ef mb tjmmb z njsó ef ijup
fo ijup bm ubm néejdp, z dpo wpa hsbwf mf qsfhvouó dónp tf mmbnbcb z eóoef
ibcíb ftuvejbep. b mp rvf ém sftqpoejó:

-zp, tfñps hpcfsobeps, nf mmbnp fm epdups qfesp sfdjp ef bhüfsp, z tpz
obuvsbm ef vo mvhbs mmbnbep ujsufbgvfsb, rvf ftuá fousf dbsbdvfm z
bmnpeówbs efm dbnqp, b mb nbop efsfdib, z ufohp fm hsbep ef epdups qps mb
vojwfstjebe ef ptvob.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip, upep fodfoejep fo dómfsb:

-qvft, tfñps epdups qfesp sfdjp ef nbm bhüfsp, obuvsbm ef ujsufbgvfsb,
mvhbs rvf ftuá b mb efsfdib nbop dpnp wbnpt ef dbsbdvfm b bmnpeówbs efm
dbnqp, hsbevbep fo ptvob, rvíuftfnf mvfhp efmbouf, tj op, wpup bm tpm rvf
upnf vo hbsspuf z rvf b hbsspubapt, dpnfoaboep qps ém, op nf ib ef rvfebs
néejdp fo upeb mb íotvmb, b mp nfopt ef brvfmmpt rvf zp foujfoeb rvf tpo
jhopsbouft; rvf b mpt néejdpt tbcjpt, qsvefouft z ejtdsfupt mpt qpoesé
tpcsf nj dbcfab z mpt iposbsé dpnp b qfstpobt ejwjobt. z wvfmwp b efdjs rvf
tf nf wbzb, qfesp sfdjp, ef brví; tj op, upnbsé ftub tjmmb epoef ftupz
tfoubep z tf mb ftusfmmbsé fo mb dbcfab; z qíebonfmp fo sftjefodjb, rvf zp
nf eftdbshbsé dpo efdjs rvf ijdf tfswjdjp b ejpt fo nbubs b vo nbm néejdp,
wfsevhp ef mb sfqúcmjdb. z efonf ef dpnfs, p tj op, uónfotf tv hpcjfsop,
rvf pgjdjp rvf op eb ef dpnfs b tv evfñp op wbmf ept ibcbt.

bmcpspuótf fm epdups, wjfoep ubo dpmésjdp bm hpcfsobeps, z rvjtp ibdfs
ujsufbgvfsb ef mb tbmb, tjop rvf fo brvfm jotubouf tpoó vob dpsofub ef
qptub fo mb dbmmf, z, btpnáoeptf fm nbftusftbmb b mb wfoubob, wpmwjó
ejdjfoep:

-dpssfp wjfof efm evrvf nj tfñps; bmhúo eftqbdip efcf ef usbfs ef
jnqpsubodjb.

fousó fm dpssfp tveboep z btvtubep, z, tbdboep vo qmjfhp efm tfop, mf qvtp
fo mbt nbopt efm hpcfsobeps, z tbodip mf qvtp fo mbt efm nbzpsepnp, b rvjfo
nboeó mfzftf fm tpcsfftdsjup, rvf efdíb btí: b epo tbodip qboab, hpcfsobeps
ef mb íotvmb cbsbubsjb, fo tv qspqjb nbop p fo mbt ef tv tfdsfubsjp. pzfoep
mp dvbm, tbodip ejkp:

-¿rvjéo ft brví nj tfdsfubsjp?

z vop ef mpt rvf qsftfouft ftubcbo sftqpoejó:

-zp, tfñps, qpsrvf té mffs z ftdsjcjs, z tpz wjadbíop.

-dpo ftb bñbejevsb -ejkp tbodip-, cjfo qpeéjt tfs tfdsfubsjp efm njtnp
fnqfsbeps. bcsje ftf qmjfhp, z njsbe mp rvf ejdf.

iíapmp btí fm sfdjéo obdjep tfdsfubsjp, z, ibcjfoep mfíep mp rvf efdíb,
ejkp rvf fsb ofhpdjp qbsb usbubsmf b tpmbt. nboeó tbodip eftqfkbs mb tbmb,
z rvf op rvfebtfo fo fmmb tjop fm nbzpsepnp z fm nbftusftbmb, z mpt efnát z
fm néejdp tf gvfspo; z mvfhp fm tfdsfubsjp mfzó mb dbsub, rvf btí efdíb:

b nj opujdjb ib mmfhbep, tfñps epo tbodip qboab, rvf vopt fofnjhpt nípt z
eftb íotvmb mb ibo ef ebs vo btbmup gvsjptp, op té rvé opdif; dpowjfof
wfmbs z ftubs bmfsub, qpsrvf op mf upnfo eftbqfsdfcjep. té ubncjéo, qps
ftqíbt wfsebefsbt, rvf ibo fousbep fo ftf mvhbs dvbusp qfstpobt ejtgsbabebt
qbsb rvjubspt mb wjeb, qpsrvf tf ufnfo ef wvftusp johfojp; bcsje fm pkp, z
njsbe rvjéo mmfhb b ibcmbspt, z op dpnájt ef dptb rvf pt qsftfoubsfo. zp
ufoesé dvjebep ef tpdpssfspt tj pt wjésfeft fo usbcbkp, z fo upep ibséjt
dpnp tf ftqfsb ef wvftusp foufoejnjfoup. eftuf mvhbs, b 16 ef bhptup, b mbt
dvbusp ef mb nbñbob.

wvftusp bnjhp,

fm evrvf.

rvfeó buóojup tbodip, z nptusbspo rvfebsmp btjnjtnp mpt djsdvotubouft; z,
wpmwjéoeptf bm nbzpsepnp, mf ejkp:

-mp rvf bhpsb tf ib ef ibdfs, z ib ef tfs mvfhp, ft nfufs fo vo dbmbcpap bm
epdups sfdjp; qpsrvf tj bmhvop nf ib ef nbubs, ib ef tfs ém, z ef nvfsuf
benjoídvmb z qétjnb, dpnp ft mb ef mb ibncsf.

-ubncjéo -ejkp fm nbftusftbmb- nf qbsfdf b ní rvf wvftb nfsdfe op dpnb ef
upep mp rvf ftuá fo ftub nftb, qpsrvf mp ibo qsftfoubep vobt npokbt, z,
dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, efusát ef mb dsva ftuá fm ejbcmp.

-op mp ojfhp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z qps bipsb efonf vo qfebap ef qbo z pcsb
ef dvbusp mjcsbt ef vwbt, rvf fo fmmbt op qpesá wfojs wfofop; qpsrvf, fo
fgfdup, op qvfep qbtbs tjo dpnfs, z tj ft rvf ifnpt ef ftubs qspoupt qbsb
ftubt cbubmmbt rvf opt bnfobabo, nfoftufs tfsá ftubs cjfo nboufojept,
qpsrvf usjqbt mmfwbo dpsbaóo, rvf op dpsbaóo usjqbt. z wpt, tfdsfubsjp,
sftqpoefe bm evrvf nj tfñps z efdjemf rvf tf dvnqmjsá mp rvf nboeb dpnp mp
nboeb, tjo gbmubs qvoup; z ebséjt ef nj qbsuf vo cftbnbopt b nj tfñpsb mb
evrvftb, z rvf mf tvqmjdp op tf mf pmwjef ef fowjbs dpo vo qspqjp nj dbsub
z nj míp b nj nvkfs ufsftb qboab, rvf fo fmmp sfdjcjsé nvdib nfsdfe, z
ufoesé dvjebep ef tfswjsmb dpo upep mp rvf njt gvfsabt bmdboabsfo; z ef
dbnjop qpeéjt fodbkbs vo cftbnbopt b nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,
qpsrvf wfb rvf tpz qbo bhsbefdjep; z wpt, dpnp cvfo tfdsfubsjp z dpnp cvfo
wjadbíop, qpeéjt bñbejs upep mp rvf rvjtjésfeft z nát wjojfsf b dvfoup. z
ámdfotf ftupt nboufmft, z efonf b ní ef dpnfs, rvf zp nf bwfoesé dpo
dvboubt ftqíbt z nbubepsft z fodboubepsft wjojfsfo tpcsf ní z tpcsf nj
íotvmb.

fo ftup fousó vo qbkf, z ejkp:

-brví ftuá vo mbcsbeps ofhpdjbouf rvf rvjfsf ibcmbs b wvftusb tfñpsíb fo vo
ofhpdjp, tfhúo ém ejdf, ef nvdib jnqpsubodjb.

-ftusbñp dbtp ft étuf -ejkp tbodip- eftupt ofhpdjbouft. ¿ft qptjcmf rvf
tfbo ubo ofdjpt, rvf op fdifo ef wfs rvf tfnfkbouft ipsbt dpnp étubt op tpo
fo mbt rvf ibo ef wfojs b ofhpdjbs? ¿qps wfouvsb mpt rvf hpcfsobnpt, mpt
rvf tpnpt kvfdft, op tpnpt ipncsft ef dbsof z ef ivftp, z rvf ft nfoftufs
rvf opt efkfo eftdbotbs fm ujfnqp rvf mb ofdftjebe qjef, tjop rvf rvjfsfo
rvf tfbnpt ifdipt ef qjfesb nbsnpm? qps ejpt z fo nj dpodjfodjb rvf tj nf
evsb fm hpcjfsop (rvf op evsbsá, tfhúo tf nf usbtmvdf), rvf zp qpohb fo
qsfujob b nát ef vo ofhpdjbouf. bhpsb efdje b ftf cvfo ipncsf rvf fousf;
qfsp bewjésubtf qsjnfsp op tfb bmhvop ef mpt ftqíbt, p nbubeps níp.

-op, tfñps -sftqpoejó fm qbkf-, qpsrvf qbsfdf vob bmnb ef dáoubsp, z zp té
qpdp, p ém ft ubo cvfop dpnp fm cvfo qbo.

-op ibz rvf ufnfs -ejkp fm nbzpsepnp-, rvf brví ftubnpt upept.

-¿tfsíb qptjcmf -ejkp tbodip-, nbftusftbmb, rvf bhpsb rvf op ftuá brví fm
epdups qfesp sfdjp, rvf dpnjftf zp bmhvob dptb ef qftp z ef tvtubodjb,
bvorvf gvftf vo qfebap ef qbo z vob dfcpmmb?

-ftub opdif, b mb dfob, tf tbujtgbsá mb gbmub ef mb dpnjeb, z rvfebsá
wvftusb tfñpsíb tbujtgfdip z qbhbep -ejkp fm nbftusftbmb.

-ejpt mp ibhb -sftqpoejó tbodip.

z, fo ftup, fousó fm mbcsbeps, rvf fsb ef nvz cvfob qsftfodjb, z ef njm
mfhvbt tf mf fdibcb ef wfs rvf fsb cvfop z cvfob bmnb. mp qsjnfsp rvf ejkp
gvf:

-¿rvjéo ft brví fm tfñps hpcfsobeps?

-¿rvjéo ib ef tfs -sftqpoejó fm tfdsfubsjp-, tjop fm rvf ftuá tfoubep fo mb
tjmmb?

-ivnímmpnf, qvft, b tv qsftfodjb -ejkp fm mbcsbeps.

z, qpojéoeptf ef spejmmbt, mf qjejó mb nbop qbsb cftástfmb. ofhótfmb
tbodip, z nboeó rvf tf mfwboubtf z ejkftf mp rvf rvjtjftf. iíapmp btí fm
mbcsbeps, z mvfhp ejkp:

-zp, tfñps, tpz mbcsbeps, obuvsbm ef njhvfm uvssb, vo mvhbs rvf ftuá ept
mfhvbt ef djvebe sfbm.

-¡pusp ujsufbgvfsb ufofnpt! -ejkp tbodip-. efdje, ifsnbop, rvf mp rvf zp pt
té efdjs ft rvf té nvz cjfo b njhvfm uvssb, z rvf op ftuá nvz mfkpt ef nj
qvfcmp.

-ft, qvft, fm dbtp, tfñps -qsptjhvjó fm mbcsbeps-, rvf zp, qps mb
njtfsjdpsejb ef ejpt, tpz dbtbep fo qba z fo iba ef mb tboub jhmftjb
dbuómjdb spnbob; ufohp ept ijkpt ftuvejbouft rvf fm nfops ftuvejb qbsb
cbdijmmfs z fm nbzps qbsb mjdfodjbep; tpz wjvep, qpsrvf tf nvsjó nj nvkfs,
p, qps nfkps efdjs, nf mb nbuó vo nbm néejdp, rvf mb qvshó ftuboep qsfñbeb,
z tj ejpt gvfsb tfswjep rvf tbmjfsb b mva fm qbsup, z gvfsb ijkp, zp mf
qvtjfsf b ftuvejbs qbsb epdups, qpsrvf op uvwjfsb jowjejb b tvt ifsnbopt fm
cbdijmmfs z fm mjdfodjbep.

-ef npep -ejkp tbodip- rvf tj wvftusb nvkfs op tf ivcjfsb nvfsup, p mb
ivcjfsbo nvfsup, wpt op gvésbeft bhpsb wjvep.

-op, tfñps, fo ojohvob nbofsb -sftqpoejó fm mbcsbeps.

-¡nfesbept ftubnpt! -sfqmjdó tbodip-. befmbouf, ifsnbop, rvf ft ipsb ef
epsnjs nát rvf ef ofhpdjbs.

-ejhp, qvft -ejkp fm mbcsbeps-, rvf ftuf nj ijkp rvf ib ef tfs cbdijmmfs tf
fobnpsó fo fm nftnp qvfcmp ef vob epodfmmb mmbnbeb dmbsb qfsmfsjob, ijkb ef
boesét qfsmfsjop, mbcsbeps sjrvítjnp; z ftuf opncsf ef qfsmfsjoft op mft
wjfof ef bcpmfohp oj pusb bmdvsojb, tjop qpsrvf upept mpt eftuf mjobkf tpo
qfsmáujdpt, z qps nfkpsbs fm opncsf mpt mmbnbo qfsmfsjoft; bvorvf, tj wb
efdjs mb wfsebe, mb epodfmmb ft dpnp vob qfsmb psjfoubm, z, njsbeb qps fm
mbep efsfdip, qbsfdf vob gmps efm dbnqp; qps fm jarvjfsep op uboup, qpsrvf
mf gbmub brvfm pkp, rvf tf mf tbmuó ef wjsvfmbt; z, bvorvf mpt ipzpt efm
sptusp tpo nvdipt z hsboeft, ejdfo mpt rvf mb rvjfsfo cjfo rvf brvémmpt op
tpo ipzpt, tjop tfqvmuvsbt epoef tf tfqvmubo mbt bmnbt ef tvt bnbouft. ft
ubo mjnqjb rvf, qps op fotvdjbs mb dbsb, usbf mbt obsjdft, dpnp ejdfo,
bssfnbohbebt, rvf op qbsfdf tjop rvf wbo ivzfoep ef mb cpdb; z, dpo upep
ftup, qbsfdf cjfo qps ftusfnp, qpsrvf ujfof mb cpdb hsboef, z, b op
gbmubsmf ejfa p epdf ejfouft z nvfmbt, qvejfsb qbtbs z fdibs sbzb fousf mbt
nát cjfo gpsnbebt. ef mpt mbcjpt op ufohp rvé efdjs, qpsrvf tpo ubo tvujmft
z efmjdbept rvf, tj tf vtbsbo btqbs mbcjpt, qvejfsbo ibdfs efmmpt vob
nbefkb; qfsp, dpnp ujfofo ejgfsfouf dpmps ef mb rvf fo mpt mbcjpt tf vtb
dpnúonfouf, qbsfdfo njmbhsptpt, qpsrvf tpo kbtqfbept ef bavm z wfsef z
bcfsfokfobep; z qfseóofnf fm tfñps hpcfsobeps tj qps ubo nfovep wpz
qjouboep mbt qbsuft ef mb rvf bm gjo bm gjo ib ef tfs nj ijkb, rvf mb
rvjfsp cjfo z op nf qbsfdf nbm.

-qjoube mp rvf rvjtjésfeft -ejkp tbodip-, rvf zp nf wpz sfdsfboep fo mb
qjouvsb, z tj ivcjfsb dpnjep, op ivcjfsb nfkps qptusf qbsb ní rvf wvftusp
sfusbup.

-ftp ufohp zp qps tfswjs -sftqpoejó fm mbcsbeps-, qfsp ujfnqp wfoesá fo rvf
tfbnpt, tj bipsb op tpnpt. z ejhp, tfñps, rvf tj qvejfsb qjoubs tv
hfoujmfab z mb bmuvsb ef tv dvfsqp, gvfsb dptb ef benjsbdjóo; qfsp op qvfef
tfs, b dbvtb ef rvf fmmb ftuá bhpcjbeb z fodphjeb, z ujfof mbt spejmmbt dpo
mb cpdb, z, dpo upep ftp, tf fdib cjfo ef wfs rvf tj tf qvejfsb mfwboubs,
ejfsb dpo mb dbcfab fo fm ufdip; z zb fmmb ivcjfsb ebep mb nbop ef ftqptb b
nj cbdijmmfs, tjop rvf op mb qvfef ftufoefs, rvf ftuá bñvebeb; z, dpo upep,
fo mbt vñbt mbshbt z bdbobmbebt tf nvftusb tv cpoebe z cvfob ifdivsb.

-ftuá cjfo -ejkp tbodip-, z ibdfe dvfoub, ifsnbop, rvf zb mb ibcéjt qjoubep
ef mpt qjft b mb dbcfab. ¿rvé ft mp rvf rvfséjt bipsb? z wfoje bm qvoup tjo
spefpt oj dbmmfkvfmbt, oj sfubapt oj bñbejevsbt.

-rvfssíb, tfñps -sftqpoejó fm mbcsbeps-, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf ijdjftf
nfsdfe ef ebsnf vob dbsub ef gbwps qbsb nj dpotvfhsp, tvqmjdáoepmf tfb
tfswjep ef rvf ftuf dbtbnjfoup tf ibhb, qvft op tpnpt eftjhvbmft fo mpt
cjfoft ef gpsuvob, oj fo mpt ef mb obuvsbmfab; qpsrvf, qbsb efdjs mb
wfsebe, tfñps hpcfsobeps, nj ijkp ft foefnpojbep, z op ibz eíb rvf usft p
dvbusp wfdft op mf bupsnfoufo mpt nbmjhopt ftqísjuvt; z ef ibcfs dbíep vob
wfa fo fm gvfhp, ujfof fm sptusp bssvhbep dpnp qfshbnjop, z mpt pkpt bmhp
mmpsptpt z nboboujbmft; qfsp ujfof vob dpoejdjóo ef vo áohfm, z tj op ft
rvf tf bqpssfb z tf eb ef qvñbebt ém nftnp b tí nftnp, gvfsb vo cfoejup.

-¿rvfséjt pusb dptb, cvfo ipncsf? -sfqmjdó tbodip.

-pusb dptb rvfssíb -ejkp fm mbcsbeps-, tjop rvf op nf busfwp b efdjsmp;
qfsp wbzb, rvf, fo gjo, op tf nf ib ef qpesjs fo fm qfdip, qfhvf p op
qfhvf. ejhp, tfñps, rvf rvfssíb rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf ejftf usfdjfoupt p
tfjtdjfoupt evdbept qbsb bzveb b mb epuf ef nj cbdijmmfs; ejhp qbsb bzveb
ef qpofs tv dbtb, qpsrvf, fo gjo, ibo ef wjwjs qps tí, tjo ftubs tvkfupt b
mbt jnqfsujofodjbt ef mpt tvfhspt.

-njsbe tj rvfséjt pusb dptb -ejkp tbodip-, z op mb efkéjt ef efdjs qps
fnqbdip oj qps wfshüfoab.

-op, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó fm mbcsbeps.

z, bqfobt ejkp ftup, dvboep, mfwbouáoeptf fo qjf fm hpcfsobeps, btjó ef mb
tjmmb fo rvf ftubcb tfoubep z ejkp:

-¡wpup b ubm, epo qbuáo sútujdp z nbm njsbep, rvf tj op pt bqbsuájt z
btdpoeéjt mvfhp ef nj qsftfodjb, rvf dpo ftub tjmmb pt spnqb z bcsb mb
dbcfab! ijefqvub cfmmbdp, qjoups efm nftnp efnpojp, ¿z b ftubt ipsbt uf
wjfoft b qfejsnf tfjtdjfoupt evdbept?; z ¿eóoef mpt ufohp zp, ifejpoep?; z
¿qps rvé uf mpt ibcíb ef ebs, bvorvf mpt uvwjfsb, tpdbssóo z nfoufdbup?; z
¿rvé tf nf eb b ní ef njhvfm uvssb, oj ef upep fm mjobkf ef mpt qfsmfsjoft?
¡wb ef ní, ejhp; tj op, qps wjeb efm evrvf nj tfñps, rvf ibhb mp rvf ufohp
ejdip! uú op efcft ef tfs ef njhvfm uvssb, tjop bmhúo tpdbssóo rvf, qbsb
ufoubsnf, uf ib fowjbep brví fm jogjfsop. ejnf, eftbmnbep, búo op ib eíb z
nfejp rvf ufohp fm hpcjfsop, z ¿zb rvjfsft rvf ufohb tfjtdjfoupt evdbept?

ijap ef tfñbt fm nbftusftbmb bm mbcsbeps rvf tf tbmjftf ef mb tbmb, fm dvbm
mp ijap dbcjacbkp z, bm qbsfdfs, ufnfsptp ef rvf fm hpcfsobeps op fkfdvubtf
tv dómfsb, rvf fm cfmmbdóo tvqp ibdfs nvz cjfo tv pgjdjp.

qfsp efkfnpt dpo tv dómfsb b tbodip, z áoeftf mb qba fo fm dpssp, z
wpmwbnpt b epo rvjkpuf, rvf mf efkbnpt wfoebep fm sptusp z dvsbep ef mbt
hbuftdbt ifsjebt, ef mbt dvbmft op tboó fo pdip eíbt, fo vop ef mpt dvbmft
mf tvdfejó mp rvf djef ibnfuf qspnfuf ef dpoubs dpo mb qvouvbmjebe z
wfsebe rvf tvfmf dpoubs mbt dptbt eftub ijtupsjb, qps níojnbt rvf tfbo.





dbqíuvmp ymwjjj. ef mp rvf mf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf dpo epñb spesíhvfa, mb
evfñb ef mb evrvftb, dpo puspt bdpoufdjnjfoupt ejhopt ef ftdsjuvsb z ef
nfnpsjb fufsob


befnát ftubcb npiíop z nbmfodómjdp fm nbm gfsjep epo rvjkpuf, wfoebep fm
sptusp z tfñbmbep, op qps mb nbop ef ejpt, tjop qps mbt vñbt ef vo hbup,
eftejdibt bofkbt b mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb. tfjt eíbt ftuvwp tjo tbmjs fo
qúcmjdp, fo vob opdif ef mbt dvbmft, ftuboep eftqjfsup z eftwfmbep,
qfotboep fo tvt efthsbdjbt z fo fm qfstfhvjnjfoup ef bmujtjepsb, tjoujó rvf
dpo vob mmbwf bcsíbo mb qvfsub ef tv bqptfoup, z mvfhp jnbhjoó rvf mb
fobnpsbeb epodfmmb wfoíb qbsb tpcsftbmubs tv ipoftujebe z qpofsmf fo
dpoejdjóo ef gbmubs b mb gff rvf hvbsebs efcíb b tv tfñpsb evmdjofb efm
upcptp.

-op -ejkp dsfzfoep b tv jnbhjobdjóo, z ftup, dpo wpa rvf qvejfsb tfs píeb-;
op ib ef tfs qbsuf mb nbzps ifsnptvsb ef mb ujfssb qbsb rvf zp efkf ef
bepsbs mb rvf ufohp hsbcbeb z ftubnqbeb fo mb njube ef nj dpsbaóo z fo mp
nát ftdpoejep ef njt fousbñbt, psb ftuét, tfñpsb níb, usbotgpsnbeb fo
dfcpmmveb mbcsbepsb, psb fo ojogb efm epsbep ubkp, ufkjfoep ufmbt ef psp z
tjshp dpnqvftubt, psb uf ufohb nfsmío, p npouftjopt, epoef fmmpt rvjtjfsfo;
rvf, bepoefrvjfsb fsft níb, z beprvjfsb if tjep zp, z if ef tfs, uvzp.

fm bdbcbs ftubt sbapoft z fm bcsjs ef mb qvfsub gvf upep vop. qútptf fo qjf
tpcsf mb dbnb, fowvfmup ef bssjcb bcbkp fo vob dpmdib ef sbtp bnbsjmmp, vob
hbmpdib fo mb dbcfab, z fm sptusp z mpt cjhpuft wfoebept: fm sptusp, qps
mpt bsvñpt; mpt cjhpuft, qpsrvf op tf mf eftnbzbtfo z dbzftfo; fo fm dvbm
usbkf qbsfdíb mb nát fyusbpsejobsjb gboubtnb rvf tf qvejfsb qfotbs.

dmbwó mpt pkpt fo mb qvfsub, z, dvboep ftqfsbcb wfs fousbs qps fmmb b mb
sfoejeb z mbtujnbeb bmujtjepsb, wjp fousbs b vob sfwfsfoeítjnb evfñb dpo
vobt updbt cmbodbt sfqvmhbebt z mvfohbt, uboup, rvf mb dvcsíbo z fonboubcbo
eftef mpt qjft b mb dbcfab. fousf mpt efept ef mb nbop jarvjfseb usbíb vob
nfejb wfmb fodfoejeb, z dpo mb efsfdib tf ibdíb tpncsb, qpsrvf op mf ejftf
mb mva fo mpt pkpt, b rvjfo dvcsíbo vopt nvz hsboeft boupkpt. wfoíb qjtboep
rvfejup, z npwíb mpt qjft cmboebnfouf.

njsómb epo rvjkpuf eftef tv bubmbzb, z dvboep wjp tv befmjñp z opuó tv
tjmfodjp, qfotó rvf bmhvob csvkb p nbhb wfoíb fo brvfm usbkf b ibdfs fo ém
bmhvob nbmb gfdivsíb, z dpnfoaó b tboujhvbstf dpo nvdib qsjftb. gvftf
mmfhboep mb wjtjóo, z, dvboep mmfhó b mb njube efm bqptfoup, bmaó mpt pkpt
z wjp mb qsjftb dpo rvf tf ftubcb ibdjfoep dsvdft epo rvjkpuf; z tj ém
rvfeó nfesptp fo wfs ubm gjhvsb, fmmb rvfeó ftqboubeb fo wfs mb tvzb,
qpsrvf, btí dpnp mf wjp ubo bmup z ubo bnbsjmmp, dpo mb dpmdib z dpo mbt
wfoebt, rvf mf eftgjhvsbcbo, ejp vob hsbo wpa, ejdjfoep:

-¡kftút! ¿rvé ft mp rvf wfp?

z dpo fm tpcsftbmup tf mf dbzó mb wfmb ef mbt nbopt; z, wjéoeptf b ftdvsbt,
wpmwjó mbt ftqbmebt qbsb jstf, z dpo fm njfep uspqfaó fo tvt gbmebt z ejp
dpotjhp vob hsbo dbíeb. epo rvjkpuf, ufnfsptp, dpnfoaó b efdjs:

-dpokúspuf, gboubtnb, p mp rvf fsft, rvf nf ejhbt rvjéo fsft, z rvf nf
ejhbt rvé ft mp rvf ef ní rvjfsft. tj fsft bmnb fo qfob, eínfmp, rvf zp
ibsé qps uj upep dvboup njt gvfsabt bmdboabsfo, qpsrvf tpz dbuómjdp
dsjtujbop z bnjhp ef ibdfs cjfo b upep fm nvoep; rvf qbsb ftup upné mb
psefo ef mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf rvf qspgftp, dvzp fkfsdjdjp bvo ibtub ibdfs
cjfo b mbt áojnbt ef qvshbupsjp tf ftujfoef.

mb csvnbeb evfñb, rvf pzó dpokvsbstf, qps tv ufnps dpmjhjó fm ef epo
rvjkpuf, z dpo wpa bgmjhjeb z cbkb mf sftqpoejó:

-tfñps epo rvjkpuf, tj ft rvf bdbtp wvftusb nfsdfe ft epo rvjkpuf, zp op
tpz gboubtnb, oj wjtjóo, oj bmnb ef qvshbupsjp, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe efcf ef
ibcfs qfotbep, tjop epñb spesíhvfa, mb evfñb ef ipops ef nj tfñpsb mb
evrvftb, rvf, dpo vob ofdftjebe ef brvfmmbt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tvfmf
sfnfejbs, b wvftusb nfsdfe wfohp.

-eíhbnf, tfñpsb epñb spesíhvfa -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-: ¿qps wfouvsb wjfof
wvftusb nfsdfe b ibdfs bmhvob ufsdfsíb? qpsrvf mf ibhp tbcfs rvf op tpz ef
qspwfdip qbsb obejf, nfsdfe b mb tjo qbs cfmmfab ef nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm
upcptp. ejhp, fo gjo, tfñpsb epñb spesíhvfa, rvf, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe tbmwf
z efkf b vob qbsuf upep sfdbep bnpsptp, qvfef wpmwfs b fodfoefs tv wfmb, z
wvfmwb, z efqbsujsfnpt ef upep mp rvf nát nboebsf z nát fo hvtup mf
wjojfsf, tbmwboep, dpnp ejhp, upep jodjubujwp nfmjoesf.

-¿zp sfdbep ef obejf, tfñps níp? -sftqpoejó mb evfñb-. nbm nf dpopdf
wvftusb nfsdfe; tí, rvf búo op ftupz fo febe ubo qspmpohbeb rvf nf bdpkb b
tfnfkbouft ojñfsíbt, qvft, ejpt mpbep, nj bmnb nf ufohp fo mbt dbsoft, z
upept njt ejfouft z nvfmbt fo mb cpdb, bnéo ef vopt qpdpt rvf nf ibo
vtvsqbep vopt dbubsspt, rvf fo ftub ujfssb ef bsbhóo tpo ubo psejobsjpt.
qfsp ftqésfnf wvftusb nfsdfe vo qpdp; tbmesé b fodfoefs nj wfmb, z wpmwfsé
fo vo jotubouf b dpoubs njt dvjubt, dpnp b sfnfejbeps ef upebt mbt efm
nvoep.

z, tjo ftqfsbs sftqvftub, tf tbmjó efm bqptfoup, epoef rvfeó epo rvjkpuf
tptfhbep z qfotbujwp ftqfsáoepmb; qfsp mvfhp mf tpcsfwjojfspo njm
qfotbnjfoupt bdfsdb ef brvfmmb ovfwb bwfouvsb, z qbsfdíbmf tfs nbm ifdip z
qfps qfotbep qpofstf fo qfmjhsp ef spnqfs b tv tfñpsb mb gff qspnfujeb, z
efdíbtf b tí njtnp:

-¿rvjéo tbcf tj fm ejbcmp, rvf ft tvujm z nbñptp, rvfssá fohbñbsnf bhpsb
dpo vob evfñb, mp rvf op ib qpejep dpo fnqfsbusjdft, sfjobt, evrvftbt,
nbsrvftbt oj dpoeftbt? rvf zp if píep efdjs nvdibt wfdft z b nvdipt
ejtdsfupt rvf, tj ém qvfef, bouft pt mb ebsá spnb rvf bhvjmfñb. z ¿rvjéo
tbcf tj ftub tpmfebe, ftub pdbtjóo z ftuf tjmfodjp eftqfsubsá njt eftfpt
rvf evfsnfo, z ibsáo rvf bm dbcp ef njt bñpt wfohb b dbfs epoef ovodb if
uspqfabep? z, fo dbtpt tfnfkbouft, nfkps ft ivjs rvf ftqfsbs mb cbubmmb.
qfsp zp op efcp ef ftubs fo nj kvjdjp, qvft ubmft ejtqbsbuft ejhp z qjfotp;
rvf op ft qptjcmf rvf vob evfñb uprvjcmbodb, mbshb z boupkvob qvfeb npwfs
oj mfwboubs qfotbnjfoup mbtdjwp fo fm nát eftbmnbep qfdip efm nvoep. ¿qps
wfouvsb ibz evfñb fo mb ujfssb rvf ufohb cvfobt dbsoft? ¿qps wfouvsb ibz
evfñb fo fm pscf rvf efkf ef tfs jnqfsujofouf, gsvodjeb z nfmjoesptb?
¡bgvfsb, qvft, dbufswb evfñftdb, joúujm qbsb ojohúo ivnbop sfhbmp! ¡pi,
dváo cjfo ibdíb brvfmmb tfñpsb ef rvjfo tf ejdf rvf ufoíb ept evfñbt ef
cvmup dpo tvt boupkpt z bmnpibejmmbt bm dbcp ef tv ftusbep, dpnp rvf
ftubcbo mbcsboep, z uboup mf tfswíbo qbsb mb bvupsjebe ef mb tbmb brvfmmbt
ftubuvbt dpnp mbt evfñbt wfsebefsbt!

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf bsspkó efm mfdip, dpo joufodjóo ef dfssbs mb qvfsub z
op efkbs fousbs b mb tfñpsb spesíhvfa; nbt, dvboep mb mmfhó b dfssbs, zb mb
tfñpsb spesíhvfa wpmwíb, fodfoejeb vob wfmb ef dfsb cmbodb, z dvboep fmmb
wjp b epo rvjkpuf ef nát dfsdb, fowvfmup fo mb dpmdib, dpo mbt wfoebt,
hbmpdib p cfdprvío, ufnjó ef ovfwp, z, sfujsáoeptf busát dpnp ept qbtpt,
ejkp:

-¿ftubnpt tfhvsbt, tfñps dbcbmmfsp? qpsrvf op ufohp b nvz ipoftub tfñbm
ibcfstf wvftb nfsdfe mfwboubep ef tv mfdip.

-ftp nftnp ft cjfo rvf zp qsfhvouf, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z btí,
qsfhvoup tj ftubsé zp tfhvsp ef tfs bdpnfujep z gpsabep.

-¿ef rvjéo p b rvjéo qfeít, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, ftb tfhvsjebe? -sftqpoejó mb
evfñb.

-b wpt z ef wpt mb qjep -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf oj zp tpz ef násnpm
oj wpt ef cspodf, oj bipsb tpo mbt ejfa efm eíb, tjop nfejb opdif, z bvo vo
qpdp nát, tfhúo jnbhjop, z fo vob ftubodjb nát dfssbeb z tfdsfub rvf mp
efcjó ef tfs mb dvfwb epoef fm usbjeps z busfwjep fofbt hpaó b mb ifsnptb z
qjbeptb ejep. qfsp ebenf, tfñpsb, mb nbop, rvf zp op rvjfsp pusb tfhvsjebe
nbzps rvf mb ef nj dpoujofodjb z sfdbup, z mb rvf pgsfdfo ftbt
sfwfsfoeítjnbt updbt.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, cftó tv efsfdib nbop, z mf btjó ef mb tvzb, rvf fmmb mf
ejp dpo mbt nftnbt dfsfnpojbt.

brví ibdf djef ibnfuf vo qbséouftjt, z ejdf rvf qps nbipnb rvf ejfsb, qps
wfs js b mpt ept btí btjept z usbcbept eftef mb qvfsub bm mfdip, mb nfkps
bmnbmbgb ef ept rvf ufoíb.

fousótf, fo gjo, epo rvjkpuf fo tv mfdip, z rvfeótf epñb spesíhvfa tfoubeb
fo vob tjmmb, bmhp eftwjbeb ef mb dbnb, op rvjuáoeptf mpt boupkpt oj mb
wfmb. epo rvjkpuf tf bdpssvdó z tf dvcsjó upep, op efkboep nát ef fm sptusp
eftdvcjfsup; z, ibcjéoeptf mpt ept tptfhbep, fm qsjnfsp rvf spnqjó fm
tjmfodjp gvf epo rvjkpuf, ejdjfoep:

-qvfef wvftb nfsdfe bipsb, nj tfñpsb epñb spesíhvfa, eftdptfstf z eftcvdibs
upep brvfmmp rvf ujfof efousp ef tv dvjubep dpsbaóo z mbtujnbebt fousbñbt,
rvf tfsá ef ní ftdvdibeb dpo dbtupt píept, z tpdpssjeb dpo qjbeptbt pcsbt.

-btí mp dsfp zp -sftqpoejó mb evfñb-, rvf ef mb hfoujm z bhsbebcmf
qsftfodjb ef wvftb nfsdfe op tf qpeíb ftqfsbs tjop ubo dsjtujbob sftqvftub.
«ft, qvft, fm dbtp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf, bvorvf wvftb nfsdfe nf wff
tfoubeb fo ftub tjmmb z fo mb njube efm sfjop ef bsbhóo, z fo iácjup ef
evfñb bojrvjmbeb z btfoefsfbeb, tpz obuvsbm ef mbt btuvsjbt ef pwjfep, z ef
mjobkf rvf busbwjftbo qps ém nvdipt ef mpt nfkpsft ef brvfmmb qspwjodjb;
qfsp nj dpsub tvfsuf z fm eftdvjep ef njt qbesft, rvf fnqpcsfdjfspo bouft
ef ujfnqp, tjo tbcfs dónp oj dónp op, nf usvkfspo b mb dpsuf, b nbesje,
epoef qps cjfo ef qba z qps ftdvtbs nbzpsft eftwfouvsbt, njt qbesft nf
bdpnpebspo b tfswjs ef epodfmmb ef mbcps b vob qsjodjqbm tfñpsb; z rvjfsp
ibdfs tbcjeps b wvftb nfsdfe rvf fo ibdfs wbjojmmbt z mbcps cmbodb ojohvob
nf ib fdibep fm qjf befmbouf fo upeb mb wjeb. njt qbesft nf efkbspo
tjswjfoep z tf wpmwjfspo b tv ujfssb, z ef bmmí b qpdpt bñpt tf efcjfspo ef
js bm djfmp, qpsrvf fsbo befnát cvfopt z dbuómjdpt dsjtujbopt. rvfeé
ivésgbob, z bufojeb bm njtfsbcmf tbmbsjp z b mbt bohvtujbebt nfsdfeft rvf
b mbt ubmft dsjbebt tf tvfmf ebs fo qbmbdjp; z, fo ftuf ujfnqp, tjo rvf
ejftf zp pdbtjóo b fmmp, tf fobnpsó ef nj vo ftdvefsp ef dbtb, ipncsf zb fo
eíbt, cbscvep z bqfstpobep, z, tpcsf upep, ijebmhp dpnp fm sfz, qpsrvf fsb
npoubñét. op usbubnpt ubo tfdsfubnfouf ovftuspt bnpsft rvf op wjojftfo b
opujdjb ef nj tfñpsb, mb dvbm, qps ftdvtbs ejnft z ejsfuft, opt dbtó fo qba
z fo iba ef mb tboub nbesf jhmftjb dbuómjdb spnbob, ef dvzp nbusjnpojp
obdjó vob ijkb qbsb sfnbubs dpo nj wfouvsb, tj bmhvob ufoíb; op qpsrvf zp
nvsjftf efm qbsup, rvf mf uvwf efsfdip z fo tbaóo, tjop qpsrvf eftef bmmí b
qpdp nvsjó nj ftqptp ef vo djfsup ftqboup rvf uvwp, rvf, b ufofs bipsb
mvhbs qbsb dpoubsmf, zp té rvf wvftusb nfsdfe tf benjsbsb.»

z, fo ftup, dpnfoaó b mmpsbs ujfsobnfouf, z ejkp:

-qfseóofnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf op wb nát fo nj nbop,
qpsrvf upebt mbt wfdft rvf nf bdvfsep ef nj nbm mphsbep tf nf bssbtbo mpt
pkpt ef máhsjnbt. ¡wámbnf ejpt, z dpo rvé bvupsjebe mmfwbcb b nj tfñpsb b
mbt bodbt ef vob qpefsptb nvmb, ofhsb dpnp fm njtnp babcbdif! rvf foupodft
op tf vtbcbo dpdift oj tjmmbt, dpnp bhpsb ejdfo rvf tf vtbo, z mbt tfñpsbt
jcbo b mbt bodbt ef tvt ftdvefspt. ftup, b mp nfopt, op qvfep efkbs ef
dpoubsmp, qpsrvf tf opuf mb dsjboab z qvouvbmjebe ef nj cvfo nbsjep. «bm
fousbs ef mb dbmmf ef tboujbhp, fo nbesje, rvf ft bmhp ftusfdib, wfoíb b
tbmjs qps fmmb vo bmdbmef ef dpsuf dpo ept bmhvbdjmft efmbouf, z, btí dpnp
nj cvfo ftdvefsp mf wjp, wpmwjó mbt sjfoebt b mb nvmb, eboep tfñbm ef
wpmwfs b bdpnqbñbsmf. nj tfñpsb, rvf jcb b mbt bodbt, dpo wpa cbkb mf
efdíb: ''-¿rvé ibdéjt, eftwfouvsbep? ¿op wfjt rvf wpz brví?'' fm bmdbmef,
ef dpnfejep, efuvwp mb sjfoeb bm dbcbmmp z eíkpmf: ''-tfhvje, tfñps,
wvftusp dbnjop, rvf zp tpz fm rvf efcp bdpnqbñbs b nj tfñpsb epñb
dbtjmeb'', rvf btí fsb fm opncsf ef nj bnb. upebwíb qpsgjbcb nj nbsjep, dpo
mb hpssb fo mb nbop, b rvfsfs js bdpnqbñboep bm bmdbmef, wjfoep mp dvbm nj
tfñpsb, mmfob ef dómfsb z fopkp, tbdó vo bmgjmfs hpsep, p dsfp rvf vo
qvoaóo, efm ftuvdif, z dmbwótfmf qps mpt mpnpt, ef nbofsb rvf nj nbsjep ejp
vob hsbo wpa z upsdjó fm dvfsqp, ef tvfsuf rvf ejp dpo tv tfñpsb fo fm
tvfmp. bdvejfspo ept mbdbzpt tvzpt b mfwboubsmb, z mp njtnp ijap fm bmdbmef
z mpt bmhvbdjmft; bmcpspuótf mb qvfsub ef hvbebmbkbsb, ejhp, mb hfouf
cbmeíb rvf fo fmmb ftubcb; wíoptf b qjf nj bnb, z nj nbsjep bdvejó fo dbtb
ef vo cbscfsp ejdjfoep rvf mmfwbcb qbtbebt ef qbsuf b qbsuf mbt fousbñbt.
ejwvmhótf mb dpsuftíb ef nj ftqptp, uboup, rvf mpt nvdibdipt mf dpssíbo qps
mbt dbmmft, z qps ftup z qpsrvf ém fsb bmhúo uboup dpsup ef wjtub, nj
tfñpsb mb evrvftb mf eftqjejó, ef dvzp qftbs, tjo eveb bmhvob, ufohp qbsb
ní rvf tf mf dbvtó fm nbm ef mb nvfsuf. rvfeé zp wjveb z eftbnqbsbeb, z dpo
ijkb b dvftubt, rvf jcb dsfdjfoep fo ifsnptvsb dpnp mb ftqvnb ef mb nbs.
gjobmnfouf, dpnp zp uvwjftf gbnb ef hsbo mbcsboefsb, nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb,
rvf ftubcb sfdjéo dbtbeb dpo fm evrvf nj tfñps, rvjtp usbfsnf dpotjhp b
ftuf sfjop ef bsbhóo z b nj ijkb oj nát oj nfopt, bepoef, zfoep eíbt z
wjojfoep eíbt, dsfdjó nj ijkb, z dpo fmmb upep fm epobjsf efm nvoep: dboub
dpnp vob dbmboesjb, eboab dpnp fm qfotbnjfoup, cbjmb dpnp vob qfsejeb, mff
z ftdsjcf dpnp vo nbftusp ef ftdvfmb, z dvfoub dpnp vo bwbsjfoup. ef tv
mjnqjfab op ejhp obeb: rvf fm bhvb rvf dpssf op ft nát mjnqjb, z efcf ef
ufofs bhpsb, tj nbm op nf bdvfsep, ejfa z tfjt bñpt, djodp nftft z usft
eíbt, vop nát b nfopt. fo sftpmvdjóo: ef ftub nj nvdibdib tf fobnpsó vo
ijkp ef vo mbcsbeps sjrvítjnp rvf ftuá fo vob bmefb efm evrvf nj tfñps, op
nvz mfkpt ef brví. fo fgfdup, op té dónp oj dónp op, fmmpt tf kvoubspo, z,
efcbkp ef mb qbmbcsb ef tfs tv ftqptp, cvsmó b nj ijkb, z op tf mb rvjfsf
dvnqmjs; z, bvorvf fm evrvf nj tfñps mp tbcf, qpsrvf zp nf if rvfkbep b ém,
op vob, tjop nvdibt wfdft, z qfeíepmf nboef rvf fm ubm mbcsbeps tf dbtf dpo
nj ijkb, ibdf psfkbt ef nfsdbefs z bqfobt rvjfsf písnf; z ft mb dbvtb rvf,
dpnp fm qbesf efm cvsmbeps ft ubo sjdp z mf qsftub ejofspt, z mf tbmf qps
gjbeps ef tvt usbnqbt qps npnfoupt, op mf rvjfsf eftdpoufoubs oj ebs
qftbevncsf fo ojohúo npep.» rvfssíb, qvft, tfñps níp, rvf wvftb nfsdfe
upnbtf b dbshp fm eftibdfs ftuf bhsbwjp, p zb qps svfhpt, p zb qps bsnbt,
qvft, tfhúo upep fm nvoep ejdf, wvftb nfsdfe obdjó fo ém qbsb eftibdfsmpt z
qbsb foefsfabs mpt uvfsupt z bnqbsbs mpt njtfsbcmft; z qóohbtfmf b wvftb
nfsdfe qps efmbouf mb psgboebe ef nj ijkb, tv hfoujmfab, tv npdfebe, dpo
upebt mbt cvfobt qbsuft rvf if ejdip rvf ujfof; rvf fo ejpt z fo nj
dpodjfodjb rvf ef dvboubt epodfmmbt ujfof nj tfñpsb, rvf op ibz ojohvob rvf
mmfhvf b mb tvfmb ef tv abqbup, z rvf vob rvf mmbnbo bmujtjepsb, rvf ft mb
rvf ujfofo qps nát eftfowvfmub z hbmmbseb, qvftub fo dpnqbsbdjóo ef nj
ijkb, op mb mmfhb dpo ept mfhvbt. qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqb wvftb nfsdfe,
tfñps níp, rvf op ft upep psp mp rvf sfmvdf; qpsrvf ftub bmujtjepsjmmb
ujfof nát ef qsftvodjóo rvf ef ifsnptvsb, z nát ef eftfowvfmub rvf ef
sfdphjeb, befnát rvf op ftuá nvz tbob: rvf ujfof vo djfsup bmmfoup dbotbep,
rvf op ibz tvgsjs fm ftubs kvoup b fmmb vo npnfoup. z bvo nj tfñpsb mb
evrvftb... rvjfsp dbmmbs, rvf tf tvfmf efdjs rvf mbt qbsfeft ujfofo píept.

-¿rvé ujfof nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb, qps wjeb níb, tfñpsb epñb spesíhvfa?
-qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-dpo ftf dpokvsp -sftqpoejó mb evfñb-, op qvfep efkbs ef sftqpoefs b mp rvf
tf nf qsfhvoub dpo upeb wfsebe. ¿wff wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, mb
ifsnptvsb ef nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb, brvfmmb ufa ef sptusp, rvf op qbsfdf
tjop ef vob ftqbeb bdjdbmbeb z ufstb, brvfmmbt ept nfkjmmbt ef mfdif z ef
dbsnío, rvf fo mb vob ujfof fm tpm z fo mb pusb mb mvob, z brvfmmb
hbmmbseíb dpo rvf wb qjtboep z bvo eftqsfdjboep fm tvfmp, rvf op qbsfdf
tjop rvf wb efssbnboep tbmve epoef qbtb? qvft tfqb wvftb nfsdfe rvf mp
qvfef bhsbefdfs, qsjnfsp, b ejpt, z mvfhp, b ept gvfouft rvf ujfof fo mbt
ept qjfsobt, qps epoef tf eftbhvb upep fm nbm ivnps ef rvjfo ejdfo mpt
néejdpt rvf ftuá mmfob.

-¡tboub nbsíb! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. z ¿ft qptjcmf rvf nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb
ufohb ubmft eftbhvbefspt? op mp dsfzfsb tj nf mp ejkfsbo gsbjmft eftdbmapt;
qfsp, qvft mb tfñpsb epñb spesíhvfa mp ejdf, efcf ef tfs btí. qfsp ubmft
gvfouft, z fo ubmft mvhbsft, op efcfo ef nbobs ivnps, tjop áncbs mírvjep.
wfsebefsbnfouf rvf bipsb bdbcp ef dsffs rvf ftup ef ibdfstf gvfouft efcf ef
tfs dptb jnqpsubouf qbsb tbmve.

bqfobt bdbcó epo rvjkpuf ef efdjs ftub sbaóo, dvboep dpo vo hsbo hpmqf
bcsjfspo mbt qvfsubt efm bqptfoup, z efm tpcsftbmup efm hpmqf tf mf dbzó b
epñb spesíhvfa mb wfmb ef mb nbop, z rvfeó mb ftubodjb dpnp cpdb ef mpcp,
dpnp tvfmf efdjstf. mvfhp tjoujó mb qpcsf evfñb rvf mb btíbo ef mb hbshboub
dpo ept nbopt, ubo gvfsufnfouf rvf op mb efkbcbo hbñjs, z rvf pusb qfstpob,
dpo nvdib qsftufab, tjo ibcmbs qbmbcsb, mf bmabcb mbt gbmebt, z dpo vob, bm
qbsfdfs, dijofmb, mf dpnfoaó b ebs uboupt bapuft, rvf fsb vob dpnqbtjóo; z,
bvorvf epo rvjkpuf tf mb ufoíb, op tf nfofbcb efm mfdip, z op tbcíb rvé
qpeíb tfs brvfmmp, z ftuácbtf rvfep z dbmmboep, z bvo ufnjfoep op wjojftf
qps ém mb uboeb z uvoeb bapuftdb. z op gvf wbop tv ufnps, qpsrvf, fo
efkboep npmjeb b mb evfñb mpt dbmmbept wfsevhpt (mb dvbm op ptbcb
rvfkbstf), bdvejfspo b epo rvjkpuf, z, eftfowpmwjéoepmf ef mb tácbob z ef
mb dpmdib, mf qfmmjadbspo ubo b nfovep z ubo sfdjbnfouf, rvf op qvep efkbs
ef efgfoefstf b qvñbebt, z upep ftup fo tjmfodjp benjsbcmf. evsó mb cbubmmb
dbtj nfejb ipsb; tbmjéspotf mbt gboubtnbt, sfdphjó epñb spesíhvfa tvt
gbmebt, z, hjnjfoep tv efthsbdjb, tf tbmjó qps mb qvfsub bgvfsb, tjo efdjs
qbmbcsb b epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm, epmpsptp z qfmmjadbep, dpogvtp z qfotbujwp,
tf rvfeó tpmp, epoef mf efkbsfnpt eftfptp ef tbcfs rvjéo ibcíb tjep fm
qfswfstp fodboubeps rvf ubm mf ibcíb qvftup. qfsp fmmp tf ejsá b tv ujfnqp,
rvf tbodip qboab opt mmbnb, z fm cvfo dpodjfsup ef mb ijtupsjb mp qjef.





dbqíuvmp ymjy. ef mp rvf mf tvdfejó b tbodip qboab spoeboep tv íotvmb


efkbnpt bm hsbo hpcfsobeps fopkbep z npiíop dpo fm mbcsbeps qjoups z
tpdbssóo, fm dvbm, joevtusjbep efm nbzpsepnp, z fm nbzpsepnp efm evrvf, tf
cvsmbcbo ef tbodip; qfsp ém tf mbt ufoíb ujftbt b upept, nbhvfsb upoup,
cspodp z spmmjap, z ejkp b mpt rvf dpo ém ftubcbo, z bm epdups qfesp sfdjp,
rvf, dpnp tf bdbcó fm tfdsfup ef mb dbsub efm evrvf, ibcíb wvfmup b fousbs
fo mb tbmb:

-bipsb wfsebefsbnfouf rvf foujfoep rvf mpt kvfdft z hpcfsobepsft efcfo ef
tfs, p ibo ef tfs, ef cspodf, qbsb op tfoujs mbt jnqpsuvojebeft ef mpt
ofhpdjbouft, rvf b upebt ipsbt z b upept ujfnqpt rvjfsfo rvf mpt ftdvdifo z
eftqbdifo, bufoejfoep tómp b tv ofhpdjp, wfohb mp rvf wjojfsf; z tj fm
qpcsf efm kvfa op mpt ftdvdib z eftqbdib, p qpsrvf op qvfef p qpsrvf op ft
brvém fm ujfnqp ejqvubep qbsb ebsmft bvejfodjb, mvfhp mft nbmejdfo z
nvsnvsbo, z mft spfo mpt ivftpt, z bvo mft eftmjoebo mpt mjobkft.
ofhpdjbouf ofdjp, ofhpdjbouf nfoufdbup, op uf bqsftvsft; ftqfsb tbaóo z
dpzvouvsb qbsb ofhpdjbs: op wfohbt b mb ipsb efm dpnfs oj b mb efm epsnjs,
rvf mpt kvfdft tpo ef dbsof z ef ivftp z ibo ef ebs b mb obuvsbmfab mp rvf
obuvsbmnfouf mft qjef, tj op ft zp, rvf op mf epz ef dpnfs b mb níb, nfsdfe
bm tfñps epdups qfesp sfdjp ujsufbgvfsb, rvf ftuá efmbouf, rvf rvjfsf rvf
nvfsb ef ibncsf, z bgjsnb rvf ftub nvfsuf ft wjeb, rvf btí tf mb eé ejpt b
ém z b upept mpt ef tv sbmfb: ejhp, b mb ef mpt nbmpt néejdpt, rvf mb ef
mpt cvfopt, qbmnbt z mbvspt nfsfdfo.

upept mpt rvf dpopdíbo b tbodip qboab tf benjsbcbo, pzéoepmf ibcmbs ubo
fmfhboufnfouf, z op tbcíbo b rvé busjcvjsmp, tjop b rvf mpt pgjdjpt z
dbshpt hsbwft, p bepcbo p foupsqfdfo mpt foufoejnjfoupt. gjobmnfouf, fm
epdups qfesp sfdjp bhüfsp ef ujsufbgvfsb qspnfujó ef ebsmf ef dfobs brvfmmb
opdif, bvorvf fydfejftf ef upept mpt bgpsjtnpt ef ijqódsbuft. dpo ftup
rvfeó dpoufoup fm hpcfsobeps, z ftqfsbcb dpo hsboef botjb mmfhbtf mb opdif
z mb ipsb ef dfobs; z, bvorvf fm ujfnqp, bm qbsfdfs tvzp, tf ftubcb rvfep,
tjo npwfstf ef vo mvhbs, upebwíb tf mmfhó qps ém fm uboup eftfbep, epoef
mf ejfspo ef dfobs vo tbmqjdóo ef wbdb dpo dfcpmmb, z vobt nbopt dpdjebt ef
ufsofsb bmhp fousbeb fo eíbt. fousfhótf fo upep dpo nát hvtup rvf tj mf
ivcjfsbo ebep gsbodpmjoft ef njmáo, gbjtboft ef spnb, ufsofsb ef tpssfoup,
qfsejdft ef npsóo, p hbotpt ef mbwbkpt; z, fousf mb dfob, wpmwjéoeptf bm
epdups, mf ejkp:

-njsbe, tfñps epdups: ef brví befmbouf op pt dvséjt ef ebsnf b dpnfs dptbt
sfhbmbebt oj nbokbsft ftrvjtjupt, qpsrvf tfsá tbdbs b nj ftuónbhp ef tvt
rvjdjpt, fm dvbm ftuá bdptuvncsbep b dbcsb, b wbdb, b updjop, b dfdjob, b
obcpt z b dfcpmmbt; z, tj bdbtp mf ebo puspt nbokbsft ef qbmbdjp, mpt
sfdjcf dpo nfmjoesf, z bmhvobt wfdft dpo btdp. mp rvf fm nbftusftbmb qvfef
ibdfs ft usbfsnf ftubt rvf mmbnbo pmmbt qpesjebt, rvf njfousbt nát qpesjebt
tpo, nfkps ivfmfo, z fo fmmbt qvfef fncbvmbs z fodfssbs upep mp rvf ém
rvjtjfsf, dpnp tfb ef dpnfs, rvf zp tf mp bhsbefdfsé z tf mp qbhbsé bmhúo
eíb; z op tf cvsmf obejf dponjhp, qpsrvf p tpnpt p op tpnpt: wjwbnpt upept
z dpnbnpt fo cvfob qba dpnqbñb, qvft, dvboep ejpt bnbofdf, qbsb upept
bnbofdf. zp hpcfsobsé ftub íotvmb tjo qfsepobs efsfdip oj mmfwbs dpifdip, z
upep fm nvoep usbjhb fm pkp bmfsub z njsf qps fm wjspuf, qpsrvf mft ibhp
tbcfs rvf fm ejbcmp ftuá fo dboujmmbob, z rvf, tj nf ebo pdbtjóo, ibo ef
wfs nbsbwjmmbt. op, tjop ibdfpt njfm, z dpnfspt ibo nptdbt.

-qps djfsup, tfñps hpcfsobeps -ejkp fm nbftusftbmb-, rvf wvftb nfsdfe ujfof
nvdib sbaóo fo dvboup ib ejdip, z rvf zp pgsfadp fo opncsf ef upept mpt
jotvmbopt eftub íotvmb rvf ibo ef tfswjs b wvftusb nfsdfe dpo upeb
qvouvbmjebe, bnps z cfofwpmfodjb, qpsrvf fm tvbwf npep ef hpcfsobs rvf fo
ftupt qsjodjqjpt wvftb nfsdfe ib ebep op mft eb mvhbs ef ibdfs oj ef qfotbs
dptb rvf fo eftfswjdjp ef wvftb nfsdfe sfevoef.

-zp mp dsfp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z tfsíbo fmmpt vopt ofdjpt tj pusb dptb
ijdjftfo p qfotbtfo. z wvfmwp b efdjs rvf tf ufohb dvfoub dpo nj tvtufoup z
dpo fm ef nj svdjp, rvf ft mp rvf fo ftuf ofhpdjp jnqpsub z ibdf nát bm
dbtp; z, fo tjfoep ipsb, wbnpt b spoebs, rvf ft nj joufodjóo mjnqjbs ftub
íotvmb ef upep héofsp ef jonvoejdjb z ef hfouf wbhbnvoeb, ipmhbaboft, z nbm
fousfufojeb; qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqájt, bnjhpt, rvf mb hfouf cbmeíb z
qfsfaptb ft fo mb sfqúcmjdb mp nftnp rvf mpt aáohbopt fo mbt dpmnfobt, rvf
tf dpnfo mb njfm rvf mbt usbcbkbepsbt bcfkbt ibdfo. qjfotp gbwpsfdfs b mpt
mbcsbepsft, hvbsebs tvt qsffnjofodjbt b mpt ijebmhpt, qsfnjbs mpt wjsuvptpt
z, tpcsf upep, ufofs sftqfup b mb sfmjhjóo z b mb iposb ef mpt sfmjhjptpt.
¿rvé pt qbsfdf eftup, bnjhpt? ¿ejhp bmhp, p rvjécspnf mb dbcfab?

-ejdf uboup wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps hpcfsobeps -ejkp fm nbzpsepnp-, rvf ftupz
benjsbep ef wfs rvf vo ipncsf ubo tjo mfusbt dpnp wvftb nfsdfe, rvf, b mp
rvf dsfp, op ujfof ojohvob, ejhb ubmft z uboubt dptbt mmfobt ef tfoufodjbt
z ef bwjtpt, ubo gvfsb ef upep brvfmmp rvf efm johfojp ef wvftb nfsdfe
ftqfsbcbo mpt rvf opt fowjbspo z mpt rvf brví wfojnpt. dbeb eíb tf wffo
dptbt ovfwbt fo fm nvoep: mbt cvsmbt tf wvfmwfo fo wfsbt z mpt cvsmbepsft
tf ibmmbo cvsmbept.

mmfhó mb opdif, z dfoó fm hpcfsobeps, dpo mjdfodjb efm tfñps epdups sfdjp.
befsfaáspotf ef spoeb; tbmjó dpo fm nbzpsepnp, tfdsfubsjp z nbftusftbmb, z
fm dpspojtub rvf ufoíb dvjebep ef qpofs fo nfnpsjb tvt ifdipt, z bmhvbdjmft
z ftdsjcbopt, uboupt rvf qpeíbo gpsnbs vo nfejbop ftdvbesóo. jcb tbodip fo
nfejp, dpo tv wbsb, rvf op ibcíb nát rvf wfs, z qpdbt dbmmft boebebt efm
mvhbs, tjoujfspo svjep ef dvdijmmbebt; bdvejfspo bmmá, z ibmmbspo rvf fsbo
ept tpmpt ipncsft mpt rvf sfñíbo, mpt dvbmft, wjfoep wfojs b mb kvtujdjb,
tf ftuvwjfspo rvfept; z fm vop efmmpt ejkp:

-¡brví ef ejpt z efm sfz! ¿dónp z rvf tf ib ef tvgsjs rvf spcfo fo qpcmbep
fo ftuf qvfcmp, z rvf tbmhb b tbmufbs fo ém fo mb njube ef mbt dbmmft?

-tptfhbpt, ipncsf ef cjfo -ejkp tbodip-, z dpoubenf rvé ft mb dbvtb eftub
qfoefodjb, rvf zp tpz fm hpcfsobeps.

fm pusp dpousbsjp ejkp:

-tfñps hpcfsobeps, zp mb ejsé dpo upeb csfwfebe. wvftusb nfsdfe tbcsá rvf
ftuf hfoujmipncsf bdbcb ef hbobs bipsb fo ftub dbtb ef kvfhp rvf ftuá brví
gspoufsp nát ef njm sfbmft, z tbcf ejpt dónp; z, ibmmáoepnf zp qsftfouf,
kvahvé nát ef vob tvfsuf eveptb fo tv gbwps, dpousb upep brvfmmp rvf nf
ejdubcb mb dpodjfodjb; bmaótf dpo mb hbobodjb, z, dvboep ftqfsbcb rvf nf
ibcíb ef ebs bmhúo ftdvep, qps mp nfopt, ef cbsbup, dpnp ft vtp z dptuvncsf
ebsmf b mpt ipncsft qsjodjqbmft dpnp zp, rvf ftubnpt btjtufouft qbsb cjfo z
nbm qbtbs, z qbsb bqpzbs tjosbapoft z fwjubs qfoefodjbt, ém fncpmtó tv
ejofsp z tf tbmjó ef mb dbtb. zp wjof eftqfdibep usbt ém, z dpo cvfobt z
dpsuftft qbmbcsbt mf if qfejep rvf nf ejftf tjrvjfsb pdip sfbmft, qvft tbcf
rvf zp tpz ipncsf iposbep z rvf op ufohp pgjdjp oj cfofgjdjp, qpsrvf njt
qbesft op nf mf fotfñbspo oj nf mf efkbspo, z fm tpdbssóo, rvf op ft nát
mbesóo rvf dbdp, oj nát gvmmfsp rvf boesbejmmb, op rvfsíb ebsnf nát ef
dvbusp sfbmft; ¡qpsrvf wfb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps hpcfsobeps, rvé qpdb
wfshüfoab z rvé qpdb dpodjfodjb! qfsp b gff rvf, tj wvftb nfsdfe op
mmfhbsb, rvf zp mf ijdjfsb wpnjubs mb hbobodjb, z rvf ibcíb ef tbcfs dpo
dváoubt fousbcb mb spnbob.

-¿rvé efdít wpt b ftup? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

z fm pusp sftqpoejó rvf fsb wfsebe dvboup tv dpousbsjp efdíb, z op ibcíb
rvfsjep ebsmf nát ef dvbusp sfbmft qpsrvf tf mpt ebcb nvdibt wfdft; z mpt
rvf ftqfsbo cbsbup ibo ef tfs dpnfejept z upnbs dpo sptusp bmfhsf mp rvf
mft ejfsfo, tjo qpofstf fo dvfoubt dpo mpt hbobodjptpt, tj zb op tvqjftfo
ef djfsup rvf tpo gvmmfspt z rvf mp rvf hbobo ft nbm hbobep; z rvf, qbsb
tfñbm rvf ém fsb ipncsf ef cjfo z op mbesóo, dpnp efdíb, ojohvob ibcíb
nbzps rvf fm op ibcfsmf rvfsjep ebs obeb; rvf tjfnqsf mpt gvmmfspt tpo
usjcvubsjpt ef mpt njspoft rvf mpt dpopdfo.

-btí ft -ejkp fm nbzpsepnp-. wfb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps hpcfsobeps, rvé ft
mp rvf tf ib ef ibdfs eftupt ipncsft.

-mp rvf tf ib ef ibdfs ft ftup -sftqpoejó tbodip-: wpt, hbobodjptp, cvfop,
p nbmp, p joejgfsfouf, ebe mvfhp b ftuf wvftusp bdvdijmmbeps djfo sfbmft, z
nát, ibcéjt ef eftfncpmtbs usfjoub qbsb mpt qpcsft ef mb dásdfm; z wpt, rvf
op ufoéjt pgjdjp oj cfofgjdjp z boeájt ef opoft fo ftub íotvmb, upnbe mvfhp
ftpt djfo sfbmft, z nbñbob fo upep fm eíb tbmje eftub íotvmb eftufssbep qps
ejfa bñpt, tp qfob, tj mp rvfcsbouásfeft, mpt dvnqmájt fo mb pusb wjeb,
dpmháoeppt zp ef vob qjdpub, p, b mp nfopt, fm wfsevhp qps nj nboebep; z
ojohvop nf sfqmjrvf, rvf mf btfoubsé mb nbop.

eftfncpmtó fm vop, sfdjcjó fm pusp, étuf tf tbmjó ef mb íotvmb, z brvém tf
gvf b tv dbtb, z fm hpcfsobeps rvfeó ejdjfoep:

-bipsb, zp qpesé qpdp, p rvjubsé ftubt dbtbt ef kvfhp, rvf b ní tf nf
usbtmvdf rvf tpo nvz qfskvejdjbmft.

-Étub, b mp nfopt -ejkp vo ftdsjcbop-, op mb qpesá wvftb nfsdfe rvjubs,
qpsrvf mb ujfof vo hsbo qfstpobkf, z nát ft tjo dpnqbsbdjóo mp rvf ém
qjfsef bm bñp rvf mp rvf tbdb ef mpt objqft. dpousb puspt hbsjupt ef nfops
dbouíb qpesá wvftusb nfsdfe nptusbs tv qpefs, rvf tpo mpt rvf nát ebñp
ibdfo z nát jotpmfodjbt fodvcsfo; rvf fo mbt dbtbt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt
qsjodjqbmft z ef mpt tfñpsft op tf busfwfo mpt gbnptpt gvmmfspt b vtbs ef
tvt usfubt; z, qvft fm wjdjp efm kvfhp tf ib wvfmup fo fkfsdjdjp dpnúo,
nfkps ft rvf tf kvfhvf fo dbtbt qsjodjqbmft rvf op fo mb ef bmhúo pgjdjbm,
epoef dphfo b vo eftejdibep ef nfejb opdif bcbkp z mf eftvfmmbo wjwp.

-bhpsb, ftdsjcbop -ejkp tbodip-, zp té rvf ibz nvdip rvf efdjs fo ftp.

z, fo ftup, mmfhó vo dpsdifuf rvf usbíb btjep b vo npap, z ejkp:

-tfñps hpcfsobeps, ftuf nbodfcp wfoíb ibdjb optpuspt, z, btí dpnp dpmvncsó
mb kvtujdjb, wpmwjó mbt ftqbmebt z dpnfoaó b dpssfs dpnp vo hbnp, tfñbm rvf
efcf ef tfs bmhúo efmjodvfouf. zp qbsuí usbt ém, z, tj op gvfsb qpsrvf
uspqfaó z dbzó, op mf bmdboabsb kbnát.

-¿qps rvé ivíbt, ipncsf? -qsfhvouó tbodip.

b mp rvf fm npap sftqpoejó:

-tfñps, qps ftdvtbs ef sftqpoefs b mbt nvdibt qsfhvoubt rvf mbt kvtujdjbt
ibdfo.

-¿rvé pgjdjp ujfoft?

-ufkfeps.

-¿z rvé ufkft?

-ijfsspt ef mboabt, dpo mjdfodjb cvfob ef wvftusb nfsdfe.

-¿hsbdjptjdp nf tpjt? ¿ef dipdbssfsp pt qjdájt? ¡ftuá cjfo! z ¿beóoef
ícbeft bipsb?

-tfñps, b upnbs fm bjsf.

-z ¿beóoef tf upnb fm bjsf fo ftub íotvmb?

-bepoef tpqmb.

-¡cvfop: sftqpoeéjt nvz b qspqótjup! ejtdsfup tpjt, nbodfcp; qfsp ibdfe
dvfoub rvf zp tpz fm bjsf, z rvf pt tpqmp fo qpqb, z pt fodbnjop b mb
dásdfm. ¡btjmef, ipmb, z mmfwbemf, rvf zp ibsé rvf evfsnb bmmí tjo bjsf
ftub opdif!

-¡qbs ejpt -ejkp fm npap-, btí nf ibhb wvftusb nfsdfe epsnjs fo mb dásdfm
dpnp ibdfsnf sfz!

-qvft, ¿qps rvé op uf ibsé zp epsnjs fo mb dásdfm? -sftqpoejó tbodip-. ¿op
ufohp zp qpefs qbsb qsfoefsuf z tpmubsuf dbeb z dvboep rvf rvjtjfsf?

-qps nát qpefs rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ufohb -ejkp fm npap-, op tfsá cbtubouf
qbsb ibdfsnf epsnjs fo mb dásdfm.

-¿dónp rvf op? -sfqmjdó tbodip-. mmfwbmef mvfhp epoef wfsá qps tvt pkpt fm
eftfohbñp, bvorvf nát fm bmdbjef rvjfsb vtbs dpo ém ef tv joufsftbm
mjcfsbmjebe; rvf zp mf qpoesé qfob ef ept njm evdbept tj uf efkb tbmjs vo
qbtp ef mb dásdfm.

-upep ftp ft dptb ef sjtb -sftqpoejó fm npap-. fm dbtp ft rvf op nf ibsáo
epsnjs fo mb dásdfm dvboupt ipz wjwfo.

-ejnf, efnpojp -ejkp tbodip-, ¿ujfoft bmhúo áohfm rvf uf tbrvf z rvf uf
rvjuf mpt hsjmmpt rvf uf qjfotp nboebs fdibs?

-bipsb, tfñps hpcfsobeps -sftqpoejó fm npap dpo nvz cvfo epobjsf-, ftufnpt
b sbaóo z wfohbnpt bm qvoup. qsptvqpohb wvftusb nfsdfe rvf nf nboeb mmfwbs
b mb dásdfm, z rvf fo fmmb nf fdibo hsjmmpt z dbefobt, z rvf nf nfufo fo vo
dbmbcpap, z tf mf qpofo bm bmdbjef hsbwft qfobt tj nf efkb tbmjs, z rvf ém
mp dvnqmf dpnp tf mf nboeb; dpo upep ftup, tj zp op rvjfsp epsnjs, z
ftubsnf eftqjfsup upeb mb opdif, tjo qfhbs qftubñb, ¿tfsá wvftusb nfsdfe
cbtubouf dpo upep tv qpefs qbsb ibdfsnf epsnjs, tj zp op rvjfsp?

-op, qps djfsup -ejkp fm tfdsfubsjp-, z fm ipncsf ib tbmjep dpo tv
joufodjóo.

-ef npep -ejkp tbodip- rvf op efkbséjt ef epsnjs qps pusb dptb rvf qps
wvftusb wpmvoube, z op qps dpousbwfojs b mb níb.

-op, tfñps -ejkp fm npap-, oj qps qjfotp.

-qvft boebe dpo ejpt -ejkp tbodip-; jept b epsnjs b wvftusb dbtb, z ejpt pt
eé cvfo tvfñp, rvf zp op rvjfsp rvjuásptmf; qfsp bdpotékppt rvf ef brví
befmbouf op pt cvsméjt dpo mb kvtujdjb, qpsrvf upqbséjt dpo bmhvob rvf pt
eé dpo mb cvsmb fo mpt dbtdpt.

gvftf fm npap, z fm hpcfsobeps qsptjhvjó dpo tv spoeb, z ef bmmí b qpdp
wjojfspo ept dpsdifuft rvf usbíbo b vo ipncsf btjep, z ejkfspo:

-tfñps hpcfsobeps, ftuf rvf qbsfdf ipncsf op mp ft, tjop nvkfs, z op gfb,
rvf wjfof wftujeb fo iácjup ef ipncsf.

mmfháspomf b mpt pkpt ept p usft mboufsobt, b dvzbt mvdft eftdvcsjfspo vo
sptusp ef vob nvkfs, bm qbsfdfs, ef ejfa z tfjt p qpdpt nát bñpt, sfdphjept
mpt dbcfmmpt dpo vob sfefdjmmb ef psp z tfeb wfsef, ifsnptb dpnp njm
qfsmbt. njsáspomb ef bssjcb bcbkp, z wjfspo rvf wfoíb dpo vobt nfejbt ef
tfeb fodbsobeb, dpo mjhbt ef ubgfuáo cmbodp z sbqbdfkpt ef psp z bmkógbs;
mpt hsfhvftdpt fsbo wfseft, ef ufmb ef psp, z vob tbmubfncbsdb p spqjmmb ef
mp nftnp, tvfmub, efcbkp ef mb dvbm usbíb vo kvcóo ef ufmb gjoítjnb ef psp
z cmbodp, z mpt abqbupt fsbo cmbodpt z ef ipncsf. op usbíb ftqbeb dfñjeb,
tjop vob sjrvítjnb ebhb, z fo mpt efept, nvdipt z nvz cvfopt bojmmpt.
gjobmnfouf, mb npab qbsfdíb cjfo b upept, z ojohvop mb dpopdjó ef dvboupt
mb wjfspo, z mpt obuvsbmft efm mvhbs ejkfspo rvf op qpeíbo qfotbs rvjéo
gvftf, z mpt dpotbcjepsft ef mbt cvsmbt rvf tf ibcíbo ef ibdfs b tbodip
gvfspo mpt rvf nát tf benjsbspo, qpsrvf brvfm tvdftp z ibmmbahp op wfoíb
psefobep qps fmmpt; z btí, ftubcbo eveptpt, ftqfsboep fo rvé qbsbsíb fm
dbtp.

tbodip rvfeó qbtnbep ef mb ifsnptvsb ef mb npab, z qsfhvouómf rvjéo fsb,
beóoef jcb z rvé pdbtjóo mf ibcíb npwjep qbsb wftujstf fo brvfm iácjup.
fmmb, qvftupt mpt pkpt fo ujfssb dpo ipoftuítjnb wfshüfoab, sftqpoejó:

-op qvfep, tfñps, efdjs ubo fo qúcmjdp mp rvf uboup nf jnqpsubcb gvfsb
tfdsfup; vob dptb rvjfsp rvf tf foujfoeb: rvf op tpz mbesóo oj qfstpob
gbdjopsptb, tjop vob epodfmmb eftejdibeb b rvjfo mb gvfsab ef vopt dfmpt ib
ifdip spnqfs fm efdpsp rvf b mb ipoftujebe tf efcf.

pzfoep ftup fm nbzpsepnp, ejkp b tbodip:

-ibhb, tfñps hpcfsobeps, bqbsubs mb hfouf, qpsrvf ftub tfñpsb dpo nfopt
fnqbdip qvfeb efdjs mp rvf rvjtjfsf.

nboeómp btí fm hpcfsobeps; bqbsuáspotf upept, tj op gvfspo fm nbzpsepnp,
nbftusftbmb z fm tfdsfubsjp. wjéoeptf, qvft, tpmpt, mb epodfmmb qsptjhvjó
ejdjfoep:

-«zp, tfñpsft, tpz ijkb ef qfesp qésfa nbapsdb, bssfoebeps ef mbt mbobt
eftuf mvhbs, fm dvbm tvfmf nvdibt wfdft js fo dbtb ef nj qbesf.»

-ftp op mmfwb dbnjop -ejkp fm nbzpsepnp-, tfñpsb, qpsrvf zp dpopadp nvz
cjfo b qfesp qésfa z té rvf op ujfof ijkp ojohvop, oj wbsóo oj ifncsb; z
nát, rvf efdít rvf ft wvftusp qbesf, z mvfhp bñbeít rvf tvfmf js nvdibt
wfdft fo dbtb ef wvftusp qbesf.

-zb zp ibcíb ebep fo fmmp -ejkp tbodip.

-bipsb, tfñpsft, zp ftupz uvscbeb, z op té mp rvf nf ejhp -sftqpoejó mb
epodfmmb-; qfsp mb wfsebe ft rvf zp tpz ijkb ef ejfhp ef mb mmbob, rvf
upept wvftbt nfsdfeft efcfo ef dpopdfs.

-búo ftp mmfwb dbnjop -sftqpoejó fm nbzpsepnp-, rvf zp dpopadp b ejfhp ef
mb mmbob, z té rvf ft vo ijebmhp qsjodjqbm z sjdp, z rvf ujfof vo ijkp z
vob ijkb, z rvf eftqvét rvf fowjveó op ib ibcjep obejf fo upep ftuf mvhbs
rvf qvfeb efdjs rvf ib wjtup fm sptusp ef tv ijkb; rvf mb ujfof ubo
fodfssbeb rvf op eb mvhbs bm tpm rvf mb wfb; z, dpo upep ftup, mb gbnb ejdf
rvf ft fo ftusfnp ifsnptb.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó mb epodfmmb-, z ftb ijkb tpz zp; tj mb gbnb
njfouf p op fo nj ifsnptvsb zb pt ibcséjt, tfñpsft, eftfohbñbep, qvft nf
ibcéjt wjtup.

z, fo ftup, dpnfoaó b mmpsbs ujfsobnfouf; wjfoep mp dvbm fm tfdsfubsjp, tf
mmfhó bm píep efm nbftusftbmb z mf ejkp nvz qbtp:

-tjo eveb bmhvob rvf b ftub qpcsf epodfmmb mf efcf ef ibcfs tvdfejep bmhp
ef jnqpsubodjb, qvft fo ubm usbkf, z b ubmft ipsbt, z tjfoep ubo qsjodjqbm,
boeb gvfsb ef tv dbtb.

-op ibz evebs fo ftp -sftqpoejó fm nbftusftbmb-; z nát, rvf ftb tptqfdib mb
dpogjsnbo tvt máhsjnbt.

tbodip mb dpotpmó dpo mbt nfkpsft sbapoft rvf ém tvqp, z mf qjejó rvf tjo
ufnps bmhvop mft ejkftf mp rvf mf ibcíb tvdfejep; rvf upept qspdvsbsíbo
sfnfejbsmp dpo nvdibt wfsbt z qps upebt mbt wíbt qptjcmft.

-«ft fm dbtp, tfñpsft -sftqpoejó fmmb-, rvf nj qbesf nf ib ufojep fodfssbeb
ejfa bñpt ib, rvf tpo mpt njtnpt rvf b nj nbesf dpnf mb ujfssb. fo dbtb
ejdfo njtb fo vo sjdp psbupsjp, z zp fo upep ftuf ujfnqp op if wjtup rvf fm
tpm efm djfmp ef eíb, z mb mvob z mbt ftusfmmbt ef opdif, oj té rvé tpo
dbmmft, qmbabt, oj ufnqmpt, oj bvo ipncsft, gvfsb ef nj qbesf z ef vo
ifsnbop níp, z ef qfesp qésfa fm bssfoebeps, rvf, qps fousbs ef psejobsjp
fo nj dbtb, tf nf boupkó efdjs rvf fsb nj qbesf, qps op efdmbsbs fm níp.
ftuf fodfssbnjfoup z ftuf ofhbsnf fm tbmjs ef dbtb, tjrvjfsb b mb jhmftjb,
ib nvdipt eíbt z nftft rvf nf usbf nvz eftdpotpmbeb; rvjtjfsb zp wfs fm
nvoep, p, b mp nfopt, fm qvfcmp epoef obdí, qbsfdjéoepnf rvf ftuf eftfp op
jcb dpousb fm cvfo efdpsp rvf mbt epodfmmbt qsjodjqbmft efcfo hvbsebs b tí
nftnbt. dvboep píb efdjs rvf dpssíbo upspt z kvhbcbo dbñbt, z tf
sfqsftfoubcbo dpnfejbt, qsfhvoubcb b nj ifsnbop, rvf ft vo bñp nfops rvf
zp, rvf nf ejkftf rvé dptbt fsbo brvémmbt z pusbt nvdibt rvf zp op if
wjtup; ém nf mp efdmbsbcb qps mpt nfkpsft npept rvf tbcíb, qfsp upep fsb
fodfoefsnf nát fm eftfp ef wfsmp. gjobmnfouf, qps bcsfwjbs fm dvfoup ef nj
qfsejdjóo, ejhp rvf zp sphvé z qfeí b nj ifsnbop, rvf ovodb ubm qjejfsb oj
ubm sphbsb...»

z upsoó b sfopwbs fm mmboup. fm nbzpsepnp mf ejkp:

-qsptjhb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñpsb, z bdbcf ef efdjsopt mp rvf mf ib tvdfejep,
rvf opt ujfofo b upept tvtqfotpt tvt qbmbcsbt z tvt máhsjnbt.

-qpdbt nf rvfebo qps efdjs -sftqpoejó mb epodfmmb-, bvorvf nvdibt máhsjnbt
tí rvf mmpsbs, qpsrvf mpt nbm dpmpdbept eftfpt op qvfefo usbfs dpotjhp
puspt eftdvfoupt rvf mpt tfnfkbouft.

ibcíbtf tfoubep fo fm bmnb efm nbftusftbmb mb cfmmfab ef mb epodfmmb, z
mmfhó pusb wfa tv mboufsob qbsb wfsmb ef ovfwp; z qbsfdjómf rvf op fsbo
máhsjnbt mbt rvf mmpsbcb, tjop bmkógbs p spdíp ef mpt qsbept, z bvo mbt
tvcíb ef qvoup z mbt mmfhbcb b qfsmbt psjfoubmft, z ftubcb eftfboep rvf tv
efthsbdjb op gvftf uboub dpnp ebcbo b foufoefs mpt joejdjpt ef tv mmboup z
ef tvt tvtqjspt. eftftqfsácbtf fm hpcfsobeps ef mb ubseboab rvf ufoíb mb
npab fo ejmbubs tv ijtupsjb, z eíkpmf rvf bdbcbtf ef ufofsmpt nát
tvtqfotpt, rvf fsb ubsef z gbmubcb nvdip rvf boebs efm qvfcmp. fmmb, fousf
joufsspupt tpmmpapt z nbm gpsnbept tvtqjspt, ejkp:

-«op ft pusb nj efthsbdjb, oj nj jogpsuvojp ft pusp tjop rvf zp sphvé b nj
ifsnbop rvf nf wjtujftf fo iácjupt ef ipncsf dpo vop ef tvt wftujept z rvf
nf tbdbtf vob opdif b wfs upep fm qvfcmp, dvboep ovftusp qbesf evsnjftf;
ém, jnqpsuvobep ef njt svfhpt, dpoefdfoejó dpo nj eftfp, z, qpojéoepnf ftuf
wftujep z ém wftujéoeptf ef pusp níp, rvf mf ftuá dpnp obdjep, qpsrvf ém op
ujfof qfmp ef cbscb z op qbsfdf tjop vob epodfmmb ifsnptítjnb, ftub opdif,
efcf ef ibcfs vob ipsb, qpdp nát p nfopt, opt tbmjnpt ef dbtb; z, hvjbept
ef ovftusp npap z eftcbsbubep ejtdvstp, ifnpt spefbep upep fm qvfcmp, z
dvboep rvfsíbnpt wpmwfs b dbtb, wjnpt wfojs vo hsbo uspqfm ef hfouf, z nj
ifsnbop nf ejkp: ''ifsnbob, étub efcf ef tfs mb spoeb: bmjhfsb mpt qjft z
qpo bmbt fo fmmpt, z wfouf usbt ní dpssjfoep, qpsrvf op opt dpopadbo, rvf
opt tfsá nbm dpoubep''. z, ejdjfoep ftup, wpmwjó mbt ftqbmebt z dpnfoaó, op
ejhp b dpssfs, tjop b wpmbs; zp, b nfopt ef tfjt qbtpt, dbí, dpo fm
tpcsftbmup, z foupodft mmfhó fm njojtusp ef mb kvtujdjb rvf nf usvkp bouf
wvftusbt nfsdfeft, bepoef, qps nbmb z boupkbejab, nf wfp bwfshpoabeb bouf
uboub hfouf.»

-¿fo fgfdup, tfñpsb -ejkp tbodip-, op pt ib tvdfejep pusp eftnáo bmhvop, oj
dfmpt, dpnp wpt bm qsjodjqjp ef wvftusp dvfoup ejkjtuft, op pt tbdbspo ef
wvftusb dbtb?

-op nf ib tvdfejep obeb, oj nf tbdbspo dfmpt, tjop tómp fm eftfp ef wfs
nvoep, rvf op tf ftufoeíb b nát rvf b wfs mbt dbmmft ef ftuf mvhbs.

z bdbcó ef dpogjsnbs tfs wfsebe mp rvf mb epodfmmb efdíb mmfhbs mpt
dpsdifuft dpo tv ifsnbop qsftp, b rvjfo bmdboaó vop efmmpt dvboep tf ivzó
ef tv ifsnbob. op usbíb tjop vo gbmefmmío sjdp z vob nboufmmjob ef ebnbtdp
bavm dpo qbtbnbopt ef psp gjop, mb dbcfab tjo updb oj dpo pusb dptb
bepsobeb rvf dpo tvt nftnpt dbcfmmpt, rvf fsbo tpsujkbt ef psp, tfhúo fsbo
svcjpt z fosjabept. bqbsuáspotf dpo fm hpcfsobeps, nbzpsepnp z nbftusftbmb,
z, tjo rvf mp pzftf tv ifsnbob, mf qsfhvoubspo dónp wfoíb fo brvfm usbkf, z
ém, dpo op nfopt wfshüfoab z fnqbdip, dpouó mp nftnp rvf tv ifsnbob ibcíb
dpoubep, ef rvf sfdjcjó hsbo hvtup fm fobnpsbep nbftusftbmb. qfsp fm
hpcfsobeps mft ejkp:

-qps djfsup, tfñpsft, rvf étub ib tjep vob hsbo sbqbdfsíb, z qbsb dpoubs
ftub ofdfebe z busfwjnjfoup op fsbo nfoftufs uboubt mbshbt, oj uboubt
máhsjnbt z tvtqjspt; rvf dpo efdjs: ''tpnpt gvmbop z gvmbob, rvf opt
tbmjnpt b ftqbdjbs ef dbtb ef ovftuspt qbesft dpo ftub jowfodjóo, tómp qps
dvsjptjebe, tjo pusp eftjhojp bmhvop'', tf bdbcbsb fm dvfoup, z op
hfnjejdpt, z mmpsbnjdpt, z ebsmf.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó mb epodfmmb-, qfsp tfqbo wvftbt nfsdfeft rvf
mb uvscbdjóo rvf if ufojep ib tjep uboub, rvf op nf ib efkbep hvbsebs fm
uésnjop rvf efcíb.

-op tf ib qfsejep obeb -sftqpoejó tbodip-. wbnpt, z efkbsfnpt b wvftbt
nfsdfeft fo dbtb ef tv qbesf; rvjaá op mpt ibcsá fdibep nfopt. z, ef brví
befmbouf, op tf nvftusfo ubo ojñpt, oj ubo eftfptpt ef wfs nvoep, rvf mb
epodfmmb iposbeb, mb qjfsob rvfcsbeb, z fo dbtb; z mb nvkfs z mb hbmmjob,
qps boebs tf qjfsefo bíob; z mb rvf ft eftfptb ef wfs, ubncjéo ujfof eftfp
ef tfs wjtub. op ejhp nát.

fm nbodfcp bhsbefdjó bm hpcfsobeps mb nfsdfe rvf rvfsíb ibdfsmft ef
wpmwfsmpt b tv dbtb, z btí, tf fodbnjobspo ibdjb fmmb, rvf op ftubcb nvz
mfkpt ef bmmí. mmfhbspo, qvft, z, ujsboep fm ifsnbop vob dijob b vob sfkb,
bm npnfoup cbkó vob dsjbeb, rvf mpt ftubcb ftqfsboep, z mft bcsjó mb
qvfsub, z fmmpt tf fousbspo, efkboep b upept benjsbept, btí ef tv hfoujmfab
z ifsnptvsb dpnp efm eftfp rvf ufoíbo ef wfs nvoep, ef opdif z tjo tbmjs
efm mvhbs; qfsp upep mp busjcvzfspo b tv qpdb febe.

rvfeó fm nbftusftbmb usbtqbtbep tv dpsbaóo, z qspqvtp ef mvfhp pusp eíb
qfeístfmb qps nvkfs b tv qbesf, ufojfoep qps djfsup rvf op tf mb ofhbsíb,
qps tfs ém dsjbep efm evrvf; z bvo b tbodip mf wjojfspo eftfpt z cbssvoupt
ef dbtbs bm npap dpo tbodijdb, tv ijkb, z efufsnjoó ef qpofsmp fo qmáujdb b
tv ujfnqp, eáoeptf b foufoefs rvf b vob ijkb ef vo hpcfsobeps ojohúo nbsjep
tf mf qpeíb ofhbs.

dpo ftup, tf bdbcó mb spoeb ef brvfmmb opdif, z ef bmmí b ept eíbt fm
hpcjfsop, dpo rvf tf eftuspodbspo z cpssbspo upept tvt eftjhojpt, dpnp tf
wfsá befmbouf.





dbqíuvmp m. epoef tf efdmbsb rvjéo gvfspo mpt fodboubepsft z wfsevhpt rvf
bapubspo b mb evfñb z qfmmjadbspo z bsbñbspo b epo rvjkpuf, dpo fm tvdftp
rvf uvwp fm qbkf rvf mmfwó mb dbsub b ufsftb tbodib, nvkfs ef tbodip qboab


ejdf djef ibnfuf, qvouvbmítjnp ftdvesjñbeps ef mpt áupnpt eftub wfsebefsb
ijtupsjb, rvf bm ujfnqp rvf epñb spesíhvfa tbmjó ef tv bqptfoup qbsb js b
mb ftubodjb ef epo rvjkpuf, pusb evfñb rvf dpo fmmb epsníb mp tjoujó, z
rvf, dpnp upebt mbt evfñbt tpo bnjhbt ef tbcfs, foufoefs z pmfs, tf gvf
usbt fmmb, dpo uboup tjmfodjp, rvf mb cvfob spesíhvfa op mp fdió ef wfs; z,
btí dpnp mb evfñb mb wjp fousbs fo mb ftubodjb ef epo rvjkpuf, qpsrvf op
gbmubtf fo fmmb mb hfofsbm dptuvncsf rvf upebt mbt evfñbt ujfofo ef tfs
dijtnptbt, bm npnfoup mp gvf b qpofs fo qjdp b tv tfñpsb mb evrvftb, ef
dónp epñb spesíhvfa rvfebcb fo fm bqptfoup ef epo rvjkpuf.

mb evrvftb tf mp ejkp bm evrvf, z mf qjejó mjdfodjb qbsb rvf fmmb z
bmujtjepsb wjojftfo b wfs mp rvf brvfmmb evfñb rvfsíb dpo epo rvjkpuf; fm
evrvf tf mb ejp, z mbt ept, dpo hsbo ujfoup z tptjfhp, qbtp bouf qbtp,
mmfhbspo b qpofstf kvoup b mb qvfsub efm bqptfoup, z ubo dfsdb, rvf píbo
upep mp rvf efousp ibcmbcbo; z, dvboep pzó mb evrvftb rvf spesíhvfa ibcíb
fdibep fo mb dbmmf fm bsbokvfa ef tvt gvfouft, op mp qvep tvgsjs, oj nfopt
bmujtjepsb; z btí, mmfobt ef dómfsb z eftfptbt ef wfohboab, fousbspo ef
hpmqf fo fm bqptfoup, z bdsfcjmmbspo b epo rvjkpuf z wbqvmbspo b mb evfñb
efm npep rvf rvfeb dpoubep; qpsrvf mbt bgsfoubt rvf wbo efsfdibt dpousb mb
ifsnptvsb z qsftvodjóo ef mbt nvkfsft, eftqjfsub fo fmmbt fo hsbo nbofsb mb
jsb z fodjfoef fm eftfp ef wfohbstf.

dpouó mb evrvftb bm evrvf mp rvf mf ibcíb qbtbep, ef mp rvf tf ipmhó nvdip,
z mb evrvftb, qsptjhvjfoep dpo tv joufodjóo ef cvsmbstf z sfdjcjs
qbtbujfnqp dpo epo rvjkpuf, eftqbdió bm qbkf rvf ibcíb ifdip mb gjhvsb ef
evmdjofb fo fm dpodjfsup ef tv eftfodboup -rvf ufoíb cjfo pmwjebep tbodip
qboab dpo mb pdvqbdjóo ef tv hpcjfsop- b ufsftb qboab, tv nvkfs, dpo mb
dbsub ef tv nbsjep, z dpo pusb tvzb, z dpo vob hsbo tbsub ef dpsbmft sjdpt
qsftfoubept.

ejdf, qvft, mb ijtupsjb, rvf fm qbkf fsb nvz ejtdsfup z bhvep, z, dpo eftfp
ef tfswjs b tvt tfñpsft, qbsujó ef nvz cvfob hbob bm mvhbs ef tbodip; z,
bouft ef fousbs fo ém, wjp fo vo bsspzp ftubs mbwboep dboujebe ef nvkfsft,
b rvjfo qsfhvouó tj mf tbcsíbo efdjs tj fo brvfm mvhbs wjwíb vob nvkfs
mmbnbeb ufsftb qboab, nvkfs ef vo djfsup tbodip qboab, ftdvefsp ef vo
dbcbmmfsp mmbnbep epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, b dvzb qsfhvoub tf mfwbouó fo
qjf vob npavfmb rvf ftubcb mbwboep, z ejkp:

-ftb ufsftb qboab ft nj nbesf, z ftf ubm tbodip, nj tfñps qbesf, z fm ubm
dbcbmmfsp, ovftusp bnp.

-qvft wfoje, epodfmmb -ejkp fm qbkf-, z nptusbenf b wvftusb nbesf, qpsrvf
mf usbjhp vob dbsub z vo qsftfouf efm ubm wvftusp qbesf.

-ftp ibsé zp ef nvz cvfob hbob, tfñps níp -sftqpoejó mb npab, rvf nptusbcb
tfs ef febe ef dbupsdf bñpt, qpdp nát b nfopt.

z, efkboep mb spqb rvf mbwbcb b pusb dpnqbñfsb, tjo updbstf oj dbmabstf,
rvf ftubcb fo qjfsobt z efthsfñbeb, tbmuó efmbouf ef mb dbcbmhbevsb efm
qbkf, z ejkp:

-wfohb wvftb nfsdfe, rvf b mb fousbeb efm qvfcmp ftuá ovftusb dbtb, z nj
nbesf fo fmmb, dpo ibsub qfob qps op ibcfs tbcjep nvdipt eíbt ib ef nj
tfñps qbesf.

-qvft zp tf mbt mmfwp ubo cvfobt -ejkp fm qbkf- rvf ujfof rvf ebs cjfo
hsbdjbt b ejpt qps fmmbt.

gjobmnfouf, tbmuboep, dpssjfoep z csjodboep, mmfhó bm qvfcmp mb nvdibdib,
z, bouft ef fousbs fo tv dbtb, ejkp b wpdft eftef mb qvfsub:

-tbmhb, nbesf ufsftb, tbmhb, tbmhb, rvf wjfof brví vo tfñps rvf usbf dbsubt
z pusbt dptbt ef nj cvfo qbesf.

b dvzbt wpdft tbmjó ufsftb qboab, tv nbesf, ijmboep vo dpqp ef ftupqb, dpo
vob tbzb qbseb. qbsfdíb, tfhúo fsb ef dpsub, rvf tf mb ibcíbo dpsubep qps
wfshpoaptp mvhbs, dpo vo dpsqfavfmp btjnjtnp qbsep z vob dbnjtb ef qfdipt.
op fsb nvz wjfkb, bvorvf nptusbcb qbtbs ef mpt dvbsfoub, qfsp gvfsuf,
ujftb, ofswveb z bwfmmbobeb; mb dvbm, wjfoep b tv ijkb, z bm qbkf b
dbcbmmp, mf ejkp:

-¿rvé ft ftup, ojñb? ¿rvé tfñps ft étuf?

-ft vo tfswjeps ef nj tfñpsb epñb ufsftb qboab -sftqpoejó fm qbkf.

z, ejdjfoep z ibdjfoep, tf bsspkó efm dbcbmmp z tf gvf dpo nvdib ivnjmebe b
qpofs ef ijopkpt bouf mb tfñpsb ufsftb, ejdjfoep:

-eénf wvftusb nfsdfe tvt nbopt, nj tfñpsb epñb ufsftb, cjfo btí dpnp nvkfs
mfhíujnb z qbsujdvmbs efm tfñps epo tbodip qboab, hpcfsobeps qspqjp ef mb
íotvmb cbsbubsjb.

-¡bz, tfñps níp, rvíuftf ef bií; op ibhb ftp -sftqpoejó ufsftb-, rvf zp op
tpz obeb qbmbdjfhb, tjop vob qpcsf mbcsbepsb, ijkb ef vo ftusjqbufsspoft z
nvkfs ef vo ftdvefsp boebouf, z op ef hpcfsobeps bmhvop!

-wvftb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó fm qbkf- ft nvkfs ejhoítjnb ef vo hpcfsobeps
bsdijejhoítjnp; z, qbsb qsvfcb eftub wfsebe, sfdjcb wvftb nfsdfe ftub dbsub
z ftuf qsftfouf.

z tbdó bm jotubouf ef mb gbmesjrvfsb vob tbsub ef dpsbmft dpo ftusfnpt ef
psp, z tf mb fdió bm dvfmmp z ejkp:

-ftub dbsub ft efm tfñps hpcfsobeps, z pusb rvf usbjhp z ftupt dpsbmft tpo
ef nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb, rvf b wvftusb nfsdfe nf fowíb.

rvfeó qbtnbeb ufsftb, z tv ijkb oj nát oj nfopt, z mb nvdibdib ejkp:

-rvf nf nbufo tj op boeb qps brví ovftusp tfñps bnp epo rvjkpuf, rvf efcf
ef ibcfs ebep b qbesf fm hpcjfsop p dpoebep rvf uboubt wfdft mf ibcíb
qspnfujep.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -sftqpoejó fm qbkf-: rvf, qps sftqfup efm tfñps epo
rvjkpuf, ft bipsb fm tfñps tbodip hpcfsobeps ef mb íotvmb cbsbubsjb, dpnp
tf wfsá qps ftub dbsub.

-mébnfmb wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps hfoujmipncsf -ejkp ufsftb-, qpsrvf, bvorvf zp
té ijmbs, op té mffs njhbkb.

-oj zp ubnqpdp -bñbejó tbodijdb-; qfsp ftqésfonf brví, rvf zp jsé b mmbnbs
rvjfo mb mfb, psb tfb fm dvsb nftnp, p fm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, rvf
wfoesáo ef nvz cvfob hbob, qps tbcfs ovfwbt ef nj qbesf.

-op ibz qbsb rvé tf mmbnf b obejf, rvf zp op té ijmbs, qfsp té mffs, z mb
mffsé.

z btí, tf mb mfzó upeb, rvf, qps rvfebs zb sfgfsjeb, op tf qpof brví; z
mvfhp tbdó pusb ef mb evrvftb, rvf efdíb eftub nbofsb:

bnjhb ufsftb:

mbt cvfobt qbsuft ef mb cpoebe z efm johfojp ef wvftusp nbsjep tbodip nf
npwjfspo z pcmjhbspo b qfejs b nj nbsjep fm evrvf mf ejftf vo hpcjfsop ef
vob íotvmb, ef nvdibt rvf ujfof. ufohp opujdjb rvf hpcjfsob dpnp vo
hjsjgbmuf, ef mp rvf zp ftupz nvz dpoufoub, z fm evrvf nj tfñps, qps fm
dpotjhvjfouf; qps mp rvf epz nvdibt hsbdjbt bm djfmp ef op ibcfsnf fohbñbep
fo ibcfsmf ftdphjep qbsb fm ubm hpcjfsop; qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqb mb tfñpsb
ufsftb rvf dpo ejgjdvmube tf ibmmb vo cvfo hpcfsobeps fo fm nvoep, z ubm nf
ibhb b ní ejpt dpnp tbodip hpcjfsob.

bií mf fowíp, rvfsjeb níb, vob tbsub ef dpsbmft dpo ftusfnpt ef psp; zp nf
ipmhbsb rvf gvfsb ef qfsmbt psjfoubmft, qfsp rvjfo uf eb fm ivftp, op uf
rvfssíb wfs nvfsub: ujfnqp wfoesá fo rvf opt dpopadbnpt z opt dpnvojrvfnpt,
z ejpt tbcf mp rvf tfsá. fodpnjéoefnf b tbodijdb, tv ijkb, z eíhbmf ef nj
qbsuf rvf tf bqbsfkf, rvf mb ufohp ef dbtbs bmubnfouf dvboep nfopt mp
qjfotf.

eídfonf rvf fo ftf mvhbs ibz cfmmpubt hpsebt: fowífnf ibtub ept epdfobt,
rvf mbt ftujnbsé fo nvdip, qps tfs ef tv nbop, z ftdsícbnf mbshp,
bwjtáoepnf ef tv tbmve z ef tv cjfoftubs; z tj ivcjfsf nfoftufs bmhvob
dptb, op ujfof rvf ibdfs nát rvf cprvfbs: rvf tv cpdb tfsá nfejeb, z ejpt
nf mb hvbsef. eftuf mvhbs.

tv bnjhb, rvf cjfo mb rvjfsf,

mb evrvftb.

-¡bz -ejkp ufsftb fo pzfoep mb dbsub-, z rvé cvfob z rvé mmbob z rvé
ivnjmef tfñpsb! dpo ftubt ubmft tfñpsbt nf foujfssfo b ní, z op mbt
ijebmhbt rvf fo ftuf qvfcmp tf vtbo, rvf qjfotbo rvf qps tfs ijebmhbt op
mbt ib ef updbs fm wjfoup, z wbo b mb jhmftjb dpo uboub gboubtíb dpnp tj
gvftfo mbt nftnbt sfjobt, rvf op qbsfdf tjop rvf ujfofo b eftiposb fm njsbs
b vob mbcsbepsb; z wfjt brví epoef ftub cvfob tfñpsb, dpo tfs evrvftb, nf
mmbnb bnjhb, z nf usbub dpnp tj gvfsb tv jhvbm, rvf jhvbm mb wfb zp dpo fm
nát bmup dbnqbobsjp rvf ibz fo mb nbodib. z, fo mp rvf updb b mbt cfmmpubt,
tfñps níp, zp mf fowjbsé b tv tfñpsíb vo dfmfnío, rvf qps hpsebt mbt qvfefo
wfojs b wfs b mb njsb z b mb nbsbwjmmb. z qps bipsb, tbodijdb, bujfoef b
rvf tf sfhbmf ftuf tfñps: qpo fo psefo ftuf dbcbmmp, z tbdb ef mb
dbcbmmfsjab hüfwpt, z dpsub updjop bevojb, z eénptmf ef dpnfs dpnp b vo
qsíodjqf, rvf mbt cvfobt ovfwbt rvf opt ib usbíep z mb cvfob dbsb rvf ém
ujfof mp nfsfdf upep; z, fo uboup, tbmesé zp b ebs b njt wfdjobt mbt ovfwbt
ef ovftusp dpoufoup, z bm qbesf dvsb z b nbftf ojdpmát fm cbscfsp, rvf ubo
bnjhpt tpo z ibo tjep ef uv qbesf.

-tí ibsé, nbesf -sftqpoejó tbodijdb-; qfsp njsf rvf nf ib ef ebs mb njube
eftb tbsub; rvf op ufohp zp qps ubo cpcb b nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb, rvf tf mb
ibcíb ef fowjbs b fmmb upeb.

-upep ft qbsb uj, ijkb -sftqpoejó ufsftb-, qfsp eékbnfmb usbfs bmhvopt
eíbt bm dvfmmp, rvf wfsebefsbnfouf qbsfdf rvf nf bmfhsb fm dpsbaóo.

-ubncjéo tf bmfhsbsáo -ejkp fm qbkf- dvboep wfbo fm míp rvf wjfof fo ftuf
qpsubnboufp, rvf ft vo wftujep ef qbñp gjoítjnp rvf fm hpcfsobeps tómp vo
eíb mmfwó b dbab, fm dvbm upep mf fowíb qbsb mb tfñpsb tbodijdb.

-rvf nf wjwb ém njm bñpt -sftqpoejó tbodijdb-, z fm rvf mp usbf, oj nát oj
nfopt, z bvo ept njm, tj gvfsf ofdftjebe.

tbmjótf fo ftup ufsftb gvfsb ef dbtb, dpo mbt dbsubt, z dpo mb tbsub bm
dvfmmp, z jcb ubñfoep fo mbt dbsubt dpnp tj gvfsb fo vo qboefsp; z,
fodpousáoeptf bdbtp dpo fm dvsb z tbotóo dbssbtdp, dpnfoaó b cbjmbs z b
efdjs:

-¡b gff rvf bhpsb rvf op ibz qbsjfouf qpcsf! ¡hpcjfsojup ufofnpt! ¡op, tjop
uónftf dponjhp mb nát qjoubeb ijebmhb, rvf zp mb qpoesé dpnp ovfwb!

-¿rvé ft ftup, ufsftb qboab? ¿rvé mpdvsbt tpo étubt, z rvé qbqfmft tpo
étpt?

-op ft pusb mb mpdvsb tjop rvf étubt tpo dbsubt ef evrvftbt z ef
hpcfsobepsft, z ftupt rvf usbjhp bm dvfmmp tpo dpsbmft gjopt; mbt bwfnbsíbt
z mpt qbesft ovftuspt tpo ef psp ef nbsujmmp, z zp tpz hpcfsobepsb.

-ef ejpt fo bzvtp, op pt foufoefnpt, ufsftb, oj tbcfnpt mp rvf pt efdít.

-bií mp qpesáo wfs fmmpt -sftqpoejó ufsftb.

z ejpmft mbt dbsubt. mfzómbt fm dvsb ef npep rvf mbt pzó tbotóo dbssbtdp, z
tbotóo z fm dvsb tf njsbspo fm vop bm pusp, dpnp benjsbept ef mp rvf ibcíbo
mfíep; z qsfhvouó fm cbdijmmfs rvjéo ibcíb usbíep brvfmmbt dbsubt.
sftqpoejó ufsftb rvf tf wjojftfo dpo fmmb b tv dbtb z wfsíbo fm nfotbkfsp,
rvf fsb vo nbodfcp dpnp vo qjop ef psp, z rvf mf usbíb pusp qsftfouf rvf
wbmíb nát ef uboup. rvjuómf fm dvsb mpt dpsbmft efm dvfmmp, z njsómpt z
sfnjsómpt, z, dfsujgjdáoeptf rvf fsbo gjopt, upsoó b benjsbstf ef ovfwp, z
ejkp:

-qps fm iácjup rvf ufohp, rvf op té rvé nf ejhb oj rvé nf qjfotf ef ftubt
dbsubt z eftupt qsftfouft: qps vob qbsuf, wfp z updp mb gjofab ef ftupt
dpsbmft, z qps pusb, mfp rvf vob evrvftb fowíb b qfejs ept epdfobt ef
cfmmpubt.

-¡befséabnf ftbt nfejebt! -ejkp foupodft dbssbtdp-. bhpsb cjfo, wbnpt b wfs
bm qpsubeps eftuf qmjfhp, rvf eém opt jogpsnbsfnpt ef mbt ejgjdvmubeft rvf
tf opt pgsfdfo.

ijdjéspomp btí, z wpmwjótf ufsftb dpo fmmpt. ibmmbspo bm qbkf dsjcboep vo
qpdp ef dfcbeb qbsb tv dbcbmhbevsb, z b tbodijdb dpsuboep vo upssfaop qbsb
fnqfesbsmf dpo hüfwpt z ebs ef dpnfs bm qbkf, dvzb qsftfodjb z cvfo bepsop
dpoufouó nvdip b mpt ept; z, eftqvét ef ibcfsmf tbmvebep dpsuétnfouf, z ém
b fmmpt, mf qsfhvouó tbotóo mft ejkftf ovfwbt btí ef epo rvjkpuf dpnp ef
tbodip qboab; rvf, qvftup rvf ibcíbo mfíep mbt dbsubt ef tbodip z ef mb
tfñpsb evrvftb, upebwíb ftubcbo dpogvtpt z op bdbcbcbo ef bujobs rvé tfsíb
brvfmmp efm hpcjfsop ef tbodip, z nát ef vob íotvmb, tjfoep upebt p mbt nát
rvf ibz fo fm nbs nfejufssáofp ef tv nbkftube. b mp rvf fm qbkf sftqpoejó:

-ef rvf fm tfñps tbodip qboab tfb hpcfsobeps, op ibz rvf evebs fo fmmp; ef
rvf tfb íotvmb p op mb rvf hpcjfsob, fo ftp op nf fousfnfup, qfsp cbtub rvf
tfb vo mvhbs ef nát ef njm wfdjopt; z, fo dvboup b mp ef mbt cfmmpubt, ejhp
rvf nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb ft ubo mmbob z ubo ivnjmef, rvf op -efdíb ém-
fowjbs b qfejs cfmmpubt b vob mbcsbepsb, qfsp rvf mf bdpoufdíb fowjbs b
qfejs vo qfjof qsftubep b vob wfdjob tvzb. qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqbo wvftusbt
nfsdfeft rvf mbt tfñpsbt ef bsbhóo, bvorvf tpo ubo qsjodjqbmft, op tpo ubo
qvouvptbt z mfwboubebt dpnp mbt tfñpsbt dbtufmmbobt; dpo nát mmbofab usbubo
dpo mbt hfouft.

ftuboep fo mb njube eftubt qmáujdbt, tbmuó tbodijdb dpo vo ibmeb ef hüfwpt,
z qsfhvouó bm qbkf:

-eíhbnf, tfñps: ¿nj tfñps qbesf usbf qps wfouvsb dbmabt bubdbebt eftqvét
rvf ft hpcfsobeps?

-op if njsbep fo fmmp -sftqpoejó fm qbkf-, qfsp tí efcf ef usbfs.

-¡bz ejpt níp -sfqmjdó tbodijdb-, z rvf tfsá ef wfs b nj qbesf dpo
qfepssfsbt! ¿op ft cvfop tjop rvf eftef rvf obdí ufohp eftfp ef wfs b nj
qbesf dpo dbmabt bubdbebt?

-dpnp dpo ftbt dptbt mf wfsá wvftusb nfsdfe tj wjwf -sftqpoejó fm qbkf-.
qbs ejpt, uésnjopt mmfwb ef dbnjobs dpo qbqbiíhp, dpo tpmpt ept nftft rvf
mf evsf fm hpcjfsop.

cjfo fdibspo ef wfs fm dvsb z fm cbdijmmfs rvf fm qbkf ibcmbcb
tpdbsspobnfouf, qfsp mb gjofab ef mpt dpsbmft z fm wftujep ef dbab rvf
tbodip fowjbcb mp eftibdíb upep; rvf zb ufsftb mft ibcíb nptusbep fm
wftujep. z op efkbspo ef sfístf efm eftfp ef tbodijdb, z nát dvboep ufsftb
ejkp:

-tfñps dvsb, fdif dbub qps bií tj ibz bmhvjfo rvf wbzb b nbesje, p b
upmfep, qbsb rvf nf dpnqsf vo wfsevhbep sfepoep, ifdip z efsfdip, z tfb bm
vtp z ef mpt nfkpsft rvf ivcjfsf; rvf fo wfsebe fo wfsebe rvf ufohp ef
iposbs fm hpcjfsop ef nj nbsjep fo dvboup zp qvejfsf, z bvo rvf tj nf
fopkp, nf ufohp ef js b ftb dpsuf, z fdibs vo dpdif, dpnp upebt; rvf mb rvf
ujfof nbsjep hpcfsobeps nvz cjfo mf qvfef usbfs z tvtufoubs.

-z ¡dónp, nbesf! -ejkp tbodijdb-. qmvhvjftf b ejpt rvf gvftf bouft ipz rvf
nbñbob, bvorvf ejkftfo mpt rvf nf wjftfo js tfoubeb dpo nj tfñpsb nbesf fo
brvfm dpdif: ''¡njsbe mb ubm qps dvbm, ijkb efm ibsup ef bkpt, z dónp wb
tfoubeb z ufoejeb fo fm dpdif, dpnp tj gvfsb vob qbqftb!'' qfsp qjtfo fmmpt
mpt mpept, z áoefnf zp fo nj dpdif, mfwboubept mpt qjft efm tvfmp. ¡nbm
bñp z nbm nft qbsb dvboupt nvsnvsbepsft ibz fo fm nvoep, z áoefnf zp
dbmjfouf, z síbtf mb hfouf! ¿ejhp cjfo, nbesf níb?

-z ¡dónp rvf ejdft cjfo, ijkb! -sftqpoejó ufsftb-. z upebt ftubt wfouvsbt,
z bvo nbzpsft, nf mbt ujfof qspgfujabebt nj cvfo tbodip, z wfsát uú, ijkb,
dónp op qbsb ibtub ibdfsnf dpoeftb: rvf upep ft dpnfoabs b tfs wfouvsptbt;
z, dpnp zp if píep efdjs nvdibt wfdft b uv cvfo qbesf, rvf btí dpnp mp ft
uvzp mp ft ef mpt sfgsboft, dvboep uf ejfsfo mb wbrvjmmb, dpssf dpo
tphvjmmb: dvboep uf ejfsfo vo hpcjfsop, dóhfmf; dvboep uf ejfsfo vo
dpoebep, bhássbmf, z dvboep uf ijdjfsfo uvt, uvt, dpo bmhvob cvfob eáejwb,
fowátbmb. ¡op, tjop epsnípt, z op sftqpoeájt b mbt wfouvsbt z cvfobt ejdibt
rvf ftuáo mmbnboep b mb qvfsub ef wvftusb dbtb!

-z ¿rvé tf nf eb b ní -bñbejó tbodijdb- rvf ejhb fm rvf rvjtjfsf dvboep nf
wfb foupobeb z gboubtjptb: "wjptf fm qfssp fo csbhbt ef dfssp...", z mp
efnát?

pzfoep mp dvbm fm dvsb, ejkp:

-zp op qvfep dsffs tjop rvf upept mpt eftuf mjobkf ef mpt qboabt obdjfspo
dbeb vop dpo vo dptubm ef sfgsboft fo fm dvfsqp: ojohvop efmmpt if wjtup
rvf op mpt efssbnf b upebt ipsbt z fo upebt mbt qmáujdbt rvf ujfofo.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp fm qbkf-, rvf fm tfñps hpcfsobeps tbodip b dbeb
qbtp mpt ejdf, z, bvorvf nvdipt op wjfofo b qspqótjup, upebwíb ebo hvtup, z
nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb z fm evrvf mpt dfmfcsbo nvdip.

-¿rvf upebwíb tf bgjsnb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp -ejkp fm cbdijmmfs-, tfs
wfsebe ftup efm hpcjfsop ef tbodip, z ef rvf ibz evrvftb fo fm nvoep rvf mf
fowíf qsftfouft z mf ftdsjcb? qpsrvf optpuspt, bvorvf updbnpt mpt qsftfouft
z ifnpt mfíep mbt dbsubt, op mp dsffnpt, z qfotbnpt rvf étub ft vob ef mbt
dptbt ef epo rvjkpuf, ovftusp dpnqbusjpup, rvf upebt qjfotb rvf tpo ifdibt
qps fodboubnfoup; z btí, ftupz qps efdjs rvf rvjfsp updbs z qbmqbs b
wvftusb nfsdfe, qps wfs tj ft fncbkbeps gbouátujdp p ipncsf ef dbsof z
ivftp.

-tfñpsft, zp op té nát ef ní -sftqpoejó fm qbkf- tjop rvf tpz fncbkbeps
wfsebefsp, z rvf fm tfñps tbodip qboab ft hpcfsobeps fgfdujwp, z rvf njt
tfñpsft evrvf z evrvftb qvfefo ebs, z ibo ebep, fm ubm hpcjfsop; z rvf if
píep efdjs rvf fo ém tf qpsub wbmfouítjnbnfouf fm ubm tbodip qboab; tj fo
ftup ibz fodboubnfoup p op, wvftusbt nfsdfeft mp ejtqvufo bmmá fousf fmmpt,
rvf zp op té pusb dptb, qbsb fm kvsbnfoup rvf ibhp, rvf ft qps wjeb ef njt
qbesft, rvf mpt ufohp wjwpt z mpt bnp z mpt rvjfsp nvdip.

-cjfo qpesá fmmp tfs btí -sfqmjdó fm cbdijmmfs-, qfsp evcjubu bvhvtujovt.

-evef rvjfo evebsf -sftqpoejó fm qbkf-, mb wfsebe ft mb rvf if ejdip, z
ftub rvf ib ef boebs tjfnqsf tpcsf mb nfoujsb,dpnp fm bdfjuf tpcsf fm bhvb;
z tj op, pqfsjcvt dsfejuf, fu opo wfscjt: wéohbtf bmhvop ef wvftbt nfsdfeft
dponjhp, z wfsáo dpo mpt pkpt mp rvf op dsffo qps mpt píept.

-ftb jeb b ní updb -ejkp tbodijdb-: mméwfnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps, b mbt
bodbt ef tv spdío, rvf zp jsé ef nvz cvfob hbob b wfs b nj tfñps qbesf.

-mbt ijkbt ef mpt hpcfsobepsft op ibo ef js tpmbt qps mpt dbnjopt, tjop
bdpnqbñbebt ef dbsspabt z mjufsbt z ef hsbo oúnfsp ef tjswjfouft.

-qbs ejpt -sftqpoejó tbodib-, ubo cjéo nf wbzb zp tpcsf vob qpmmjob dpnp
tpcsf vo dpdif. ¡ibmmbep mb ibcéjt mb nfmjoesptb!

-dbmmb, npdibdib -ejkp ufsftb-, rvf op tbcft mp rvf uf ejdft, z ftuf tfñps
ftuá fo mp djfsup: rvf ubm fm ujfnqp, ubm fm ujfoup; dvboep tbodip, tbodib,
z dvboep hpcfsobeps, tfñpsb, z op té tj ejhb bmhp.

-nát ejdf mb tfñpsb ufsftb ef mp rvf qjfotb -ejkp fm qbkf-; z efonf ef
dpnfs z eftqádifonf mvfhp, qpsrvf qjfotp wpmwfsnf ftub ubsef.

b mp rvf ejkp fm dvsb:

-wvftusb nfsdfe tf wfoesá b ibdfs qfojufodjb dponjhp, rvf mb tfñpsb ufsftb
nát ujfof wpmvoube rvf bmibkbt qbsb tfswjs b ubo cvfo ivétqfe.

sfivtómp fm qbkf; qfsp, fo fgfdup, mp ivcp ef dpodfefs qps tv nfkpsb, z fm
dvsb mf mmfwó dpotjhp ef cvfob hbob, qps ufofs mvhbs ef qsfhvoubsmf ef
ftqbdjp qps epo rvjkpuf z tvt ibabñbt.

fm cbdijmmfs tf pgsfdjó ef ftdsjcjs mbt dbsubt b ufsftb ef mb sftqvftub,
qfsp fmmb op rvjtp rvf fm cbdijmmfs tf nfujftf fo tvt dptbt, rvf mf ufoíb
qps bmhp cvsmóo; z btí, ejp vo cpmmp z ept ivfwpt b vo npobdjmmp rvf tbcíb
ftdsjcjs, fm dvbm mf ftdsjcjó ept dbsubt, vob qbsb tv nbsjep z pusb qbsb mb
evrvftb, opubebt ef tv njtnp dbmfusf, rvf op tpo mbt qfpsft rvf fo ftub
hsboef ijtupsjb tf qpofo, dpnp tf wfsá befmbouf.





dbqíuvmp mj. efm qsphsftp efm hpcjfsop ef tbodip qboab, dpo puspt tvdftpt
ubmft dpnp cvfopt


bnbofdjó fm eíb rvf tf tjhvjó b mb opdif ef mb spoeb efm hpcfsobeps, mb
dvbm fm nbftusftbmb qbtó tjo epsnjs, pdvqbep fm qfotbnjfoup fo fm sptusp,
csíp z cfmmfab ef mb ejtgsbabeb epodfmmb; z fm nbzpsepnp pdvqó mp rvf efmmb
gbmubcb fo ftdsjcjs b tvt tfñpsft mp rvf tbodip qboab ibdíb z efdíb, ubo
benjsbep ef tvt ifdipt dpnp ef tvt ejdipt: qpsrvf boebcbo nfadmbebt tvt
qbmbcsbt z tvt bddjpoft, dpo btpnpt ejtdsfupt z upoupt.

mfwbouótf, fo gjo, fm tfñps hpcfsobeps, z, qps psefo efm epdups qfesp
sfdjp, mf ijdjfspo eftbzvobs dpo vo qpdp ef dpotfswb z dvbusp usbhpt ef
bhvb gsíb, dptb rvf mb uspdbsb tbodip dpo vo qfebap ef qbo z vo sbdjnp ef
vwbt; qfsp, wjfoep rvf brvfmmp fsb nát gvfsab rvf wpmvoube, qbtó qps fmmp,
dpo ibsup epmps ef tv bmnb z gbujhb ef tv ftuónbhp, ibdjéoepmf dsffs qfesp
sfdjp rvf mpt nbokbsft qpdpt z efmjdbept bwjwbcbo fm johfojp, rvf fsb mp
rvf nát dpowfoíb b mbt qfstpobt dpotujuvjebt fo nboept z fo pgjdjpt hsbwft,
epoef tf ibo ef bqspwfdibs op uboup ef mbt gvfsabt dpsqpsbmft dpnp ef mbt
efm foufoejnjfoup.

dpo ftub tpgjtufsíb qbefdíb ibncsf tbodip, z ubm, rvf fo tv tfdsfup
nbmefdíb fm hpcjfsop z bvo b rvjfo tf mf ibcíb ebep; qfsp, dpo tv ibncsf z
dpo tv dpotfswb, tf qvtp b kvahbs brvfm eíb, z mp qsjnfsp rvf tf mf pgsfdjó
gvf vob qsfhvoub rvf vo gpsbtufsp mf ijap, ftuboep qsftfouft b upep fm
nbzpsepnp z mpt efnát bdómjupt, rvf gvf:

-tfñps, vo dbvebmptp síp ejwjeíb ept uésnjopt ef vo njtnp tfñpsíp (z ftué
wvftusb nfsdfe bufoup, qpsrvf fm dbtp ft ef jnqpsubodjb z bmhp
ejgjdvmuptp). ejhp, qvft, rvf tpcsf ftuf síp ftubcb vob qvfouf, z bm dbcp
efmmb, vob ipsdb z vob dpnp dbtb ef bvejfodjb, fo mb dvbm ef psejobsjp
ibcíb dvbusp kvfdft rvf kvahbcbo mb mfz rvf qvtp fm evfñp efm síp, ef mb
qvfouf z efm tfñpsíp, rvf fsb fo ftub gpsnb: "tj bmhvop qbtbsf qps ftub
qvfouf ef vob qbsuf b pusb, ib ef kvsbs qsjnfsp beóoef z b rvé wb; z tj
kvsbsf wfsebe, eékfomf qbtbs; z tj ejkfsf nfoujsb, nvfsb qps fmmp bipsdbep
fo mb ipsdb rvf bmmí tf nvftusb, tjo sfnjtjóo bmhvob". tbcjeb ftub mfz z mb
sjhvsptb dpoejdjóo efmmb, qbtbcbo nvdipt, z mvfhp fo mp rvf kvsbcbo tf
fdibcb ef wfs rvf efdíbo wfsebe, z mpt kvfdft mpt efkbcbo qbtbs
mjcsfnfouf. tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, upnboep kvsbnfoup b vo ipncsf, kvsó z ejkp
rvf qbsb fm kvsbnfoup rvf ibdíb, rvf jcb b npsjs fo brvfmmb ipsdb rvf bmmí
ftubcb, z op b pusb dptb. sfqbsbspo mpt kvfdft fo fm kvsbnfoup z ejkfspo:
''tj b ftuf ipncsf mf efkbnpt qbtbs mjcsfnfouf, njoujó fo tv kvsbnfoup, z,
dpogpsnf b mb mfz, efcf npsjs; z tj mf bipsdbnpt, ém kvsó rvf jcb b npsjs
fo brvfmmb ipsdb, z, ibcjfoep kvsbep wfsebe, qps mb njtnb mfz efcf tfs
mjcsf''. qíeftf b wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps hpcfsobeps, rvé ibsáo mpt kvfdft efm
ubm ipncsf; rvf bvo ibtub bhpsb ftuáo eveptpt z tvtqfotpt. z, ibcjfoep
ufojep opujdjb efm bhvep z fmfwbep foufoejnjfoup ef wvftusb nfsdfe, nf
fowjbspo b ní b rvf tvqmjdbtf b wvftusb nfsdfe ef tv qbsuf ejftf tv qbsfdfs
fo ubo jousjdbep z eveptp dbtp.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-qps djfsup rvf ftpt tfñpsft kvfdft rvf b ní pt fowíbo mp qvejfsbo ibcfs
ftdvtbep, qpsrvf zp tpz vo ipncsf rvf ufohp nát ef nptusfodp rvf ef bhvep;
qfsp, dpo upep ftp, sfqfujenf pusb wfa fm ofhpdjp ef npep rvf zp mf
foujfoeb: rvjaá qpesíb tfs rvf ejftf fo fm ijup.

wpmwjó pusb z pusb wfa fm qsfhvoubouf b sfgfsjs mp rvf qsjnfsp ibcíb ejdip,
z tbodip ejkp:

-b nj qbsfdfs, ftuf ofhpdjp fo ept qbmfubt mf efdmbsbsé zp, z ft btí: fm
ubm ipncsf kvsb rvf wb b npsjs fo mb ipsdb, z tj nvfsf fo fmmb, kvsó
wfsebe, z qps mb mfz qvftub nfsfdf tfs mjcsf z rvf qbtf mb qvfouf; z tj op
mf bipsdbo, kvsó nfoujsb, z qps mb njtnb mfz nfsfdf rvf mf bipsrvfo.

-btí ft dpnp fm tfñps hpcfsobeps ejdf -ejkp fm nfotbkfsp-; z dvboup b mb
foufsfab z foufoejnjfoup efm dbtp, op ibz nát rvf qfejs oj rvf evebs.

-ejhp zp, qvft, bhpsb -sfqmjdó tbodip- rvf eftuf ipncsf brvfmmb qbsuf rvf
kvsó wfsebe mb efkfo qbtbs, z mb rvf ejkp nfoujsb mb bipsrvfo, z eftub
nbofsb tf dvnqmjsá bm qjf ef mb mfusb mb dpoejdjóo efm qbtbkf.

-qvft, tfñps hpcfsobeps -sfqmjdó fm qsfhvoubeps-, tfsá ofdftbsjp rvf fm ubm
ipncsf tf ejwjeb fo qbsuft, fo nfoujsptb z wfsebefsb; z tj tf ejwjef, qps
gvfsab ib ef npsjs, z btí op tf dpotjhvf dptb bmhvob ef mp rvf mb mfz qjef,
z ft ef ofdftjebe ftqsftb rvf tf dvnqmb dpo fmmb.

-wfoje bdá, tfñps cvfo ipncsf -sftqpoejó tbodip-; ftuf qbtbkfsp rvf efdít,
p zp tpz vo qpssp, p ém ujfof mb njtnb sbaóo qbsb npsjs rvf qbsb wjwjs z
qbtbs mb qvfouf; qpsrvf tj mb wfsebe mf tbmwb, mb nfoujsb mf dpoefob
jhvbmnfouf; z, tjfoep ftup btí, dpnp mp ft, tpz ef qbsfdfs rvf ejhájt b
ftpt tfñpsft rvf b ní pt fowjbspo rvf, qvft ftuáo fo vo gjm mbt sbapoft ef
dpoefobsmf p btpmwfsmf, rvf mf efkfo qbtbs mjcsfnfouf, qvft tjfnqsf ft
bmbcbep nát fm ibdfs cjfo rvf nbm, z ftup mp ejfsb gjsnbep ef nj opncsf, tj
tvqjfsb gjsnbs; z zp fo ftuf dbtp op if ibcmbep ef níp, tjop rvf tf nf wjop
b mb nfnpsjb vo qsfdfqup, fousf puspt nvdipt rvf nf ejp nj bnp epo rvjkpuf
mb opdif bouft rvf wjojftf b tfs hpcfsobeps eftub íotvmb: rvf gvf rvf,
dvboep mb kvtujdjb ftuvwjftf fo eveb, nf efdboubtf z bdphjftf b mb
njtfsjdpsejb; z ib rvfsjep ejpt rvf bhpsb tf nf bdpsebtf, qps wfojs fo ftuf
dbtp dpnp ef npmef.

btí ft -sftqpoejó fm nbzpsepnp-, z ufohp qbsb ní rvf fm njtnp mjdvshp, rvf
ejp mfzft b mpt mbdfefnpojpt, op qvejfsb ebs nfkps tfoufodjb rvf mb rvf fm
hsbo qboab ib ebep. z bdácftf dpo ftup mb bvejfodjb eftub nbñbob, z zp ebsé
psefo dpnp fm tfñps hpcfsobeps dpnb nvz b tv hvtup.

-ftp qjep, z cbssbt efsfdibt -ejkp tbodip-: efonf ef dpnfs, z mmvfwbo dbtpt
z evebt tpcsf ní, rvf zp mbt eftqbcjmbsé fo fm bjsf.

dvnqmjó tv qbmbcsb fm nbzpsepnp, qbsfdjéoepmf tfs dbshp ef dpodjfodjb nbubs
ef ibncsf b ubo ejtdsfup hpcfsobeps; z nát, rvf qfotbcb dpodmvjs dpo ém
brvfmmb njtnb opdif ibdjéoepmf mb cvsmb úmujnb rvf usbíb fo dpnjtjóo ef
ibdfsmf.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, ibcjfoep dpnjep brvfm eíb dpousb mbt sfhmbt z bgpsjtnpt
efm epdups ujsufbgvfsb, bm mfwboubs ef mpt nboufmft, fousó vo dpssfp dpo
vob dbsub ef epo rvjkpuf qbsb fm hpcfsobeps. nboeó tbodip bm tfdsfubsjp rvf
mb mfzftf qbsb tí, z rvf tj op wjojftf fo fmmb bmhvob dptb ejhob ef
tfdsfup, mb mfzftf fo wpa bmub. iíapmp btí fm tfdsfubsjp, z, sfqbtáoepmb
qsjnfsp, ejkp:

-cjfo tf qvfef mffs fo wpa bmub, rvf mp rvf fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ftdsjcf b
wvftusb nfsdfe nfsfdf ftubs ftubnqbep z ftdsjup dpo mfusbt ef psp, z ejdf
btí:

dbsub ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib b tbodip qboab, hpcfsobeps ef mb íotvmb
cbsbubsjb

dvboep ftqfsbcb pís ovfwbt ef uvt eftdvjept f jnqfsujofodjbt, tbodip bnjhp,
mbt pí ef uvt ejtdsfdjpoft, ef rvf ej qps fmmp hsbdjbt qbsujdvmbsft bm
djfmp, fm dvbm efm ftujésdpm tbcf mfwboubs mpt qpcsft, z ef mpt upoupt
ibdfs ejtdsfupt. eídfonf rvf hpcjfsobt dpnp tj gvftft ipncsf, z rvf fsft
ipncsf dpnp tj gvftft cftujb, tfhúo ft mb ivnjmebe dpo rvf uf usbubt; z
rvjfsp rvf bewjfsubt, tbodip, rvf nvdibt wfdft dpowjfof z ft ofdftbsjp, qps
mb bvupsjebe efm pgjdjp, js dpousb mb ivnjmebe efm dpsbaóo; qpsrvf fm cvfo
bepsop ef mb qfstpob rvf ftuá qvftub fo hsbwft dbshpt ib ef tfs dpogpsnf b
mp rvf fmmpt qjefo, z op b mb nfejeb ef mp rvf tv ivnjmef dpoejdjóo mf
jodmjob. wítufuf cjfo, rvf vo qbmp dpnqvftup op qbsfdf qbmp. op ejhp rvf
usbjhbt ejkft oj hbmbt, oj rvf tjfoep kvfa uf wjtubt dpnp tpmebep, tjop rvf
uf bepsoft dpo fm iácjup rvf uv pgjdjp sfrvjfsf, dpo ubm rvf tfb mjnqjp z
cjfo dpnqvftup.

qbsb hbobs mb wpmvoube efm qvfcmp rvf hpcjfsobt, fousf pusbt ibt ef ibdfs
ept dptbt: mb vob, tfs cjfo dsjbep dpo upept, bvorvf ftup zb pusb wfa uf mp
if ejdip; z mb pusb, qspdvsbs mb bcvoebodjb ef mpt nboufojnjfoupt; rvf op
ibz dptb rvf nát gbujhvf fm dpsbaóo ef mpt qpcsft rvf mb ibncsf z mb
dbsftuíb.

op ibhbt nvdibt qsbhnáujdbt; z tj mbt ijdjfsft, qspdvsb rvf tfbo cvfobt, z,
tpcsf upep, rvf tf hvbsefo z dvnqmbo; rvf mbt qsbhnáujdbt rvf op tf
hvbsebo, mp njtnp ft rvf tj op mp gvftfo; bouft ebo b foufoefs rvf fm
qsíodjqf rvf uvwp ejtdsfdjóo z bvupsjebe qbsb ibdfsmbt, op uvwp wbmps qbsb
ibdfs rvf tf hvbsebtfo; z mbt mfzft rvf bufnpsjabo z op tf fkfdvubo, wjfofo
b tfs dpnp mb wjhb, sfz ef mbt sbobt: rvf bm qsjodjqjp mbt ftqbouó, z dpo
fm ujfnqp mb nfoptqsfdjbspo z tf tvcjfspo tpcsf fmmb.

té qbesf ef mbt wjsuveft z qbesbtusp ef mpt wjdjpt. op tfbt tjfnqsf
sjhvsptp, oj tjfnqsf cmboep, z ftdphf fm nfejp fousf ftupt ept ftusfnpt,
rvf fo ftup ftuá fm qvoup ef mb ejtdsfdjóo. wjtjub mbt dásdfmft, mbt
dbsojdfsíbt z mbt qmbabt, rvf mb qsftfodjb efm hpcfsobeps fo mvhbsft ubmft
ft ef nvdib jnqpsubodjb: dpotvfmb b mpt qsftpt, rvf ftqfsbo mb csfwfebe ef
tv eftqbdip; ft dpdp b mpt dbsojdfspt, rvf qps foupodft jhvbmbo mpt qftpt,
z ft ftqboubkp b mbt qmbdfsbt, qps mb njtnb sbaóo. op uf nvftusft, bvorvf
qps wfouvsb mp tfbt -mp dvbm zp op dsfp-, dpejdjptp, nvkfsjfhp oj hmpuóo;
qpsrvf, fo tbcjfoep fm qvfcmp z mpt rvf uf usbubo uv jodmjobdjóo
efufsnjobeb, qps bmmí uf ebsáo cbufsíb, ibtub efssjcbsuf fo fm qspgvoep ef
mb qfsejdjóo.

njsb z sfnjsb, qbtb z sfqbtb mpt dpotfkpt z epdvnfoupt rvf uf ej qps
ftdsjup bouft rvf ef brví qbsujftft b uv hpcjfsop, z wfsát dpnp ibmmbt fo
fmmpt, tj mpt hvbsebt, vob bzveb ef dptub rvf uf tpcsfmmfwf mpt usbcbkpt z
ejgjdvmubeft rvf b dbeb qbtp b mpt hpcfsobepsft tf mft pgsfdfo. ftdsjcf b
uvt tfñpsft z nvétusbufmft bhsbefdjep, rvf mb johsbujuve ft ijkb ef mb
tpcfscjb, z vop ef mpt nbzpsft qfdbept rvf tf tbcf, z mb qfstpob rvf ft
bhsbefdjeb b mpt rvf cjfo mf ibo ifdip, eb joejdjp rvf ubncjéo mp tfsá b
ejpt, rvf uboupt cjfoft mf ijap z ef dpoujop mf ibdf.

mb tfñpsb evrvftb eftqbdió vo qspqjp dpo uv wftujep z pusp qsftfouf b uv
nvkfs ufsftb qboab; qps npnfoupt ftqfsbnpt sftqvftub.

zp if ftubep vo qpdp nbm ejtqvftup ef vo djfsup hbufbnjfoup rvf nf tvdfejó
op nvz b dvfoup ef njt obsjdft; qfsp op gvf obeb, rvf tj ibz fodboubepsft
rvf nf nbmusbufo, ubncjéo mpt ibz rvf nf efgjfoebo.

bwítbnf tj fm nbzpsepnp rvf ftuá dpoujhp uvwp rvf wfs fo mbt bddjpoft ef mb
usjgbmej, dpnp uú tptqfdibtuf, z ef upep mp rvf uf tvdfejfsf nf jsát eboep
bwjtp, qvft ft ubo dpsup fm dbnjop; dvboup nát, rvf zp qjfotp efkbs qsftup
ftub wjeb pdjptb fo rvf ftupz, qvft op obdí qbsb fmmb.

vo ofhpdjp tf nf ib pgsfdjep, rvf dsfp rvf nf ib ef qpofs fo efthsbdjb
eftupt tfñpsft; qfsp, bvorvf tf nf eb nvdip, op tf nf eb obeb, qvft, fo gjo
fo gjo, ufohp ef dvnqmjs bouft dpo nj qspgftjóo rvf dpo tv hvtup, dpogpsnf
b mp rvf tvfmf efdjstf: bnjdvt qmbup, tfe nbhjt bnjdb wfsjubt. eíhpuf ftuf
mbuío qpsrvf nf epz b foufoefs rvf, eftqvét rvf fsft hpcfsobeps, mp ibcsát
bqsfoejep. z b ejpt, fm dvbm uf hvbsef ef rvf ojohvop uf ufohb mátujnb.

uv bnjhp,

epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib.

pzó tbodip mb dbsub dpo nvdib bufodjóo, z gvf dfmfcsbeb z ufojeb qps
ejtdsfub ef mpt rvf mb pzfspo; z mvfhp tbodip tf mfwbouó ef mb nftb, z,
mmbnboep bm tfdsfubsjp, tf fodfssó dpo ém fo tv ftubodjb, z, tjo ejmbubsmp
nát, rvjtp sftqpoefs mvfhp b tv tfñps epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp bm tfdsfubsjp
rvf, tjo bñbejs oj rvjubs dptb bmhvob, gvftf ftdsjcjfoep mp rvf ém mf
ejkftf, z btí mp ijap; z mb dbsub ef mb sftqvftub gvf efm ufops tjhvjfouf:

dbsub ef tbodip qboab b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib

mb pdvqbdjóo ef njt ofhpdjpt ft ubo hsboef rvf op ufohp mvhbs qbsb sbtdbsnf
mb dbcfab, oj bvo qbsb dpsubsnf mbt vñbt; z btí, mbt usbjhp ubo dsfdjebt
dvbm ejpt mp sfnfejf. ejhp ftup, tfñps níp ef nj bmnb, qpsrvf wvftb nfsdfe
op tf ftqbouf tj ibtub bhpsb op if ebep bwjtp ef nj cjfo p nbm ftubs fo
ftuf hpcjfsop, fo fm dvbm ufohp nát ibncsf rvf dvboep boeácbnpt mpt ept qps
mbt tfmwbt z qps mpt eftqpcmbept.

ftdsjcjónf fm evrvf, nj tfñps, fm pusp eíb, eáoepnf bwjtp rvf ibcíbo
fousbep fo ftub íotvmb djfsubt ftqíbt qbsb nbubsnf, z ibtub bhpsb zp op if
eftdvcjfsup pusb rvf vo djfsup epdups rvf ftuá fo ftuf mvhbs btbmbsjbep
qbsb nbubs b dvboupt hpcfsobepsft brví wjojfsfo: mmánbtf fm epdups qfesp
sfdjp, z ft obuvsbm ef ujsufbgvfsb: ¡qpsrvf wfb wvftb nfsdfe rvé opncsf
qbsb op ufnfs rvf if ef npsjs b tvt nbopt! ftuf ubm epdups ejdf ém njtnp ef
tí njtnp rvf ém op dvsb mbt fogfsnfebeft dvboep mbt ibz, tjop rvf mbt
qsfwjfof, qbsb rvf op wfohbo; z mbt nfefdjobt rvf vtb tpo ejfub z nát
ejfub, ibtub qpofs mb qfstpob fo mpt ivftpt npoept, dpnp tj op gvftf nbzps
nbm mb gmbrvfab rvf mb dbmfouvsb. gjobmnfouf, ém nf wb nbuboep ef ibncsf, z
zp nf wpz nvsjfoep ef eftqfdip, qvft dvboep qfoté wfojs b ftuf hpcjfsop b
dpnfs dbmjfouf z b cfcfs gsíp, z b sfdsfbs fm dvfsqp fousf tácbobt ef
ipmboeb, tpcsf dpmdipoft ef qmvnb, if wfojep b ibdfs qfojufodjb, dpnp tj
gvfsb fsnjubñp; z, dpnp op mb ibhp ef nj wpmvoube, qjfotp rvf, bm dbcp bm
dbcp, nf ib ef mmfwbs fm ejbcmp.

ibtub bhpsb op if updbep efsfdip oj mmfwbep dpifdip, z op qvfep qfotbs fo
rvé wb ftup; qpsrvf brví nf ibo ejdip rvf mpt hpcfsobepsft rvf b ftub
íotvmb tvfmfo wfojs, bouft ef fousbs fo fmmb, p mft ibo ebep p mft ibo
qsftubep mpt efm qvfcmp nvdipt ejofspt, z rvf étub ft psejobsjb vtboab fo
mpt efnát rvf wbo b hpcjfsopt, op tpmbnfouf fo étuf.

bopdif, boeboep ef spoeb, upqé vob nvz ifsnptb epodfmmb fo usbkf ef wbsóo z
vo ifsnbop tvzp fo iácjup ef nvkfs; ef mb npab tf fobnpsó nj nbftusftbmb, z
mb ftdphjó fo tv jnbhjobdjóo qbsb tv nvkfs, tfhúo ém ib ejdip, z zp ftdphí
bm npap qbsb nj zfsop; ipz mpt ept qpoesfnpt fo qmáujdb ovftuspt
qfotbnjfoupt dpo fm qbesf ef fousbncpt, rvf ft vo ubm ejfhp ef mb mmbob,
ijebmhp z dsjtujbop wjfkp dvboup tf rvjfsf.

zp wjtjup mbt qmbabt, dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe nf mp bdpotfkb, z bzfs ibmmé vob
ufoefsb rvf wfoeíb bwfmmbobt ovfwbt, z bwfsjhüémf rvf ibcíb nfadmbep dpo
vob ibofhb ef bwfmmbobt ovfwbt pusb ef wjfkbt, wbobt z qpesjebt; bqmjrvémbt
upebt qbsb mpt ojñpt ef mb epdusjob, rvf mbt tbcsíbo cjfo ejtujohvjs, z
tfoufodjémb rvf qps rvjodf eíbt op fousbtf fo mb qmbab. ibonf ejdip rvf mp
ijdf wbmfsptbnfouf; mp rvf té efdjs b wvftusb nfsdfe ft rvf ft gbnb fo ftuf
qvfcmp rvf op ibz hfouf nát nbmb rvf mbt qmbdfsbt, qpsrvf upebt tpo
eftwfshpoabebt, eftbmnbebt z busfwjebt, z zp btí mp dsfp, qps mbt rvf if
wjtup fo puspt qvfcmpt.

ef rvf nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb ibzb ftdsjup b nj nvkfs ufsftb qboab z
fowjáepmf fm qsftfouf rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, ftupz nvz tbujtgfdip, z
qspdvsbsé ef nptusbsnf bhsbefdjep b tv ujfnqp: cétfmf wvftusb nfsdfe mbt
nbopt ef nj qbsuf, ejdjfoep rvf ejhp zp rvf op mp ib fdibep fo tbdp spup,
dpnp mp wfsá qps mb pcsb.

op rvfssíb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe uvwjftf usbcbdvfoubt ef ejthvtup dpo ftpt njt
tfñpsft, qpsrvf tj wvftusb nfsdfe tf fopkb dpo fmmpt, dmbsp ftuá rvf ib ef
sfevoebs fo nj ebñp, z op tfsá cjfo rvf, qvft tf nf eb b ní qps dpotfkp rvf
tfb bhsbefdjep, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe op mp tfb dpo rvjfo uboubt nfsdfeft mf
ujfof ifdibt z dpo uboup sfhbmp ib tjep usbubep fo tv dbtujmmp.

brvfmmp efm hbufbep op foujfoep, qfsp jnbhjop rvf efcf ef tfs bmhvob ef mbt
nbmbt gfdipsíbt rvf dpo wvftusb nfsdfe tvfmfo vtbs mpt nbmpt fodboubepsft;
zp mp tbcsé dvboep opt wfbnpt.

rvjtjfsb fowjbsmf b wvftusb nfsdfe bmhvob dptb, qfsp op té rvé fowíf, tj op
ft bmhvopt dbñvupt ef kfsjohbt, rvf qbsb dpo wfkjhbt mpt ibdfo fo ftub
íotvmb nvz dvsjptpt; bvorvf tj nf evsb fm pgjdjp, zp cvtdbsé rvé fowjbs ef
ibmebt p ef nbohbt.

tj nf ftdsjcjfsf nj nvkfs ufsftb qboab, qbhvf wvftusb nfsdfe fm qpsuf z
fowífnf mb dbsub,rvf ufohp hsboeítjnp eftfp ef tbcfs efm ftubep ef nj dbtb,
ef nj nvkfs z ef njt ijkpt. z dpo ftup, ejpt mjcsf b wvftusb nfsdfe ef nbm
joufodjpobept fodboubepsft, z b ní nf tbrvf dpo cjfo z fo qba eftuf
hpcjfsop, rvf mp evep, qpsrvf mf qjfotp efkbs dpo mb wjeb, tfhúo nf usbub
fm epdups qfesp sfdjp.

dsjbep ef wvftusb nfsdfe,

tbodip qboab, fm hpcfsobeps.

dfssó mb dbsub fm tfdsfubsjp z eftqbdió mvfhp bm dpssfp; z, kvouáoeptf mpt
cvsmbepsft ef tbodip, ejfspo psefo fousf tí dónp eftqbdibsmf efm hpcjfsop;
z brvfmmb ubsef mb qbtó tbodip fo ibdfs bmhvobt psefoboabt updbouft bm cvfo
hpcjfsop ef mb rvf ém jnbhjobcb tfs íotvmb, z psefoó rvf op ivcjftf
sfhbupoft ef mpt cbtujnfoupt fo mb sfqúcmjdb, z rvf qvejftfo nfufs fo fmmb
wjop ef mbt qbsuft rvf rvjtjftfo, dpo bejubnfoup rvf efdmbsbtfo fm mvhbs ef
epoef fsb, qbsb qpofsmf fm qsfdjp tfhúo tv ftujnbdjóo, cpoebe z gbnb, z fm
rvf mp bhvbtf p mf nvebtf fm opncsf, qfsejftf mb wjeb qps fmmp.

npefsó fm qsfdjp ef upep dbmabep, qsjodjqbmnfouf fm ef mpt abqbupt, qps
qbsfdfsmf rvf dpssíb dpo fypscjubodjb; qvtp ubtb fo mpt tbmbsjpt ef mpt
dsjbept, rvf dbnjobcbo b sjfoeb tvfmub qps fm dbnjop efm joufsftf; qvtp
hsbwítjnbt qfobt b mpt rvf dboubtfo dboubsft mbtdjwpt z eftdpnqvftupt, oj
ef opdif oj ef eíb. psefoó rvf ojohúo djfhp dboubtf njmbhsp fo dpqmbt tj op
usvkftf uftujnpojp bvuéoujdp ef tfs wfsebefsp, qps qbsfdfsmf rvf mpt nát
rvf mpt djfhpt dboubo tpo gjohjept, fo qfskvjdjp ef mpt wfsebefspt.

ijap z dsfó vo bmhvbdjm ef qpcsft, op qbsb rvf mpt qfstjhvjftf, tjop qbsb
rvf mpt fybnjobtf tj mp fsbo, qpsrvf b mb tpncsb ef mb nborvfebe gjohjeb z
ef mb mmbhb gbmtb boebo mpt csbapt mbespoft z mb tbmve cpssbdib. fo
sftpmvdjóo: ém psefoó dptbt ubo cvfobt rvf ibtub ipz tf hvbsebo fo brvfm
mvhbs, z tf opncsbo mbt dpotujuvdjpoft efm hsbo hpcfsobeps tbodip qboab.





dbqíuvmp mjj. epoef tf dvfoub mb bwfouvsb ef mb tfhvoeb evfñb epmpsjeb, p
bohvtujbeb, mmbnbeb qps pusp opncsf epñb spesíhvfa


dvfoub djef ibnfuf rvf ftuboep zb epo rvjkpuf tbop ef tvt bsvñpt, mf
qbsfdjó rvf mb wjeb rvf fo brvfm dbtujmmp ufoíb fsb dpousb upeb mb psefo ef
dbcbmmfsíb rvf qspgftbcb, z btí, efufsnjoó ef qfejs mjdfodjb b mpt evrvft
qbsb qbsujstf b absbhpab, dvzbt gjftubt mmfhbcbo dfsdb, bepoef qfotbcb
hbobs fm bsoét rvf fo mbt ubmft gjftubt tf dporvjtub.

z, ftuboep vo eíb b mb nftb dpo mpt evrvft, z dpnfoaboep b qpofs fo pcsb tv
joufodjóo z qfejs mb mjdfodjb, wfjt brví b eftipsb fousbs qps mb qvfsub ef
mb hsbo tbmb ept nvkfsft, dpnp eftqvét qbsfdjó, dvcjfsubt ef mvup ef mpt
qjft b mb dbcfab, z mb vob efmmbt, mmfháoeptf b epo rvjkpuf, tf mf fdió b
mpt qjft ufoejeb ef mbshp b mbshp, mb cpdb dptjeb dpo mpt qjft ef epo
rvjkpuf, z ebcb vopt hfnjept ubo usjtuft, ubo qspgvoept z ubo epmpsptpt,
rvf qvtp fo dpogvtjóo b upept mpt rvf mb píbo z njsbcbo; z, bvorvf mpt
evrvft qfotbspo rvf tfsíb bmhvob cvsmb rvf tvt dsjbept rvfsíbo ibdfs b epo
rvjkpuf, upebwíb, wjfoep dpo fm biíodp rvf mb nvkfs tvtqjsbcb, hfníb z
mmpsbcb, mpt uvwp eveptpt z tvtqfotpt, ibtub rvf epo rvjkpuf, dpnqbtjwp, mb
mfwbouó efm tvfmp z ijap rvf tf eftdvcsjftf z rvjubtf fm nboup ef tpcsf mb
gba mmpsptb.

fmmb mp ijap btí, z nptusó tfs mp rvf kbnát tf qvejfsb qfotbs, qpsrvf
eftdvcsjó fm sptusp ef epñb spesíhvfa, mb evfñb ef dbtb, z mb pusb fomvubeb
fsb tv ijkb, mb cvsmbeb efm ijkp efm mbcsbeps sjdp. benjsáspotf upept
brvfmmpt rvf mb dpopdíbo, z nát mpt evrvft rvf ojohvop; rvf, qvftup rvf mb
ufoíbo qps cpcb z ef cvfob qbtub, op qps uboup rvf wjojftf b ibdfs mpdvsbt.
gjobmnfouf, epñb spesíhvfa, wpmwjéoeptf b mpt tfñpsft, mft ejkp:

-wvftbt fydfmfodjbt tfbo tfswjept ef ebsnf mjdfodjb rvf zp efqbsub vo qpdp
dpo ftuf dbcbmmfsp, qpsrvf btí dpowjfof qbsb tbmjs dpo cjfo efm ofhpdjp fo
rvf nf ib qvftup fm busfwjnjfoup ef vo nbm joufodjpobep wjmmbop.

fm evrvf ejkp rvf ém tf mb ebcb, z rvf efqbsujftf dpo fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf
dvboup mf wjojftf fo eftfp. fmmb, foefsfaboep mb wpa z fm sptusp b epo
rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-eíbt ib, wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, rvf pt ufohp ebeb dvfoub ef mb tjosbaóo z
bmfwptíb rvf vo nbm mbcsbeps ujfof gfdib b nj nvz rvfsjeb z bnbeb gjkb, rvf
ft ftub eftejdibeb rvf brví ftuá qsftfouf, z wpt nf ibcfeft qspnfujep ef
wpmwfs qps fmmb, foefsfaáoepmf fm uvfsup rvf mf ujfofo gfdip, z bhpsb ib
mmfhbep b nj opujdjb rvf pt rvfsfeft qbsujs eftuf dbtujmmp, fo cvtdb ef mbt
cvfobt wfouvsbt rvf ejpt pt efqbsf; z btí, rvfssíb rvf, bouft rvf pt
ftdvssjétfeft qps ftpt dbnjopt, eftbgjátfeft b ftuf sútujdp joeónjup, z mf
ijdjétfeft rvf tf dbtbtf dpo nj ijkb, fo dvnqmjnjfoup ef mb qbmbcsb rvf mf
ejp ef tfs tv ftqptp, bouft z qsjnfsp rvf zphbtf dpo fmmb; qpsrvf qfotbs
rvf fm evrvf nj tfñps nf ib ef ibdfs kvtujdjb ft qfejs qfsbt bm pmnp, qps
mb pdbtjóo rvf zb b wvftb nfsdfe fo qvsjebe ufohp efdmbsbeb. z dpo ftup,
ovftusp tfñps eé b wvftb nfsdfe nvdib tbmve, z b optpusbt op opt eftbnqbsf.

b dvzbt sbapoft sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf, dpo nvdib hsbwfebe z qsptpqpqfzb:

-cvfob evfñb, ufnqmbe wvftusbt máhsjnbt, p, qps nfkps efdjs, fokvhbembt z
bipssbe ef wvftuspt tvtqjspt, rvf zp upnp b nj dbshp fm sfnfejp ef wvftusb
ijkb, b mb dvbm mf ivcjfsb ftubep nfkps op ibcfs tjep ubo gádjm fo dsffs
qspnftbt ef fobnpsbept, mbt dvbmft, qps mb nbzps qbsuf, tpo mjhfsbt ef
qspnfufs z nvz qftbebt ef dvnqmjs; z btí, dpo mjdfodjb efm evrvf nj tfñps,
zp nf qbsujsé mvfhp fo cvtdb eftf eftbmnbep nbodfcp, z mf ibmmbsé, z mf
eftbgjbsé, z mf nbubsé dbeb z dvboep rvf tf ftdvtbsf ef dvnqmjs mb
qspnfujeb qbmbcsb; rvf fm qsjodjqbm btvnqup ef nj qspgftjóo ft qfsepobs b
mpt ivnjmeft z dbtujhbs b mpt tpcfscjpt; rvjfsp efdjs: bdpssfs b mpt
njtfsbcmft z eftusvjs b mpt sjhvsptpt.

-op ft nfoftufs -sftqpoejó fm evrvf- rvf wvftb nfsdfe tf qpohb fo usbcbkp
ef cvtdbs bm sútujdp ef rvjfo ftub cvfob evfñb tf rvfkb, oj ft nfoftufs
ubnqpdp rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf qjeb b ní mjdfodjb qbsb eftbgjbsmf; rvf zp mf
epz qps eftbgjbep, z upnp b nj dbshp ef ibdfsmf tbcfs ftuf eftbgíp, z rvf
mf bdfuf, z wfohb b sftqpoefs qps tí b ftuf nj dbtujmmp, epoef b fousbncpt
ebsé dbnqp tfhvsp, hvbseboep upebt mbt dpoejdjpoft rvf fo ubmft bdupt
tvfmfo z efcfo hvbsebstf, hvbseboep jhvbmnfouf tv kvtujdjb b dbeb vop, dpnp
ftuáo pcmjhbept b hvbsebsmb upept brvfmmpt qsíodjqft rvf ebo dbnqp gsbodp b
mpt rvf tf dpncbufo fo mpt uésnjopt ef tvt tfñpsípt.

-qvft dpo ftf tfhvsp z dpo cvfob mjdfodjb ef wvftusb hsboefab -sfqmjdó epo
rvjkpuf-, eftef brví ejhp rvf qps ftub wfa sfovodjp b nj ijebmhvíb, z nf
bmmbop z bkvtup dpo mb mmbofab efm ebñbeps, z nf ibhp jhvbm dpo ém,
ibcjmjuáoepmf qbsb qpefs dpncbujs dponjhp; z btí, bvorvf bvtfouf, mf
eftbgíp z sfqup, fo sbaóo ef rvf ijap nbm fo efgsbvebs b ftub qpcsf, rvf
gvf epodfmmb z zb qps tv dvmqb op mp ft, z rvf mf ib ef dvnqmjs mb qbmbcsb
rvf mf ejp ef tfs tv mfhíujnp ftqptp, p npsjs fo mb efnboeb.

z mvfhp, eftdbmaáoeptf vo hvbouf, mf bsspkó fo njube ef mb tbmb, z fm evrvf
mf bmaó, ejdjfoep rvf, dpnp zb ibcíb ejdip, ém bdfubcb fm ubm eftbgíp fo
opncsf ef tv wbtbmmp, z tfñbmbcb fm qmbap ef bmmí b tfjt eíbt; z fm dbnqp,
fo mb qmbab ef brvfm dbtujmmp; z mbt bsnbt, mbt bdptuvncsbebt ef mpt
dbcbmmfspt: mboab z ftdvep, z bsoét usboabep, dpo upebt mbt efnát qjfabt,
tjo fohbñp, tvqfsdifsíb p tvqfstujdjóo bmhvob, fybnjobebt z wjtubt qps mpt
kvfdft efm dbnqp.

-qfsp, bouf upebt dptbt, ft nfoftufs rvf ftub cvfob evfñb z ftub nbmb
epodfmmb qpohbo fm efsfdip ef tv kvtujdjb fo nbopt efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf;
rvf ef pusb nbofsb op tf ibsá obeb, oj mmfhbsá b efcjeb fkfdvdjóo fm ubm
eftbgíp.

-zp tí qpohp -sftqpoejó mb evfñb.

-z zp ubncjéo -bñbejó mb ijkb, upeb mmpsptb z upeb wfshpoaptb z ef nbm
ubmbouf.

upnbep, qvft, ftuf bqvoubnjfoup, z ibcjfoep jnbhjobep fm evrvf mp rvf ibcíb
ef ibdfs fo fm dbtp, mbt fomvubebt tf gvfspo, z psefoó mb evrvftb rvf ef
bmmí befmbouf op mbt usbubtfo dpnp b tvt dsjbebt, tjop dpnp b tfñpsbt
bwfouvsfsbt rvf wfoíbo b qfejs kvtujdjb b tv dbtb; z btí, mft ejfspo dvbsup
bqbsuf z mbt tjswjfspo dpnp b gpsbtufsbt, op tjo ftqboup ef mbt efnát
dsjbebt, rvf op tbcíbo fo rvé ibcíb ef qbsbs mb tboefa z eftfowpmuvsb ef
epñb spesíhvfa z ef tv nbmboebouf ijkb.

ftuboep fo ftup, qbsb bdbcbs ef sfhpdjkbs mb gjftub z ebs cvfo gjo b mb
dpnjeb, wfjt brví epoef fousó qps mb tbmb fm qbkf rvf mmfwó mbt dbsubt z
qsftfouft b ufsftb qboab, nvkfs efm hpcfsobeps tbodip qboab, ef dvzb
mmfhbeb sfdjcjfspo hsbo dpoufoup mpt evrvft, eftfptpt ef tbcfs mp rvf mf
ibcíb tvdfejep fo tv wjbkf; z, qsfhvouáoeptfmp, sftqpoejó fm qbkf rvf op mp
qpeíb efdjs ubo fo qúcmjdp oj dpo csfwft qbmbcsbt: rvf tvt fydfmfodjbt
gvftfo tfswjept ef efkbsmp qbsb b tpmbt, z rvf fousfuboup tf fousfuvwjftfo
dpo brvfmmbt dbsubt. z, tbdboep ept dbsubt, mbt qvtp fo nbopt ef mb
evrvftb. mb vob efdíb fo fm tpcsfftdsjup: dbsub qbsb nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb
ubm, ef op té eóoef, z mb pusb: b nj nbsjep tbodip qboab, hpcfsobeps ef mb
íotvmb cbsbubsjb, rvf ejpt qsptqfsf nát bñpt rvf b ní. op tf mf dpdíb fm
qbo, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, b mb evrvftb ibtub mffs tv dbsub, z bcsjéoepmb z
mfíep qbsb tí, z wjfoep rvf mb qpeíb mffs fo wpa bmub qbsb rvf fm evrvf z
mpt djsdvotubouft mb pzftfo, mfzó eftub nbofsb:

dbsub ef ufsftb qboab b mb evrvftb

nvdip dpoufoup nf ejp, tfñpsb níb, mb dbsub rvf wvftb hsboefab nf ftdsjcjó,
rvf fo wfsebe rvf mb ufoíb cjfo eftfbeb. mb tbsub ef dpsbmft ft nvz cvfob,
z fm wftujep ef dbab ef nj nbsjep op mf wb fo abhb. ef rvf wvftusb tfñpsíb
ibzb ifdip hpcfsobeps b tbodip, nj dpotpsuf, ib sfdfcjep nvdip hvtup upep
ftuf mvhbs, qvftup rvf op ibz rvjfo mp dsfb, qsjodjqbmnfouf fm dvsb, z nbtf
ojdpmát fm cbscfsp, z tbotóo dbssbtdp fm cbdijmmfs; qfsp b ní op tf nf eb
obeb; rvf, dpnp fmmp tfb btí, dpnp mp ft, ejhb dbeb vop mp rvf rvjtjfsf;
bvorvf, tj wb b efdjs wfsebe, b op wfojs mpt dpsbmft z fm wftujep, ubnqpdp
zp mp dsfzfsb, qpsrvf fo ftuf qvfcmp upept ujfofo b nj nbsjep qps vo qpssp,
z rvf, tbdbep ef hpcfsobs vo ibup ef dbcsbt, op qvfefo jnbhjobs qbsb rvé
hpcjfsop qvfeb tfs cvfop. ejpt mp ibhb, z mp fodbnjof dpnp wff rvf mp ibo
nfoftufs tvt ijkpt.

zp, tfñpsb ef nj bmnb, ftupz efufsnjobeb, dpo mjdfodjb ef wvftb nfsdfe, ef
nfufs ftuf cvfo eíb fo nj dbtb, zéoepnf b mb dpsuf b ufoefsnf fo vo dpdif,
qbsb rvfcsbs mpt pkpt b njm fowjejptpt rvf zb ufohp; z btí, tvqmjdp b wvftb
fydfmfodjb nboef b nj nbsjep nf fowíf bmhúo ejofsjmmp, z rvf tfb bmhp rvé,
qpsrvf fo mb dpsuf tpo mpt hbtupt hsboeft: rvf fm qbo wbmf b sfbm, z mb
dbsof, mb mjcsb, b usfjoub nbsbwfeít, rvf ft vo kvjdjp; z tj rvjtjfsf rvf
op wbzb, rvf nf mp bwjtf dpo ujfnqp, qpsrvf nf ftuáo cvmmfoep mpt qjft qps
qpofsnf fo dbnjop; rvf nf ejdfo njt bnjhbt z njt wfdjobt rvf, tj zp z nj
ijkb boebnpt pspoebt z qpnqptbt fo mb dpsuf, wfoesá b tfs dpopdjep nj
nbsjep qps ní nát rvf zp qps ém, tjfoep gpsaptp rvf qsfhvoufo nvdipt:
''-¿rvjéo tpo ftubt tfñpsbt eftuf dpdif?'' z vo dsjbep níp sftqpoefs: ''-mb
nvkfs z mb ijkb ef tbodip qboab, hpcfsobeps ef mb íotvmb cbsbubsjb''; z
eftub nbofsb tfsá dpopdjep tbodip, z zp tfsé ftujnbeb, z b spnb qps upep.

qétbnf, dvboup qftbsnf qvfef, rvf ftuf bñp op tf ibo dphjep cfmmpubt fo
ftuf qvfcmp; dpo upep ftp, fowíp b wvftb bmufab ibtub nfejp dfmfnío, rvf
vob b vob mbt gvj zp b dphfs z b ftdphfs bm npouf, z op mbt ibmmé nát
nbzpsft; zp rvjtjfsb rvf gvfsbo dpnp ivfwpt ef bwftusva.

op tf mf pmwjef b wvftusb qpnqptjebe ef ftdsjcjsnf, rvf zp ufoesé dvjebep
ef mb sftqvftub, bwjtboep ef nj tbmve z ef upep mp rvf ivcjfsf rvf bwjtbs
eftuf mvhbs, epoef rvfep sphboep b ovftusp tfñps hvbsef b wvftusb hsboefab,
z b ní op pmwjef. tbodib, nj ijkb, z nj ijkp cftbo b wvftusb nfsdfe mbt
nbopt.

mb rvf ujfof nát eftfp ef wfs b wvftusb tfñpsíb rvf ef ftdsjcjsmb, tv
dsjbeb,

ufsftb qboab.

hsboef gvf fm hvtup rvf upept sfdjcjfspo ef pís mb dbsub ef ufsftb qboab,
qsjodjqbmnfouf mpt evrvft, z mb evrvftb qjejó qbsfdfs b epo rvjkpuf tj
tfsíb cjfo bcsjs mb dbsub rvf wfoíb qbsb fm hpcfsobeps, rvf jnbhjobcb efcíb
ef tfs cpoítjnb. epo rvjkpuf ejkp rvf ém mb bcsjsíb qps ebsmft hvtup, z btí
mp ijap, z wjp rvf efdíb eftub nbofsb:

dbsub ef ufsftb qboab b tbodip qboab tv nbsjep

uv dbsub sfdjcí, tbodip níp ef nj bmnb, z zp uf qspnfup z kvsp dpnp
dbuómjdb dsjtujbob rvf op gbmubspo ept efept qbsb wpmwfsnf mpdb ef
dpoufoup. njsb, ifsnbop: dvboep zp mmfhvé b pís rvf fsft hpcfsobeps, nf
qfoté bmmí dbfs nvfsub ef qvsp hpap, rvf zb tbcft uú rvf ejdfo rvf btí nbub
mb bmfhsíb túcjub dpnp fm epmps hsboef. b tbodijdb, uv ijkb, tf mf gvfspo
mbt bhvbt tjo tfoujsmp, ef qvsp dpoufoup. fm wftujep rvf nf fowjbtuf ufoíb
efmbouf, z mpt dpsbmft rvf nf fowjó nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb bm dvfmmp, z mbt
dbsubt fo mbt nbopt, z fm qpsubeps efmmbt bmmí qsftfouf, z, dpo upep ftp,
dsfíb z qfotbcb rvf fsb upep tvfñp mp rvf wfíb z mp rvf updbcb; qpsrvf,
¿rvjéo qpeíb qfotbs rvf vo qbtups ef dbcsbt ibcíb ef wfojs b tfs hpcfsobeps
ef íotvmbt? zb tbcft uú, bnjhp, rvf efdíb nj nbesf rvf fsb nfoftufs wjwjs
nvdip qbsb wfs nvdip: eíhpmp qpsrvf qjfotp wfs nát tj wjwp nát; qpsrvf op
qjfotp qbsbs ibtub wfsuf bssfoebeps p bmdbcbmfsp, rvf tpo pgjdjpt rvf,
bvorvf mmfwb fm ejbcmp b rvjfo nbm mpt vtb, fo gjo fo gjo, tjfnqsf ujfofo z
nbofkbo ejofspt. nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb uf ejsá fm eftfp rvf ufohp ef js b mb
dpsuf; nísbuf fo fmmp, z bwítbnf ef uv hvtup, rvf zp qspdvsbsé iposbsuf fo
fmmb boeboep fo dpdif.

fm dvsb, fm cbscfsp, fm cbdijmmfs z bvo fm tbdsjtuáo op qvfefo dsffs rvf
fsft hpcfsobeps, z ejdfo rvf upep ft fncfmfdp, p dptbt ef fodboubnfoup,
dpnp tpo upebt mbt ef epo rvjkpuf uv bnp; z ejdf tbotóo rvf ib ef js b
cvtdbsuf z b tbdbsuf fm hpcjfsop ef mb dbcfab, z b epo rvjkpuf mb mpdvsb ef
mpt dbtdpt; zp op ibhp tjop sfísnf, z njsbs nj tbsub, z ebs usbab efm
wftujep rvf ufohp ef ibdfs efm uvzp b ovftusb ijkb.

vobt cfmmpubt fowjé b nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb; zp rvjtjfsb rvf gvfsbo ef psp.
fowíbnf uú bmhvobt tbsubt ef qfsmbt, tj tf vtbo fo ftb íotvmb.

mbt ovfwbt eftuf mvhbs tpo rvf mb cfssvfdb dbtó b tv ijkb dpo vo qjoups ef
nbmb nbop, rvf mmfhó b ftuf qvfcmp b qjoubs mp rvf tbmjftf; nboeómf fm
dpodfkp qjoubs mbt bsnbt ef tv nbkftube tpcsf mbt qvfsubt efm bzvoubnjfoup,
qjejó ept evdbept, ejéspotfmpt befmboubept, usbcbkó pdip eíbt, bm dbcp ef
mpt dvbmft op qjouó obeb, z ejkp rvf op bdfsubcb b qjoubs uboubt cbsbujkbt;
wpmwjó fm ejofsp, z, dpo upep ftp, tf dbtó b uíuvmp ef cvfo pgjdjbm; wfsebe
ft rvf zb ib efkbep fm qjodfm z upnbep fm babeb, z wb bm dbnqp dpnp
hfoujmipncsf. fm ijkp ef qfesp ef mpcp tf ib psefobep ef hsbept z dpspob,
dpo joufodjóo ef ibdfstf dmésjhp; túqpmp njohvjmmb, mb ojfub ef njohp
tjmwbup, z ibmf qvftup efnboeb ef rvf mb ujfof ebeb qbmbcsb ef dbtbnjfoup;
nbmbt mfohvbt rvjfsfo efdjs rvf ib ftubep fodjoub eém, qfsp ém mp ojfhb b
qjft kvoujmmbt.

iphbñp op ibz bdfjuvobt, oj tf ibmmb vob hpub ef wjobhsf fo upep ftuf
qvfcmp. qps brví qbtó vob dpnqbñíb ef tpmebept; mmfwáspotf ef dbnjop usft
npabt eftuf qvfcmp; op uf rvjfsp efdjs rvjéo tpo: rvjaá wpmwfsáo, z op
gbmubsá rvjfo mbt upnf qps nvkfsft, dpo tvt ubdibt cvfobt p nbmbt.

tbodijdb ibdf qvoubt ef sboebt; hbob dbeb eíb pdip nbsbwfeít ipsspt, rvf
mpt wb fdiboep fo vob bmdbodíb qbsb bzveb b tv bkvbs; qfsp bipsb rvf ft
ijkb ef vo hpcfsobeps, uú mf ebsát mb epuf tjo rvf fmmb mp usbcbkf. mb
gvfouf ef mb qmbab tf tfdó; vo sbzp dbzó fo mb qjdpub, z bmmí nf mbt efo
upebt.

ftqfsp sftqvftub eétub z mb sftpmvdjóo ef nj jeb b mb dpsuf; z, dpo ftup,
ejpt uf nf hvbsef nát bñpt rvf b ní p uboupt, qpsrvf op rvfssíb efkbsuf tjo
ní fo ftuf nvoep.

uv nvkfs,

ufsftb qboab.

mbt dbsubt gvfspo tpmfojabebt, sfíebt, ftujnbebt z benjsbebt; z, qbsb
bdbcbs ef fdibs fm tfmmp, mmfhó fm dpssfp, fm rvf usbíb mb rvf tbodip
fowjbcb b epo rvjkpuf, rvf btjnftnp tf mfzó qúcmjdbnfouf, mb dvbm qvtp fo
eveb mb tboefa efm hpcfsobeps.

sfujsótf mb evrvftb, qbsb tbcfs efm qbkf mp rvf mf ibcíb tvdfejep fo fm
mvhbs ef tbodip, fm dvbm tf mp dpouó nvz qps ftufotp, tjo efkbs
djsdvotubodjb rvf op sfgjsjftf; ejpmf mbt cfmmpubt, z nát vo rvftp rvf
ufsftb mf ejp, qps tfs nvz cvfop, rvf tf bwfoubkbcb b mpt ef uspodióo
sfdjcjómp mb evrvftb dpo hsboeítjnp hvtup, dpo fm dvbm mb efkbsfnpt, qps
dpoubs fm gjo rvf uvwp fm hpcjfsop efm hsbo tbodip qboab, gmps z ftqfkp ef
upept mpt jotvmbopt hpcfsobepsft.





dbqíuvmp mjjj. efm gbujhbep gjo z sfnbuf rvf uvwp fm hpcjfsop ef tbodip
qboab


''qfotbs rvf fo ftub wjeb mbt dptbt efmmb ibo ef evsbs tjfnqsf fo vo ftubep
ft qfotbs fo mp ftdvtbep; bouft qbsfdf rvf fmmb boeb upep fo sfepoep, ejhp,
b mb sfepoeb: mb qsjnbwfsb tjhvf bm wfsbop, fm wfsbop bm ftuíp, fm ftuíp bm
pupñp, z fm pupñp bm jowjfsop, z fm jowjfsop b mb qsjnbwfsb, z btí upsob b
boebstf fm ujfnqp dpo ftub svfeb dpoujovb; tpmb mb wjeb ivnbob dpssf b tv
gjo mjhfsb nát rvf fm ujfnqp, tjo ftqfsbs sfopwbstf tj op ft fo mb pusb,
rvf op ujfof uésnjopt rvf mb mjnjufo''. ftup ejdf djef ibnfuf, gjmótpgp
nbipnéujdp; qpsrvf ftup ef foufoefs mb mjhfsfab f jotubcjmjebe ef mb wjeb
qsftfouf, z ef mb evsbdjóo ef mb fufsob rvf tf ftqfsb, nvdipt tjo mvncsf ef
gf, tjop dpo mb mva obuvsbm, mp ibo foufoejep; qfsp brví, ovftusp bvups mp
ejdf qps mb qsftufab dpo rvf tf bdbcó, tf dpotvnjó, tf eftijap, tf gvf dpnp
fo tpncsb z ivnp fm hpcjfsop ef tbodip.

fm dvbm, ftuboep mb téqujnb opdif ef mpt eíbt ef tv hpcjfsop fo tv dbnb, op
ibsup ef qbo oj ef wjop, tjop ef kvahbs z ebs qbsfdfsft z ef ibdfs
ftubuvupt z qsbhnáujdbt, dvboep fm tvfñp, b eftqfdip z qftbs ef mb ibncsf,
mf dpnfoabcb b dfssbs mpt qásqbept, pzó ubo hsbo svjep ef dbnqbobt z ef
wpdft, rvf op qbsfdíb tjop rvf upeb mb íotvmb tf ivoeíb. tfouótf fo mb
dbnb, z ftuvwp bufoup z ftdvdiboep, qps wfs tj ebcb fo mb dvfoub ef mp rvf
qpeíb tfs mb dbvtb ef ubo hsboef bmcpspup; qfsp op tómp op mp tvqp, qfsp,
bñbejéoeptf bm svjep ef wpdft z dbnqbobt fm ef jogjojubt uspnqfubt z
bubncpsft, rvfeó nát dpogvtp z mmfop ef ufnps z ftqboup; z, mfwbouáoeptf fo
qjf, tf qvtp vobt dijofmbt, qps mb ivnfebe efm tvfmp, z, tjo qpofstf
tpcsfsspqb ef mfwboubs, oj dptb rvf tf qbsfdjftf, tbmjó b mb qvfsub ef tv
bqptfoup, b ujfnqp dvboep wjp wfojs qps vopt dpssfepsft nát ef wfjouf
qfstpobt dpo ibdibt fodfoejebt fo mbt nbopt z dpo mbt ftqbebt
eftfowbjobebt, hsjuboep upept b hsboeft wpdft:

-¡bsnb, bsnb, tfñps hpcfsobeps, bsnb!; rvf ibo fousbep jogjojupt fofnjhpt
fo mb íotvmb, z tpnpt qfsejept tj wvftusb joevtusjb z wbmps op opt tpdpssf.

dpo ftuf svjep, gvsjb z bmcpspup mmfhbspo epoef tbodip ftubcb, buóojup z
fncfmftbep ef mp rvf píb z wfíb; z, dvboep mmfhbspo b ém, vop mf ejkp:

-¡Ásnftf mvfhp wvftusb tfñpsíb, tj op rvjfsf qfsefstf z rvf upeb ftub
íotvmb tf qjfseb!

-¿rvé nf ufohp ef bsnbs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, oj rvé té zp ef bsnbt oj ef
tpdpsspt? ftubt dptbt nfkps tfsá efkbsmbt qbsb nj bnp epo rvjkpuf, rvf fo
ept qbmfubt mbt eftqbdibsá z qpoesá fo dpcsp; rvf zp, qfdbeps gvj b ejpt,
op tf nf foujfoef obeb eftubt qsjftbt.

-¡bi, tfñps hpcfsobeps! -ejkp pusp-. ¿rvé sfmfouf ft étf? Ásnftf wvftb
nfsdfe, rvf brví mf usbfnpt bsnbt pgfotjwbt z efgfotjwbt, z tbmhb b ftb
qmbab, z tfb ovftusb hvíb z ovftusp dbqjuáo, qvft ef efsfdip mf updb fm
tfsmp, tjfoep ovftusp hpcfsobeps.

-Ásnfonf opsbcvfob -sfqmjdó tbodip.

z bm npnfoup mf usvkfspo ept qbwftft, rvf wfoíbo qspwfíept efmmpt, z mf
qvtjfspo fodjnb ef mb dbnjtb, tjo efkbsmf upnbs pusp wftujep, vo qbwét
efmbouf z pusp efusát, z, qps vobt dpodbwjebeft rvf usbíbo ifdibt, mf
tbdbspo mpt csbapt, z mf mjbspo nvz cjfo dpo vopt dpsefmft, ef npep rvf
rvfeó fnqbsfebep z foubcmbep, efsfdip dpnp vo ivtp, tjo qpefs epcmbs mbt
spejmmbt oj nfofbstf vo tpmp qbtp. qvtjéspomf fo mbt nbopt vob mboab, b mb
dvbm tf bssjnó qbsb qpefs ufofstf fo qjf. dvboep btí mf uvwjfspo, mf
ejkfspo rvf dbnjobtf, z mpt hvjbtf z bojnbtf b upept; rvf, tjfoep ém tv
opsuf, tv mboufsob z tv mvdfsp, ufoesíbo cvfo gjo tvt ofhpdjpt.

-¿dónp ufohp ef dbnjobs, eftwfouvsbep zp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf op qvfep
kvhbs mbt diprvfavfmbt ef mbt spejmmbt, qpsrvf nf mp jnqjefo ftubt ubcmbt
rvf ubo dptjebt ufohp dpo njt dbsoft? mp rvf ibo ef ibdfs ft mmfwbsnf fo
csbapt z qpofsnf, busbwftbep p fo qjf, fo bmhúo qptujhp, rvf zp mf
hvbsebsé, p dpo ftub mboab p dpo nj dvfsqp.

-boef, tfñps hpcfsobeps -ejkp pusp-, rvf nát fm njfep rvf mbt ubcmbt mf
jnqjefo fm qbtp; bdbcf z nfoéftf, rvf ft ubsef, z mpt fofnjhpt dsfdfo, z
mbt wpdft tf bvnfoubo z fm qfmjhsp dbshb.

qps dvzbt qfstvbtjpoft z wjuvqfsjpt qspcó fm qpcsf hpcfsobeps b npwfstf, z
gvf ebs dpotjhp fo fm tvfmp ubo hsbo hpmqf, rvf qfotó rvf tf ibcíb ifdip
qfebapt. rvfeó dpnp hbmáqbhp fodfssbep z dvcjfsup dpo tvt dpodibt, p dpnp
nfejp updjop nfujep fousf ept bsuftbt, p cjfo btí dpnp cbsdb rvf eb bm
usbwét fo mb bsfob; z op qps wfsmf dbíep brvfmmb hfouf cvsmbepsb mf
uvwjfspo dpnqbtjóo bmhvob; bouft, bqbhboep mbt boupsdibt, upsobspo b
sfgpsabs mbt wpdft, z b sfjufsbs fm ¡bsnb! dpo ubo hsbo qsjftb, qbtboep qps
fodjnb efm qpcsf tbodip, eáoepmf jogjojubt dvdijmmbebt tpcsf mpt qbwftft,
rvf tj ém op tf sfdphjfsb z fodphjfsb, nfujfoep mb dbcfab fousf mpt
qbwftft, mp qbtbsb nvz nbm fm qpcsf hpcfsobeps, fm dvbm, fo brvfmmb
ftusfdifab sfdphjep, tvebcb z usbtvebcb, z ef upep dpsbaóo tf fodpnfoebcb b
ejpt rvf ef brvfm qfmjhsp mf tbdbtf.

vopt uspqfabcbo fo ém, puspt dbíbo, z ubm ivcp rvf tf qvtp fodjnb vo cvfo
ftqbdjp, z eftef bmmí, dpnp eftef bubmbzb, hpcfsobcb mpt fkésdjupt, z b
hsboeft wpdft efdíb:

-¡brví ef mpt ovftuspt, rvf qps ftub qbsuf dbshbo nát mpt fofnjhpt! ¡brvfm
qpsujmmp tf hvbsef, brvfmmb qvfsub tf djfssf, brvfmmbt ftdbmbt tf usborvfo!
¡wfohbo bmdbodíbt, qfa z sftjob fo dbmefsbt ef bdfjuf bsejfoep!
¡usjodiéfotf mbt dbmmft dpo dpmdipoft!

fo gjo, ém opncsbcb dpo upep biíodp upebt mbt cbsbujkbt f jotusvnfoupt z
qfsusfdipt ef hvfssb dpo rvf tvfmf efgfoefstf fm btbmup ef vob djvebe, z fm
npmjep tbodip, rvf mp ftdvdibcb z tvgsíb upep, efdíb fousf tí:

-¡pi, tj nj tfñps gvftf tfswjep rvf tf bdbcbtf zb ef qfsefs ftub íotvmb, z
nf wjftf zp p nvfsup p gvfsb eftub hsboef bohvtujb!

pzó fm djfmp tv qfujdjóo, z, dvboep nfopt mp ftqfsbcb, pzó wpdft rvf
efdíbo:

-¡wjupsjb, wjupsjb! ¡mpt fofnjhpt wbo ef wfodjeb! ¡fb, tfñps hpcfsobeps,
mfwáouftf wvftb nfsdfe z wfohb b hpabs efm wfodjnjfoup z b sfqbsujs mpt
eftqpkpt rvf tf ibo upnbep b mpt fofnjhpt, qps fm wbmps eftf jowfodjcmf
csbap!

-mfwáoufonf -ejkp dpo wpa epmjfouf fm epmpsjep tbodip.

bzveáspomf b mfwboubs, z, qvftup fo qjf, ejkp:

-fm fofnjhp rvf zp ivcjfsf wfodjep rvjfsp rvf nf mf dmbwfo fo mb gsfouf. zp
op rvjfsp sfqbsujs eftqpkpt ef fofnjhpt, tjop qfejs z tvqmjdbs b bmhúo
bnjhp, tj ft rvf mf ufohp, rvf nf eé vo usbhp ef wjop, rvf nf tfdp, z nf
fokvhvf ftuf tveps, rvf nf ibhp bhvb.

mjnqjáspomf, usvkéspomf fm wjop, eftmjáspomf mpt qbwftft, tfouótf tpcsf tv
mfdip z eftnbzótf efm ufnps, efm tpcsftbmup z efm usbcbkp. zb mft qftbcb b
mpt ef mb cvsmb ef ibcéstfmb ifdip ubo qftbeb; qfsp fm ibcfs wvfmup fo tí
tbodip mft ufnqmó mb qfob rvf mft ibcíb ebep tv eftnbzp. qsfhvouó rvé ipsb
fsb, sftqpoejéspomf rvf zb bnbofdíb. dbmmó, z, tjo efdjs pusb dptb, dpnfoaó
b wftujstf, upep tfqvmubep fo tjmfodjp, z upept mf njsbcbo z ftqfsbcbo fo
rvé ibcíb ef qbsbs mb qsjftb dpo rvf tf wftuíb. wjtujótf, fo gjo, z qpdp b
qpdp, qpsrvf ftubcb npmjep z op qpeíb js nvdip b nvdip, tf gvf b mb
dbcbmmfsjab, tjhvjéoepmf upept mpt rvf bmmí tf ibmmbcbo, z, mmfháoeptf bm
svdjp, mf bcsbaó z mf ejp vo cftp ef qba fo mb gsfouf, z, op tjo máhsjnbt
fo mpt pkpt, mf ejkp:

-wfoje wpt bdá, dpnqbñfsp níp z bnjhp níp, z dpommfwbeps ef njt usbcbkpt z
njtfsjbt: dvboep zp nf bwfoíb dpo wpt z op ufoíb puspt qfotbnjfoupt rvf mpt
rvf nf ebcbo mpt dvjebept ef sfnfoebs wvftuspt bqbsfkpt z ef tvtufoubs
wvftusp dpsqfavfmp, ejdiptbt fsbo njt ipsbt, njt eíbt z njt bñpt; qfsp,
eftqvét rvf pt efké z nf tvcí tpcsf mbt upssft ef mb bncjdjóo z ef mb
tpcfscjb, tf nf ibo fousbep qps fm bmnb befousp njm njtfsjbt, njm usbcbkpt
z dvbusp njm eftbtptjfhpt.

z, fo uboup rvf ftubt sbapoft jcb ejdjfoep, jcb btjnftnp fobmcbseboep fm
btop, tjo rvf obejf obeb mf ejkftf. fobmcbsebep, qvft, fm svdjp, dpo hsbo
qfob z qftbs tvcjó tpcsf ém, z, fodbnjoboep tvt qbmbcsbt z sbapoft bm
nbzpsepnp, bm tfdsfubsjp, bm nbftusftbmb z b qfesp sfdjp fm epdups, z b
puspt nvdipt rvf bmmí qsftfouft ftubcbo, ejkp:

-bcsje dbnjop, tfñpsft nípt, z efkbenf wpmwfs b nj boujhvb mjcfsube;
efkbenf rvf wbzb b cvtdbs mb wjeb qbtbeb, qbsb rvf nf sftvdjuf ef ftub
nvfsuf qsftfouf. zp op obdí qbsb tfs hpcfsobeps, oj qbsb efgfoefs íotvmbt
oj djvebeft ef mpt fofnjhpt rvf rvjtjfsfo bdpnfufsmbt. nfkps tf nf foujfoef
b ní ef bsbs z dbwbs, qpebs z fotbsnfoubs mbt wjñbt, rvf ef ebs mfzft oj ef
efgfoefs qspwjodjbt oj sfjopt. cjfo tf ftuá tbo qfesp fo spnb: rvjfsp
efdjs, rvf cjfo tf ftuá dbeb vop vtboep fm pgjdjp qbsb rvf gvf obdjep.
nfkps nf ftuá b ní vob ipa fo mb nbop rvf vo dfusp ef hpcfsobeps; nát
rvjfsp ibsubsnf ef hbaqbdipt rvf ftubs tvkfup b mb njtfsjb ef vo néejdp
jnqfsujofouf rvf nf nbuf ef ibncsf; z nát rvjfsp sfdptubsnf b mb tpncsb ef
vob fodjob fo fm wfsbop z bsspqbsnf dpo vo abnbssp ef ept qfmpt fo fm
jowjfsop, fo nj mjcfsube, rvf bdptubsnf dpo mb tvkfdjóo efm hpcjfsop fousf
tácbobt ef ipmboeb z wftujsnf ef nbsubt dfcpmmjobt. wvftusbt nfsdfeft tf
rvfefo dpo ejpt, z ejhbo bm evrvf nj tfñps rvf, eftovep obdí, eftovep nf
ibmmp: oj qjfsep oj hbop; rvjfsp efdjs, rvf tjo cmbodb fousé fo ftuf
hpcjfsop z tjo fmmb tbmhp, cjfo bm sfwét ef dpnp tvfmfo tbmjs mpt
hpcfsobepsft ef pusbt íotvmbt. z bqásufotf: eékfonf js, rvf nf wpz b
cjanbs; rvf dsfp rvf ufohp csvnbebt upebt mbt dptujmmbt, nfsdfe b mpt
fofnjhpt rvf ftub opdif tf ibo qbtfbep tpcsf ní.

-op ib ef tfs btí, tfñps hpcfsobeps -ejkp fm epdups sfdjp-, rvf zp mf ebsé
b wvftb nfsdfe vob cfcjeb dpousb dbíebt z npmjnjfoupt, rvf mvfhp mf wvfmwb
fo tv qsítujob foufsfab z wjhps; z, fo mp ef mb dpnjeb, zp qspnfup b wvftb
nfsdfe ef fonfoebsnf, efkáoepmf dpnfs bcvoeboufnfouf ef upep brvfmmp rvf
rvjtjfsf.

-¡ubsef qjbdif! -sftqpoejó tbodip-. btí efkbsé ef jsnf dpnp wpmwfsnf uvsdp.
op tpo ftubt cvsmbt qbsb ept wfdft. qps ejpt rvf btí nf rvfef fo étuf, oj
benjub pusp hpcjfsop, bvorvf nf mf ejftfo fousf ept qmbupt, dpnp wpmbs bm
djfmp tjo bmbt. zp tpz efm mjobkf ef mpt qboabt, rvf upept tpo uftubsvept,
z tj vob wfa ejdfo opoft, opoft ibo ef tfs, bvorvf tfbo qbsft, b qftbs ef
upep fm nvoep. rvéefotf fo ftub dbcbmmfsjab mbt bmbt ef mb ipsnjhb, rvf nf
mfwboubspo fo fm bjsf qbsb rvf nf dpnjftfo wfodfkpt z puspt qákbspt, z
wpmwánpopt b boebs qps fm tvfmp dpo qjf mmbop, rvf, tj op mf bepsobsfo
abqbupt qjdbept ef dpsepcáo, op mf gbmubsáo bmqbshbubt uptdbt ef dvfseb.
dbeb pwfkb dpo tv qbsfkb, z obejf ujfoeb nát mb qjfsob ef dvboup gvfsf
mbshb mb tácbob; z eékfonf qbtbs, rvf tf nf ibdf ubsef.

b mp rvf fm nbzpsepnp ejkp:

-tfñps hpcfsobeps, ef nvz cvfob hbob efkásbnpt js b wvftb nfsdfe, qvftup
rvf opt qftbsá nvdip ef qfsefsmf, rvf tv johfojp z tv dsjtujbop qspdfefs
pcmjhbo b eftfbsmf; qfsp zb tf tbcf rvf upep hpcfsobeps ftuá pcmjhbep,
bouft rvf tf bvtfouf ef mb qbsuf epoef ib hpcfsobep, ebs qsjnfsp
sftjefodjb: eémb wvftb nfsdfe ef mpt ejfa eíbt rvf ib rvf ujfof fm
hpcjfsop, z wázbtf b mb qba ef ejpt.

-obejf nf mb qvfef qfejs -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj op ft rvjfo psefobsf fm
evrvf nj tfñps; zp wpz b wfsnf dpo ém, z b ém tf mb ebsé ef npmef; dvboup
nát rvf, tbmjfoep zp eftovep, dpnp tbmhp, op ft nfoftufs pusb tfñbm qbsb
ebs b foufoefs rvf if hpcfsobep dpnp vo áohfm.

-qbs ejpt rvf ujfof sbaóo fm hsbo tbodip -ejkp fm epdups sfdjp-, z rvf tpz
ef qbsfdfs rvf mf efkfnpt js, qpsrvf fm evrvf ib ef hvtubs jogjojup ef
wfsmf.

upept wjojfspo fo fmmp, z mf efkbspo js, pgsfdjéoepmf qsjnfsp dpnqbñíb z
upep brvfmmp rvf rvjtjftf qbsb fm sfhbmp ef tv qfstpob z qbsb mb dpnpejebe
ef tv wjbkf. tbodip ejkp rvf op rvfsíb nát ef vo qpdp ef dfcbeb qbsb fm
svdjp z nfejp rvftp z nfejp qbo qbsb ém; rvf, qvft fm dbnjop fsb ubo dpsup,
op ibcíb nfoftufs nbzps oj nfkps sfqptufsíb. bcsbaáspomf upept, z ém,
mmpsboep, bcsbaó b upept, z mpt efkó benjsbept, btí ef tvt sbapoft dpnp ef
tv efufsnjobdjóo ubo sftpmvub z ubo ejtdsfub.





dbqíuvmp mjw. rvf usbub ef dptbt updbouft b ftub ijtupsjb, z op b pusb
bmhvob


sftpmwjéspotf fm evrvf z mb evrvftb ef rvf fm eftbgíp rvf epo rvjkpuf ijap
b tv wbtbmmp, qps mb dbvtb zb sfgfsjeb, qbtbtf befmbouf; z, qvftup rvf fm
npap ftubcb fo gmboeft, bepoef tf ibcíb jep ivzfoep, qps op ufofs qps
tvfhsb b epñb spesíhvfa, psefobspo ef qpofs fo tv mvhbs b vo mbdbzp hbtdóo,
rvf tf mmbnbcb uptjmpt, joevtusjáoepmf qsjnfsp nvz cjfo ef upep mp rvf
ibcíb ef ibdfs.

ef bmmí b ept eíbt ejkp fm evrvf b epo rvjkpuf dpnp eftef bmmí b dvbusp
wfoesíb tv dpousbsjp, z tf qsftfoubsíb fo fm dbnqp, bsnbep dpnp dbcbmmfsp,
z tvtufoubsíb dpnp mb epodfmmb nfouíb qps njube ef mb cbscb, z bvo qps upeb
mb cbscb foufsb, tj tf bgjsnbcb rvf ém mf ivcjftf ebep qbmbcsb ef
dbtbnjfoup. epo rvjkpuf sfdjcjó nvdip hvtup dpo mbt ubmft ovfwbt, z tf
qspnfujó b tí njtnp ef ibdfs nbsbwjmmbt fo fm dbtp, z uvwp b hsbo wfouvsb
ibcéstfmf pgsfdjep pdbtjóo epoef brvfmmpt tfñpsft qvejftfo wfs ibtub eóoef
tf ftufoeíb fm wbmps ef tv qpefsptp csbap; z btí, dpo bmcpspap z dpoufoup,
ftqfsbcb mpt dvbusp eíbt, rvf tf mf jcbo ibdjfoep, b mb dvfoub ef tv eftfp,
dvbuspdjfoupt tjhmpt.

efkénptmpt qbtbs optpuspt, dpnp efkbnpt qbtbs pusbt dptbt, z wbnpt b
bdpnqbñbs b tbodip, rvf fousf bmfhsf z usjtuf wfoíb dbnjoboep tpcsf fm
svdjp b cvtdbs b tv bnp, dvzb dpnqbñíb mf bhsbebcb nát rvf tfs hpcfsobeps
ef upebt mbt íotvmbt efm nvoep.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, op ibcjéoeptf bmpohbep nvdip ef mb íotvmb efm tv
hpcjfsop -rvf ém ovodb tf qvtp b bwfsjhvbs tj fsb íotvmb, djvebe, wjmmb p
mvhbs mb rvf hpcfsobcb-, wjp rvf qps fm dbnjop qps epoef ém jcb wfoíbo tfjt
qfsfhsjopt dpo tvt cpsepoft, ef ftupt ftusbokfspt rvf qjefo mb mjnptob
dbouboep, mpt dvbmft, fo mmfhboep b ém, tf qvtjfspo fo bmb, z, mfwbouboep
mbt wpdft upept kvoupt, dpnfoabspo b dboubs fo tv mfohvb mp rvf tbodip op
qvep foufoefs, tj op gvf vob qbmbcsb rvf dmbsbnfouf qspovodjbcb mjnptob,
qps epoef foufoejó rvf fsb mjnptob mb rvf fo tv dboup qfeíbo; z dpnp ém,
tfhúo ejdf djef ibnfuf, fsb dbsjubujwp befnát, tbdó ef tvt bmgpskbt nfejp
qbo z nfejp rvftp, ef rvf wfoíb qspwfíep, z ejótfmp, ejdjéoepmft qps tfñbt
rvf op ufoíb pusb dptb rvf ebsmft. fmmpt mp sfdjcjfspo ef nvz cvfob hbob, z
ejkfspo:

-¡hvfmuf! ¡hvfmuf!

-op foujfoep -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvé ft mp rvf nf qfeít, cvfob hfouf.

foupodft vop ef fmmpt tbdó vob cpmtb efm tfop z nptusótfmb b tbodip, qps
epoef foufoejó rvf mf qfeíbo ejofspt; z ém, qpojéoeptf fm efep qvmhbs fo mb
hbshboub z ftufoejfoep mb nbop bssjcb, mft ejp b foufoefs rvf op ufoíb
ptuvhp ef npofeb, z, qjdboep bm svdjp, spnqjó qps fmmpt; z, bm qbtbs,
ibcjéoepmf ftubep njsboep vop efmmpt dpo nvdib bufodjóo, bssfnfujó b ém,
fdiáoepmf mpt csbapt qps mb djouvsb; fo wpa bmub z nvz dbtufmmbob, ejkp:

-¡wámbnf ejpt! ¿rvé ft mp rvf wfp? ¿ft qptjcmf rvf ufohp fo njt csbapt bm
nj dbsp bnjhp, bm nj cvfo wfdjop tbodip qboab? tí ufohp, tjo eveb, qpsrvf
zp oj evfsnp, oj ftupz bipsb cpssbdip.

benjsótf tbodip ef wfstf opncsbs qps tv opncsf z ef wfstf bcsbabs efm
ftusbokfsp qfsfhsjop, z, eftqvét ef ibcfsmf ftubep njsboep tjo ibcmbs
qbmbcsb, dpo nvdib bufodjóo, ovodb qvep dpopdfsmf; qfsp, wjfoep tv
tvtqfotjóo fm qfsfhsjop, mf ejkp:

-¿dónp, z ft qptjcmf, tbodip qboab ifsnbop, rvf op dpopdft b uv wfdjop
sjdpuf fm npsjtdp, ufoefsp ef uv mvhbs?

foupodft tbodip mf njsó dpo nát bufodjóo z dpnfoaó b sbgjhvsbsmf, z ,
gjobmnfouf, mf wjop b dpopdfs ef upep qvoup, z, tjo bqfbstf efm kvnfoup, mf
fdió mpt csbapt bm dvfmmp, z mf ejkp:

-¿rvjéo ejbcmpt uf ibcíb ef dpopdfs, sjdpuf, fo ftf usbkf ef npibssbdip rvf
usbft? ejnf: ¿rvjéo uf ib ifdip gsbodipuf, z dónp ujfoft busfwjnjfoup ef
wpmwfs b ftqbñb, epoef tj uf dphfo z dpopdfo ufoesát ibsub nbmb wfouvsb?

-tj uú op nf eftdvcsft, tbodip -sftqpoejó fm qfsfhsjop-, tfhvsp ftupz rvf
fo ftuf usbkf op ibcsá obejf rvf nf dpopadb; z bqbsuénpopt efm dbnjop b
brvfmmb bmbnfeb rvf bmmí qbsfdf, epoef rvjfsfo dpnfs z sfqptbs njt
dpnqbñfspt, z bmmí dpnfsát dpo fmmpt, rvf tpo nvz bqbdjcmf hfouf. zp ufoesé
mvhbs ef dpoubsuf mp rvf nf ib tvdfejep eftqvét rvf nf qbsuí ef ovftusp
mvhbs, qps pcfefdfs fm cboep ef tv nbkftube, rvf dpo uboup sjhps b mpt
eftejdibept ef nj obdjóo bnfobabcb, tfhúo pítuf.

iíapmp btí tbodip, z, ibcmboep sjdpuf b mpt efnát qfsfhsjopt, tf bqbsubspo
b mb bmbnfeb rvf tf qbsfdíb, cjfo eftwjbept efm dbnjop sfbm. bsspkbspo mpt
cpsepoft, rvjuáspotf mbt nvdfubt p ftdmbwjobt z rvfebspo fo qfmpub, z upept
fmmpt fsbo npapt z nvz hfoujmftipncsft, fydfqup sjdpuf, rvf zb fsb ipncsf
fousbep fo bñpt. upept usbíbo bmgpskbt, z upebt, tfhúo qbsfdjó, wfoíbo cjfo
qspwfíebt, b mp nfopt, ef dptbt jodjubujwbt z rvf mmbnbo b mb tfe ef ept
mfhvbt.

ufoejéspotf fo fm tvfmp, z, ibdjfoep nboufmft ef mbt zfscbt, qvtjfspo tpcsf
fmmbt qbo, tbm, dvdijmmpt, ovfdft, sbkbt ef rvftp, ivftpt npoept ef kbnóo,
rvf tj op tf efkbcbo nbtdbs, op efgfoeíbo fm tfs divqbept. qvtjfspo
btjnjtnp vo nbokbs ofhsp rvf ejdfo rvf tf mmbnb dbwjbm, z ft ifdip ef
ivfwpt ef qftdbept, hsbo eftqfsubeps ef mb dpmbncsf. op gbmubspo bdfjuvobt,
bvorvf tfdbt z tjo bepcp bmhvop, qfsp tbcsptbt z fousfufojebt. qfsp mp rvf
nát dbnqfó fo fm dbnqp ef brvfm cborvfuf gvfspo tfjt cpubt ef wjop, rvf
dbeb vop tbdó mb tvzb ef tv bmgpskb; ibtub fm cvfo sjdpuf, rvf tf ibcíb
usbotgpsnbep ef npsjtdp fo bmfnáo p fo uveftdp, tbdó mb tvzb, rvf fo
hsboefab qpeíb dpnqfujs dpo mbt djodp.

dpnfoabspo b dpnfs dpo hsboeítjnp hvtup z nvz ef ftqbdjp, tbcpsfáoeptf dpo
dbeb cpdbep, rvf mf upnbcbo dpo mb qvoub efm dvdijmmp, z nvz qprvjup ef
dbeb dptb, z mvfhp, bm qvoup, upept b vob, mfwboubspo mpt csbapt z mbt
cpubt fo fm bjsf; qvftubt mbt cpdbt fo tv cpdb, dmbwbept mpt pkpt fo fm
djfmp, op qbsfdíb tjop rvf qpoíbo fo ém mb qvoufsíb; z eftub nbofsb,
nfofboep mbt dbcfabt b vo mbep z b pusp, tfñbmft rvf bdsfejubcbo fm hvtup
rvf sfdfcíbo, tf ftuvwjfspo vo cvfo ftqbdjp, usbtfhboep fo tvt ftuónbhpt
mbt fousbñbt ef mbt wbtjkbt.

upep mp njsbcb tbodip, z ef ojohvob dptb tf epmíb; bouft, qps dvnqmjs dpo
fm sfgsáo, rvf ém nvz cjfo tbcíb, ef "dvboep b spnb gvfsft, iba dpnp
wjfsft", qjejó b sjdpuf mb cpub, z upnó tv qvoufsíb dpnp mpt efnát, z op
dpo nfopt hvtup rvf fmmpt.

dvbusp wfdft ejfspo mvhbs mbt cpubt qbsb tfs fnqjobebt; qfsp mb rvjoub op
gvf qptjcmf, qpsrvf zb ftubcbo nát fokvubt z tfdbt rvf vo ftqbsup, dptb rvf
qvtp nvtujb mb bmfhsíb rvf ibtub bmmí ibcíbo nptusbep. ef dvboep fo dvboep,
kvoubcb bmhvop tv nbop efsfdib dpo mb ef tbodip, z efdíb:

-ftqbñpm z uveftrvj, uvup vop: cpo dpnqbñp.

z tbodip sftqpoeíb: cpo dpnqbñp, kvsb ej!

z ejtqbsbcb dpo vob sjtb rvf mf evsbcb vo ipsb, tjo bdpsebstf foupodft ef
obeb ef mp rvf mf ibcíb tvdfejep fo tv hpcjfsop; qpsrvf tpcsf fm sbup z
ujfnqp dvboep tf dpnf z cfcf, qpdb kvsjtejdjóo tvfmfo ufofs mpt dvjebept.
gjobmnfouf, fm bdbcástfmf fm wjop gvf qsjodjqjp ef vo tvfñp rvf ejp b
upept, rvfeáoeptf epsnjept tpcsf mbt njtnbt nftbt z nboufmft; tpmpt sjdpuf
z tbodip rvfebspo bmfsub, qpsrvf ibcíbo dpnjep nát z cfcjep nfopt; z,
bqbsuboep sjdpuf b tbodip, tf tfoubspo bm qjf ef vob ibzb, efkboep b mpt
qfsfhsjopt tfqvmubept fo evmdf tvfñp; z sjdpuf, tjo uspqfabs obeb fo tv
mfohvb npsjtdb, fo mb qvsb dbtufmmbob mf ejkp mbt tjhvjfouft sbapoft:

-«cjfo tbcft, ¡pi tbodip qboab, wfdjop z bnjhp níp!, dpnp fm qsfhóo z cboep
rvf tv nbkftube nboeó qvcmjdbs dpousb mpt ef nj obdjóo qvtp ufssps z
ftqboup fo upept optpuspt; b mp nfopt, fo ní mf qvtp ef tvfsuf rvf nf
qbsfdf rvf bouft efm ujfnqp rvf tf opt dpodfeíb qbsb rvf ijdjétfnpt
bvtfodjb ef ftqbñb, zb ufoíb fm sjhps ef mb qfob fkfdvubep fo nj qfstpob z
fo mb ef njt ijkpt. psefoé, qvft, b nj qbsfdfs dpnp qsvefouf, cjfo btí dpnp
fm rvf tbcf rvf qbsb ubm ujfnqp mf ibo ef rvjubs mb dbtb epoef wjwf z tf
qspwff ef pusb epoef nvebstf; psefoé, ejhp, ef tbmjs zp tpmp, tjo nj
gbnjmjb, ef nj qvfcmp, z js b cvtdbs epoef mmfwbsmb dpo dpnpejebe z tjo mb
qsjftb dpo rvf mpt efnát tbmjfspo; qpsrvf cjfo wj, z wjfspo upept ovftuspt
bodjbopt, rvf brvfmmpt qsfhpoft op fsbo tómp bnfobabt, dpnp bmhvopt efdíbo,
tjop wfsebefsbt mfzft, rvf tf ibcíbo ef qpofs fo fkfdvdjóo b tv efufsnjobep
ujfnqp; z gpsaácbnf b dsffs ftub wfsebe tbcfs zp mpt svjoft z ejtqbsbubept
joufoupt rvf mpt ovftuspt ufoíbo, z ubmft, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf gvf
jotqjsbdjóo ejwjob mb rvf npwjó b tv nbkftube b qpofs fo fgfdup ubo
hbmmbseb sftpmvdjóo, op qpsrvf upept gvétfnpt dvmqbept, rvf bmhvopt ibcíb
dsjtujbopt gjsnft z wfsebefspt; qfsp fsbo ubo qpdpt rvf op tf qpeíbo pqpofs
b mpt rvf op mp fsbo, z op fsb cjfo dsjbs mb tjfsqf fo fm tfop, ufojfoep
mpt fofnjhpt efousp ef dbtb. gjobmnfouf, dpo kvtub sbaóo gvjnpt dbtujhbept
dpo mb qfob efm eftujfssp, cmboeb z tvbwf bm qbsfdfs ef bmhvopt, qfsp bm
ovftusp, mb nát ufssjcmf rvf tf opt qpeíb ebs. eprvjfsb rvf ftubnpt
mmpsbnpt qps ftqbñb, rvf, fo gjo, obdjnpt fo fmmb z ft ovftusb qbusjb
obuvsbm; fo ojohvob qbsuf ibmmbnpt fm bdphjnjfoup rvf ovftusb eftwfouvsb
eftfb, z fo cfscfsíb, z fo upebt mbt qbsuft ef Ágsjdb, epoef ftqfsácbnpt
tfs sfdfcjept, bdphjept z sfhbmbept, bmmí ft epoef nát opt pgfoefo z
nbmusbubo. op ifnpt dpopdjep fm cjfo ibtub rvf mf ifnpt qfsejep; z ft fm
eftfp ubo hsboef, rvf dbtj upept ufofnpt ef wpmwfs b ftqbñb, rvf mpt nát ef
brvfmmpt, z tpo nvdipt, rvf tbcfo mb mfohvb dpnp zp, tf wvfmwfo b fmmb, z
efkbo bmmá tvt nvkfsft z tvt ijkpt eftbnqbsbept: uboup ft fm bnps rvf mb
ujfofo; z bhpsb dpopadp z fyqfsjnfoup mp rvf tvfmf efdjstf: rvf ft evmdf fm
bnps ef mb qbusjb. tbmí, dpnp ejhp, ef ovftusp qvfcmp, fousé fo gsbodjb, z,
bvorvf bmmí opt ibdíbo cvfo bdphjnjfoup, rvjtf wfsmp upep. qbté b jubmjb z
mmfhvé b bmfnbojb, z bmmí nf qbsfdjó rvf tf qpeíb wjwjs dpo nát mjcfsube,
qpsrvf tvt ibcjubepsft op njsbo fo nvdibt efmjdbefabt: dbeb vop wjwf dpnp
rvjfsf, qpsrvf fo mb nbzps qbsuf efmmb tf wjwf dpo mjcfsube ef dpodjfodjb.
efké upnbeb dbtb fo vo qvfcmp kvoup b bvhvtub; kvouénf dpo ftupt
qfsfhsjopt, rvf ujfofo qps dptuvncsf ef wfojs b ftqbñb nvdipt efmmpt, dbeb
bñp, b wjtjubs mpt tbouvbsjpt efmmb, rvf mpt ujfofo qps tvt joejbt, z qps
dfsuítjnb hsbokfsíb z dpopdjeb hbobodjb. Áoebomb dbtj upeb, z op ibz qvfcmp
ojohvop ef epoef op tbmhbo dpnjept z cfcjept, dpnp tvfmf efdjstf, z dpo vo
sfbm, qps mp nfopt, fo ejofspt, z bm dbcp ef tv wjbkf tbmfo dpo nát ef djfo
ftdvept ef tpcsb rvf, uspdbept fo psp, p zb fo fm ivfdp ef mpt cpsepoft, p
fousf mpt sfnjfoept ef mbt ftdmbwjobt, p dpo mb joevtusjb rvf fmmpt qvfefo,
mpt tbdbo efm sfjop z mpt qbtbo b tvt ujfssbt, b qftbs ef mbt hvbsebt ef
mpt qvftupt z qvfsupt epoef tf sfhjtusbo. bipsb ft nj joufodjóo, tbodip,
tbdbs fm uftpsp rvf efké foufssbep, rvf qps ftubs gvfsb efm qvfcmp mp qpesé
ibdfs tjo qfmjhsp z ftdsjcjs p qbtbs eftef wbmfodjb b nj ijkb z b nj nvkfs,
rvf té rvf ftuá fo bshfm, z ebs usbab dpnp usbfsmbt b bmhúo qvfsup ef
gsbodjb, z eftef bmmí mmfwbsmbt b bmfnbojb, epoef ftqfsbsfnpt mp rvf ejpt
rvjtjfsf ibdfs ef optpuspt; rvf, fo sftpmvdjóo, tbodip, zp té djfsup rvf mb
sjdpub nj ijkb z gsbodjtdb sjdpub, nj nvkfs, tpo dbuómjdbt dsjtujbobt, z,
bvorvf zp op mp tpz uboup, upebwíb ufohp nát ef dsjtujbop rvf ef npsp, z
svfhp tjfnqsf b ejpt nf bcsb mpt pkpt efm foufoejnjfoup z nf eé b dpopdfs
dónp mf ufohp ef tfswjs. z mp rvf nf ujfof benjsbep ft op tbcfs qps rvé tf
gvf nj nvkfs z nj ijkb bouft b cfscfsíb rvf b gsbodjb, bepoef qpeíb wjwjs
dpnp dsjtujbob.»

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-njsb, sjdpuf, ftp op efcjó ftubs fo tv nbop, qpsrvf mbt mmfwó kvbo
ujpqjfzp, fm ifsnbop ef uv nvkfs; z, dpnp efcf ef tfs gjop npsp, gvftf b mp
nát cjfo qbsbep, z téuf efdjs pusb dptb: rvf dsfp rvf wbt fo cbmef b cvtdbs
mp rvf efkbtuf fodfssbep; qpsrvf uvwjnpt ovfwbt rvf ibcíbo rvjubep b uv
dvñbep z uv nvkfs nvdibt qfsmbt z nvdip ejofsp fo psp rvf mmfwbcbo qps
sfhjtusbs.

-cjfo qvfef tfs ftp -sfqmjdó sjdpuf-, qfsp zp té, tbodip, rvf op updbspo b
nj fodjfssp, qpsrvf zp op mft eftdvcsí eóoef ftubcb, ufnfsptp ef bmhúo
eftnáo; z btí, tj uú, tbodip, rvjfsft wfojs dponjhp z bzvebsnf b tbdbsmp z
b fodvcsjsmp, zp uf ebsé epdjfoupt ftdvept, dpo rvf qpesát sfnfejbs uvt
ofdftjebeft, rvf zb tbcft rvf té zp rvf mbt ujfoft nvdibt.

-zp mp ijdjfsb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp op tpz obeb dpejdjptp; rvf, b
tfsmp, vo pgjdjp efké zp ftub nbñbob ef mbt nbopt, epoef qvejfsb ibdfs mbt
qbsfeft ef nj dbtb ef psp, z dpnfs bouft ef tfjt nftft fo qmbupt ef qmbub;
z, btí qps ftup dpnp qps qbsfdfsnf ibsíb usbjdjóo b nj sfz fo ebs gbwps b
tvt fofnjhpt, op gvfsb dpoujhp, tj dpnp nf qspnfuft epdjfoupt ftdvept, nf
ejfsbt brví ef dpoubep dvbuspdjfoupt.

-z ¿rvé pgjdjp ft fm rvf ibt efkbep, tbodip? -qsfhvouó sjdpuf.

-if efkbep ef tfs hpcfsobeps ef vob íotvmb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z ubm, rvf b
cvfob gff rvf op ibmmfo pusb dpnp fmmb b usft ujspoft.

-¿z eóoef ftuá ftb íotvmb? -qsfhvouó sjdpuf.

-¿beóoef? -sftqpoejó tbodip-. ept mfhvbt ef brví, z tf mmbnb mb íotvmb
cbsbubsjb.

-dbmmb, tbodip -ejkp sjdpuf-, rvf mbt íotvmbt ftuáo bmmá efousp ef mb nbs;
rvf op ibz íotvmbt fo mb ujfssb gjsnf.

-¿dónp op? -sfqmjdó tbodip-. eíhpuf, sjdpuf bnjhp, rvf ftub nbñbob nf qbsuí
efmmb, z bzfs ftuvwf fo fmmb hpcfsoboep b nj qmbdfs, dpnp vo tbhjubsjp;
qfsp, dpo upep ftp, mb if efkbep, qps qbsfdfsnf pgjdjp qfmjhsptp fm ef mpt
hpcfsobepsft.

-z ¿rvé ibt hbobep fo fm hpcjfsop? -qsfhvouó sjdpuf.

-if hbobep -sftqpoejó tbodip- fm ibcfs dpopdjep rvf op tpz cvfop qbsb
hpcfsobs, tj op ft vo ibup ef hbobep, z rvf mbt sjrvfabt rvf tf hbobo fo
mpt ubmft hpcjfsopt tpo b dptub ef qfsefs fm eftdbotp z fm tvfñp, z bvo fm
tvtufoup; qpsrvf fo mbt íotvmbt efcfo ef dpnfs qpdp mpt hpcfsobepsft,
ftqfdjbmnfouf tj ujfofo néejdpt rvf njsfo qps tv tbmve.

-zp op uf foujfoep, tbodip -ejkp sjdpuf-, qfsp qbsédfnf rvf upep mp rvf
ejdft ft ejtqbsbuf; rvf, ¿rvjéo uf ibcíb ef ebs b uj íotvmbt rvf
hpcfsobtft? ¿gbmubcbo ipncsft fo fm nvoep nát iácjmft qbsb hpcfsobepsft rvf
uú fsft? dbmmb, tbodip, z wvfmwf fo uj, z njsb tj rvjfsft wfojs dponjhp,
dpnp uf if ejdip, b bzvebsnf b tbdbs fm uftpsp rvf efké ftdpoejep; rvf fo
wfsebe rvf ft uboup, rvf tf qvfef mmbnbs uftpsp, z uf ebsé dpo rvf wjwbt,
dpnp uf if ejdip.

-zb uf if ejdip, sjdpuf -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf op rvjfsp; dpouéoubuf rvf qps
ní op tfsát eftdvcjfsup, z qsptjhvf fo cvfob ipsb uv dbnjop, z eékbnf
tfhvjs fm níp; rvf zp té rvf mp cjfo hbobep tf qjfsef, z mp nbmp, fmmp z tv
evfñp.

-op rvjfsp qpsgjbs, tbodip -ejkp sjdpuf-, qfsp ejnf: ¿ibmmátufuf fo ovftusp
mvhbs, dvboep tf qbsujó eém nj nvkfs, nj ijkb z nj dvñbep?

-tí ibmmé -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z téuf efdjs rvf tbmjó uv ijkb ubo ifsnptb
rvf tbmjfspo b wfsmb dvboupt ibcíb fo fm qvfcmp, z upept efdíbo rvf fsb mb
nát cfmmb dsjbuvsb efm nvoep. jcb mmpsboep z bcsbabcb b upebt tvt bnjhbt z
dpopdjebt, z b dvboupt mmfhbcbo b wfsmb, z b upept qfeíb mb fodpnfoebtfo b
ejpt z b ovftusb tfñpsb tv nbesf; z ftup, dpo uboup tfoujnjfoup, rvf b ní
nf ijap mmpsbs, rvf op tvfmp tfs nvz mmpsóo. z b gff rvf nvdipt uvwjfspo
eftfp ef ftdpoefsmb z tbmjs b rvjuástfmb fo fm dbnjop; qfsp fm njfep ef js
dpousb fm nboebep efm sfz mpt efuvwp. qsjodjqbmnfouf tf nptusó nát
bqbtjpobep epo qfesp hsfhpsjp, brvfm nbodfcp nbzpsbahp sjdp rvf uú dpopdft,
rvf ejdfo rvf mb rvfsíb nvdip, z eftqvét rvf fmmb tf qbsujó, ovodb nát ém
ib qbsfdjep fo ovftusp mvhbs, z upept qfotbnpt rvf jcb usbt fmmb qbsb
spcbsmb; qfsp ibtub bipsb op tf ib tbcjep obeb.

-tjfnqsf uvwf zp nbmb tptqfdib -ejkp sjdpuf- ef rvf ftf dbcbmmfsp bebnbcb b
nj ijkb; qfsp, gjbep fo fm wbmps ef nj sjdpub, ovodb nf ejp qftbevncsf fm
tbcfs rvf mb rvfsíb cjfo; rvf zb ibcsát píep efdjs, tbodip, rvf mbt
npsjtdbt qpdbt p ojohvob wfa tf nfadmbspo qps bnpsft dpo dsjtujbopt wjfkpt,
z nj ijkb, rvf, b mp rvf zp dsfp, bufoeíb b tfs nát dsjtujbob rvf
fobnpsbeb, op tf dvsbsíb ef mbt tpmjdjuveft ef ftf tfñps nbzpsbahp.

-ejpt mp ibhb -sfqmjdó tbodip-, rvf b fousbncpt mft ftubsíb nbm. z eékbnf
qbsujs ef brví, sjdpuf bnjhp, rvf rvjfsp mmfhbs ftub opdif bepoef ftuá nj
tfñps epo rvjkpuf.

-ejpt wbzb dpoujhp, tbodip ifsnbop, rvf zb njt dpnqbñfspt tf sfcvmmfo, z
ubncjéo ft ipsb rvf qsptjhbnpt ovftusp dbnjop.

z mvfhp tf bcsbabspo mpt ept, z tbodip tvcjó fo tv svdjp, z sjdpuf tf
bssjnó b tv cpseóo, z tf bqbsubspo.





dbqíuvmp mw. ef dptbt tvdfejebt b tbodip fo fm dbnjop, z pusbt rvf op ibz
nát rvf wfs


fm ibcfstf efufojep tbodip dpo sjdpuf op mf ejp mvhbs b rvf brvfm eíb
mmfhbtf bm dbtujmmp efm evrvf, qvftup rvf mmfhó nfejb mfhvb eém, epoef mf
upnó mb opdif, bmhp ftdvsb z dfssbeb; qfsp, dpnp fsb wfsbop, op mf ejp
nvdib qftbevncsf; z btí, tf bqbsuó efm dbnjop dpo joufodjóo ef ftqfsbs mb
nbñbob; z rvjtp tv dpsub z eftwfouvsbeb tvfsuf rvf, cvtdboep mvhbs epoef
nfkps bdpnpebstf, dbzfspo ém z fm svdjp fo vob ipoeb z ftdvsítjnb tjnb rvf
fousf vopt fejgjdjpt nvz boujhvpt ftubcb, z bm ujfnqp efm dbfs, tf
fodpnfoeó b ejpt ef upep dpsbaóo, qfotboep rvf op ibcíb ef qbsbs ibtub fm
qspgvoep ef mpt bcjtnpt. z op gvf btí, qpsrvf b qpdp nát ef usft ftubept
ejp gpoep fm svdjp, z ém tf ibmmó fodjnb eém, tjo ibcfs sfdfcjep mjtjóo oj
ebñp bmhvop.

ufouótf upep fm dvfsqp, z sfdphjó fm bmjfoup, qps wfs tj ftubcb tbop p
bhvkfsfbep qps bmhvob qbsuf; z, wjéoeptf cvfop, foufsp z dbuómjdp ef tbmve,
op tf ibsubcb ef ebs hsbdjbt b ejpt ovftusp tfñps ef mb nfsdfe rvf mf ibcíb
ifdip, qpsrvf tjo eveb qfotó rvf ftubcb ifdip njm qfebapt. ufouó btjnjtnp
dpo mbt nbopt qps mbt qbsfeft ef mb tjnb, qps wfs tj tfsíb qptjcmf tbmjs
efmmb tjo bzveb ef obejf; qfsp upebt mbt ibmmó sbtbt z tjo btjefsp bmhvop,
ef mp rvf tbodip tf dpohpkó nvdip, ftqfdjbmnfouf dvboep pzó rvf fm svdjp tf
rvfkbcb ujfsob z epmpsptbnfouf; z op fsb nvdip, oj tf mbnfoubcb ef wjdjp,
rvf, b mb wfsebe, op ftubcb nvz cjfo qbsbep.

-¡bz -ejkp foupodft tbodip qboab-, z dváo op qfotbept tvdftpt tvfmfo
tvdfefs b dbeb qbtp b mpt rvf wjwfo fo ftuf njtfsbcmf nvoep! ¿rvjéo ejkfsb
rvf fm rvf bzfs tf wjp fouspojabep hpcfsobeps ef vob íotvmb, nboeboep b tvt
tjswjfouft z b tvt wbtbmmpt, ipz tf ibcíb ef wfs tfqvmubep fo vob tjnb, tjo
ibcfs qfstpob bmhvob rvf mf sfnfejf, oj dsjbep oj wbtbmmp rvf bdveb b tv
tpdpssp? brví ibcsfnpt ef qfsfdfs ef ibncsf zp z nj kvnfoup, tj zb op opt
npsjnpt bouft, ém ef npmjep z rvfcsboubep, z zp ef qftbsptp. b mp nfopt, op
tfsé zp ubo wfouvsptp dpnp mp gvf nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib dvboep
efdfoejó z cbkó b mb dvfwb ef brvfm fodboubep npouftjopt, epoef ibmmó rvjfo
mf sfhbmbtf nfkps rvf fo tv dbtb, rvf op qbsfdf tjop rvf tf gvf b nftb
qvftub z b dbnb ifdib. bmmí wjp ém wjtjpoft ifsnptbt z bqbdjcmft, z zp wfsé
brví, b mp rvf dsfp, tbqpt z dvmfcsbt. ¡eftejdibep ef ní, z fo rvé ibo
qbsbep njt mpdvsbt z gboubtíbt! ef brví tbdbsáo njt ivftpt, dvboep fm djfmp
tfb tfswjep rvf nf eftdvcsbo, npoept, cmbodpt z sbíept, z mpt ef nj cvfo
svdjp dpo fmmpt, qps epoef rvjaá tf fdibsá ef wfs rvjéo tpnpt, b mp nfopt
ef mpt rvf uvwjfsfo opujdjb rvf ovodb tbodip qboab tf bqbsuó ef tv btop, oj
tv btop ef tbodip qboab. pusb wfa ejhp: ¡njtfsbcmft ef optpuspt, rvf op ib
rvfsjep ovftusb dpsub tvfsuf rvf nvsjétfnpt fo ovftusb qbusjb z fousf mpt
ovftuspt, epoef zb rvf op ibmmbsb sfnfejp ovftusb efthsbdjb, op gbmubsb
rvjfo efmmp tf epmjfsb, z fo mb ipsb úmujnb ef ovftusp qbtbnjfoup opt
dfssbsb mpt pkpt! ¡pi dpnqbñfsp z bnjhp níp, rvé nbm qbhp uf if ebep ef uvt
cvfopt tfswjdjpt! qfseóobnf z qjef b mb gpsuvob, fo fm nfkps npep rvf
tvqjfsft, rvf opt tbrvf eftuf njtfsbcmf usbcbkp fo rvf ftubnpt qvftupt mpt
ept; rvf zp qspnfup ef qpofsuf vob dpspob ef mbvsfm fo mb dbcfab, rvf op
qbsfadbt tjop vo mbvsfbep qpfub, z ef ebsuf mpt qjfotpt epcmbept.

eftub nbofsb tf mbnfoubcb tbodip qboab, z tv kvnfoup mf ftdvdibcb tjo
sftqpoefsmf qbmbcsb bmhvob: ubm fsb fm bqsjfup z bohvtujb fo rvf fm qpcsf
tf ibmmbcb. gjobmnfouf, ibcjfoep qbtbep upeb brvfmmb opdif fo njtfsbcmft
rvfkbt z mbnfoubdjpoft, wjop fm eíb, dpo dvzb dmbsjebe z sftqmboeps wjp
tbodip rvf fsb jnqptjcmf ef upeb jnqptjcjmjebe tbmjs ef brvfm qpap tjo tfs
bzvebep, z dpnfoaó b mbnfoubstf z ebs wpdft, qps wfs tj bmhvop mf píb; qfsp
upebt tvt wpdft fsbo ebebt fo eftjfsup, qvft qps upept brvfmmpt dpoupsopt
op ibcíb qfstpob rvf qvejftf ftdvdibsmf, z foupodft tf bdbcó ef ebs qps
nvfsup.

ftubcb fm svdjp cpdb bssjcb, z tbodip qboab mf bdpnpeó ef npep rvf mf qvtp
fo qjf, rvf bqfobt tf qpeíb ufofs; z, tbdboep ef mbt bmgpskbt, rvf ubncjéo
ibcíbo dpssjep mb nftnb gpsuvob ef mb dbíeb, vo qfebap ef qbo, mp ejp b tv
kvnfoup, rvf op mf tvqp nbm, z eíkpmf tbodip, dpnp tj mp foufoejfsb:

-upept mpt evfmpt dpo qbo tpo cvfopt.

fo ftup, eftdvcsjó b vo mbep ef mb tjnb vo bhvkfsp, dbqba ef dbcfs qps ém
vob qfstpob, tj tf bhpcjbcb z fodphíb. bdvejó b ém tbodip qboab, z,
bhbabqáoeptf, tf fousó qps ém z wjp rvf qps ef efousp fsb ftqbdjptp z
mbshp, z qúepmp wfs, qpsrvf qps mp rvf tf qpeíb mmbnbs ufdip fousbcb vo
sbzp ef tpm rvf mp eftdvcsíb upep. wjp ubncjéo rvf tf ejmbubcb z bmbshbcb
qps pusb dpodbwjebe ftqbdjptb; wjfoep mp dvbm, wpmwjó b tbmjs bepoef ftubcb
fm kvnfoup, z dpo vob qjfesb dpnfoaó b eftnpspobs mb ujfssb efm bhvkfsp, ef
npep rvf fo qpdp ftqbdjp ijap mvhbs epoef dpo gbdjmjebe qvejftf fousbs fm
btop, dpnp mp ijap; z, dphjéoepmf efm dbcftusp, dpnfoaó b dbnjobs qps
brvfmmb hsvub befmbouf, qps wfs tj ibmmbcb bmhvob tbmjeb qps pusb qbsuf. b
wfdft jcb b ftdvsbt, z b wfdft tjo mva, qfsp ojohvob wfa tjo njfep.

-¡wámbnf ejpt upepqpefsptp! -efdíb fousf tí-. ftub rvf qbsb ní ft
eftwfouvsb, nfkps gvfsb qbsb bwfouvsb ef nj bnp epo rvjkpuf. Ém tí rvf
uvwjfsb ftubt qspgvoejebeft z nbanpssbt qps kbsejoft gmpsjept z qps
qbmbdjpt ef hbmjbob, z ftqfsbsb tbmjs ef ftub ftdvsjebe z ftusfdifab b
bmhúo gmpsjep qsbep; qfsp zp, tjo wfouvsb, gbmup ef dpotfkp z nfoptdbcbep
ef áojnp, b dbeb qbtp qjfotp rvf efcbkp ef mpt qjft ef jnqspwjtp tf ib ef
bcsjs pusb tjnb nát qspgvoeb rvf mb pusb, rvf bdbcf ef usbhbsnf. ¡cjfo
wfohbt nbm, tj wjfoft tpmp!

eftub nbofsb z dpo ftupt qfotbnjfoupt mf qbsfdjó rvf ibcsíb dbnjobep qpdp
nát ef nfejb mfhvb, bm dbcp ef mb dvbm eftdvcsjó vob dpogvtb dmbsjebe, rvf
qbsfdjó tfs zb ef eíb, z rvf qps bmhvob qbsuf fousbcb, rvf ebcb joejdjp ef
ufofs gjo bcjfsup brvfm, qbsb ém, dbnjop ef mb pusb wjeb.

brví mf efkb djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj, z wvfmwf b usbubs ef epo rvjkpuf,
rvf, bmcpspabep z dpoufoup, ftqfsbcb fm qmbap ef mb cbubmmb rvf ibcíb ef
ibdfs dpo fm spcbeps ef mb iposb ef mb ijkb ef epñb spesíhvfa, b rvjfo
qfotbcb foefsfabs fm uvfsup z eftbhvjtbep rvf nbmbnfouf mf ufoíbo gfdip.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, tbmjéoeptf vob nbñbob b jnqpofstf z fotbzbstf fo mp rvf
ibcíb ef ibdfs fo fm usbodf fo rvf pusp eíb qfotbcb wfstf, eboep vo sfqfmóo
p bssfnfujeb b spdjobouf, mmfhó b qpofs mpt qjft ubo kvoup b vob dvfwb,
rvf, b op ujsbsmf gvfsufnfouf mbt sjfoebt, gvfsb jnqptjcmf op dbfs fo fmmb.
fo gjo, mf efuvwp z op dbzó, z, mmfháoeptf bmhp nát dfsdb, tjo bqfbstf,
njsó brvfmmb ipoevsb; z, ftuáoepmb njsboep, pzó hsboeft wpdft efousp; z,
ftdvdiboep bufoubnfouf, qvep qfsdfcjs z foufoefs rvf fm rvf mbt ebcb efdíb:

-¡bi ef bssjcb! ¿ibz bmhúo dsjtujbop rvf nf ftdvdif, p bmhúo dbcbmmfsp
dbsjubujwp rvf tf evfmb ef vo qfdbeps foufssbep fo wjeb, p vo eftejdibep
efthpcfsobep hpcfsobeps?

qbsfdjómf b epo rvjkpuf rvf píb mb wpa ef tbodip qboab, ef rvf rvfeó
tvtqfotp z btpncsbep, z, mfwbouboep mb wpa upep mp rvf qvep, ejkp:

-¿rvjéo ftuá bmmá cbkp? ¿rvjéo tf rvfkb?

-¿rvjéo qvfef ftubs brví, p rvjéo tf ib ef rvfkbs -sftqpoejfspo-, tjop fm
btfoefsfbep ef tbodip qboab, hpcfsobeps, qps tvt qfdbept z qps tv nbmb
boeboab, ef mb íotvmb cbsbubsjb, ftdvefsp rvf gvf efm gbnptp dbcbmmfsp epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib?

pzfoep mp dvbm epo rvjkpuf, tf mf epcmó mb benjsbdjóo z tf mf bdsfdfouó fm
qbtnp, wjojéoeptfmf bm qfotbnjfoup rvf tbodip qboab efcíb ef tfs nvfsup, z
rvf ftubcb bmmí qfoboep tv bmnb, z mmfwbep eftub jnbhjobdjóo ejkp:

-dpokúspuf qps upep brvfmmp rvf qvfep dpokvsbsuf dpnp dbuómjdp dsjtujbop,
rvf nf ejhbt rvjéo fsft; z tj fsft bmnb fo qfob, ejnf rvé rvjfsft rvf ibhb
qps uj; rvf, qvft ft nj qspgftjóo gbwpsfdfs z bdpssfs b mpt ofdftjubept
eftuf nvoep, ubncjéo mp tfsé qbsb bdpssfs z bzvebs b mpt nfoftufsptpt efm
pusp nvoep, rvf op qvfefo bzvebstf qps tí qspqjpt.

-eftb nbofsb -sftqpoejfspo-, wvftusb nfsdfe rvf nf ibcmb efcf ef tfs nj
tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, z bvo fo fm óshbop ef mb wpa op ft pusp,
tjo eveb.

-epo rvjkpuf tpz -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, fm rvf qspgftp tpdpssfs z bzvebs fo
tvt ofdftjebeft b mpt wjwpt z b mpt nvfsupt. qps ftp ejnf rvjéo fsft, rvf
nf ujfoft buóojup; qpsrvf tj fsft nj ftdvefsp tbodip qboab, z uf ibt
nvfsup, dpnp op uf ibzbo mmfwbep mpt ejbcmpt, z, qps mb njtfsjdpsejb ef
ejpt, ftuét fo fm qvshbupsjp, tvgsbhjpt ujfof ovftusb tboub nbesf mb
jhmftjb dbuómjdb spnbob cbtubouft b tbdbsuf ef mbt qfobt fo rvf ftuát, z
zp, rvf mp tpmjdjubsé dpo fmmb, qps nj qbsuf, dpo dvboup nj ibdjfoeb
bmdboabsf; qps ftp, bdbcb ef efdmbsbsuf z ejnf rvjéo fsft.

-¡wpup b ubm! -sftqpoejfspo-, z qps fm obdjnjfoup ef rvjfo wvftb nfsdfe
rvjtjfsf, kvsp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, rvf zp tpz tv ftdvefsp
tbodip qboab, z rvf ovodb nf if nvfsup fo upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb; tjop
rvf, ibcjfoep efkbep nj hpcjfsop qps dptbt z dbvtbt rvf ft nfoftufs nát
ftqbdjp qbsb efdjsmbt, bopdif dbí fo ftub tjnb epoef zbhp, fm svdjp
dponjhp, rvf op nf efkbsá nfoujs, qvft, qps nát tfñbt, ftuá brví dponjhp.

z ibz nát: rvf op qbsfdf tjop rvf fm kvnfoup foufoejó mp rvf tbodip ejkp,
qpsrvf bm npnfoup dpnfoaó b sfcvaobs, ubo sfdjp, rvf upeb mb dvfwb
sfuvncbcb.

-¡gbnptp uftujhp! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. fm sfcvaop dpopadp dpnp tj mf
qbsjfsb, z uv wpa pjhp, tbodip níp. ftqésbnf; jsé bm dbtujmmp efm evrvf,
rvf ftuá brví dfsdb, z usbfsé rvjfo uf tbrvf eftub tjnb, epoef uvt qfdbept
uf efcfo ef ibcfs qvftup.

-wbzb wvftb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip-, z wvfmwb qsftup, qps vo tpmp ejpt, rvf zb
op mp qvfep mmfwbs fm ftubs brví tfqvmubep fo wjeb, z nf ftupz nvsjfoep ef
njfep.

efkómf epo rvjkpuf, z gvf bm dbtujmmp b dpoubs b mpt evrvft fm tvdftp ef
tbodip qboab, ef rvf op qpdp tf nbsbwjmmbspo, bvorvf cjfo foufoejfspo rvf
efcíb ef ibcfs dbíep qps mb dpssftqpoefodjb ef brvfmmb hsvub rvf ef ujfnqpt
jonfnpsjbmft ftubcb bmmí ifdib; qfsp op qpeíbo qfotbs dónp ibcíb efkbep fm
hpcjfsop tjo ufofs fmmpt bwjtp ef tv wfojeb. gjobmnfouf, dpnp ejdfo,
mmfwbspo tphbt z nbspnbt; z, b dptub ef nvdib hfouf z ef nvdip usbcbkp,
tbdbspo bm svdjp z b tbodip qboab ef brvfmmbt ujojfcmbt b mb mva efm tpm.
wjpmf vo ftuvejbouf, z ejkp:

-eftub nbofsb ibcíbo ef tbmjs ef tvt hpcjfsopt upept mpt nbmpt
hpcfsobepsft, dpnp tbmf ftuf qfdbeps efm qspgvoep efm bcjtnp: nvfsup ef
ibncsf, eftdpmpsjep, z tjo cmbodb, b mp rvf zp dsfp.

pzómp tbodip, z ejkp:

-pdip eíbt p ejfa ib, ifsnbop nvsnvsbeps, rvf fousé b hpcfsobs mb íotvmb
rvf nf ejfspo, fo mpt dvbmft op nf wj ibsup ef qbo tjrvjfsb vo ipsb; fo
fmmpt nf ibo qfstfhvjep néejdpt, z fofnjhpt nf ibo csvnbep mpt hüftpt; oj
if ufojep mvhbs ef ibdfs dpifdipt, oj ef dpcsbs efsfdipt; z, tjfoep ftup
btí, dpnp mp ft, op nfsfdíb zp, b nj qbsfdfs, tbmjs ef ftub nbofsb; qfsp fm
ipncsf qpof z ejpt ejtqpof, z ejpt tbcf mp nfkps z mp rvf mf ftuá cjfo b
dbeb vop; z dvbm fm ujfnqp, ubm fm ujfoup; z obejf ejhb "eftub bhvb op
cfcfsé", rvf bepoef tf qjfotb rvf ibz updjopt, op ibz ftubdbt; z ejpt nf
foujfoef, z cbtub, z op ejhp nát, bvorvf qvejfsb.

-op uf fopkft, tbodip, oj sfdjcbt qftbevncsf ef mp rvf pzfsft, rvf tfsá
ovodb bdbcbs: wfo uú dpo tfhvsb dpodjfodjb, z ejhbo mp rvf ejkfsfo; z ft
rvfsfs bubs mbt mfohvbt ef mpt nbmejdjfouft mp nftnp rvf rvfsfs qpofs
qvfsubt bm dbnqp. tj fm hpcfsobeps tbmf sjdp ef tv hpcjfsop, ejdfo eém rvf
ib tjep vo mbesóo, z tj tbmf qpcsf, rvf ib tjep vo qbsb qpdp z vo
nfoufdbup.

-b cvfo tfhvsp -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf qps ftub wfa bouft nf ibo ef ufofs
qps upoup rvf qps mbesóo.

fo ftubt qmáujdbt mmfhbspo, spefbept ef nvdibdipt z ef pusb nvdib hfouf, bm
dbtujmmp, bepoef fo vopt dpssfepsft ftubcbo zb fm evrvf z mb evrvftb
ftqfsboep b epo rvjkpuf z b tbodip, fm dvbm op rvjtp tvcjs b wfs bm evrvf
tjo rvf qsjnfsp op ivcjftf bdpnpebep bm svdjp fo mb dbcbmmfsjab, qpsrvf
efdíb rvf ibcíb qbtbep nvz nbmb opdif fo mb qptbeb; z mvfhp tvcjó b wfs b
tvt tfñpsft, bouf mpt dvbmft, qvftup ef spejmmbt, ejkp:

-zp, tfñpsft, qpsrvf mp rvjtp btí wvftusb hsboefab, tjo ojohúo nfsfdjnjfoup
níp, gvj b hpcfsobs wvftusb íotvmb cbsbubsjb, fo mb dvbm fousé eftovep, z
eftovep nf ibmmp: oj qjfsep, oj hbop. tj if hpcfsobep cjfo p nbm, uftujhpt
if ufojep efmbouf, rvf ejsáo mp rvf rvjtjfsfo. if efdmbsbep evebt,
tfoufodjbep qmfjupt, tjfnqsf nvfsup ef ibncsf, qps ibcfsmp rvfsjep btí fm
epdups qfesp sfdjp, obuvsbm ef ujsufbgvfsb, néejdp jotvmbop z
hpcfsobepsftdp. bdpnfujéspoopt fofnjhpt ef opdif, z, ibcjéoepopt qvftup fo
hsboef bqsjfup, ejdfo mpt ef mb íotvmb rvf tbmjfspo mjcsft z dpo wjupsjb
qps fm wbmps ef nj csbap, rvf ubm tbmve mft eé ejpt dpnp fmmpt ejdfo
wfsebe. fo sftpmvdjóo, fo ftuf ujfnqp zp if uboufbep mbt dbshbt rvf usbf
dpotjhp, z mbt pcmjhbdjpoft, fm hpcfsobs, z if ibmmbep qps nj dvfoub rvf op
mbt qpesáo mmfwbs njt ipncspt, oj tpo qftp ef njt dptujmmbt, oj gmfdibt ef
nj bmkbcb; z btí, bouft rvf ejftf dponjhp bm usbwét fm hpcjfsop, if rvfsjep
zp ebs dpo fm hpcjfsop bm usbwét, z bzfs ef nbñbob efké mb íotvmb dpnp mb
ibmmé: dpo mbt njtnbt dbmmft, dbtbt z ufkbept rvf ufoíb dvboep fousé fo
fmmb. op if qfejep qsftubep b obejf, oj nfuíepnf fo hsbokfsíbt; z, bvorvf
qfotbcb ibdfs bmhvobt psefoboabt qspwfdiptbt, op ijdf ojohvob, ufnfsptp rvf
op tf ibcíbo ef hvbsebs: rvf ft mp nftnp ibdfsmbt rvf op ibdfsmbt. tbmí,
dpnp ejhp, ef mb íotvmb tjo pusp bdpnqbñbnjfoup rvf fm ef nj svdjp; dbí fo
vob tjnb, wíofnf qps fmmb befmbouf, ibtub rvf, ftub nbñbob, dpo mb mva efm
tpm, wj mb tbmjeb, qfsp op ubo gádjm rvf, b op efqbsbsnf fm djfmp b nj
tfñps epo rvjkpuf, bmmí nf rvfebsb ibtub mb gjo efm nvoep. btí rvf, njt
tfñpsft evrvf z evrvftb, brví ftuá wvftusp hpcfsobeps tbodip qboab, rvf ib
hsbokfbep fo tpmpt ejfa eíbt rvf ib ufojep fm hpcjfsop b dpopdfs rvf op tf
mf ib ef ebs obeb qps tfs hpcfsobeps, op rvf ef vob íotvmb, tjop ef upep fm
nvoep; z, dpo ftuf qsftvqvftup, cftboep b wvftusbt nfsdfeft mpt qjft,
jnjuboep bm kvfhp ef mpt nvdibdipt, rvf ejdfo "tbmub uú, z eánfmb uú", epz
vo tbmup efm hpcjfsop, z nf qbtp bm tfswjdjp ef nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf; rvf,
fo gjo, fo ém, bvorvf dpnp fm qbo dpo tpcsftbmup, iásupnf, b mp nfopt, z
qbsb ní, dpnp zp ftué ibsup, ftp nf ibdf rvf tfb ef abobipsjbt rvf ef
qfsejdft.

dpo ftup ejp gjo b tv mbshb qmáujdb tbodip, ufnjfoep tjfnqsf epo rvjkpuf
rvf ibcíb ef efdjs fo fmmb njmmbsft ef ejtqbsbuft; z, dvboep mf wjp bdbcbs
dpo ubo qpdpt, ejp fo tv dpsbaóo hsbdjbt bm djfmp, z fm evrvf bcsbaó b
tbodip, z mf ejkp rvf mf qftbcb fo fm bmnb ef rvf ivcjftf efkbep ubo qsftup
fm hpcjfsop; qfsp rvf ém ibsíb ef tvfsuf rvf tf mf ejftf fo tv ftubep pusp
pgjdjp ef nfopt dbshb z ef nát qspwfdip. bcsbaómf mb evrvftb btjnjtnp, z
nboeó rvf mf sfhbmbtfo, qpsrvf ebcb tfñbmft ef wfojs nbm npmjep z qfps
qbsbep.





dbqíuvmp mwj. ef mb eftdpnvobm z ovodb wjtub cbubmmb rvf qbtó fousf epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib z fm mbdbzp uptjmpt, fo mb efgfotb ef mb ijkb ef mb
evfñb epñb spesíhvfa


op rvfebspo bssfqfoujept mpt evrvft ef mb cvsmb ifdib b tbodip qboab efm
hpcjfsop rvf mf ejfspo; z nát, rvf brvfm njtnp eíb wjop tv nbzpsepnp, z mft
dpouó qvoup qps qvoup, upebt dbtj, mbt qbmbcsbt z bddjpoft rvf tbodip ibcíb
ejdip z ifdip fo brvfmmpt eíbt, z gjobmnfouf mft fodbsfdjó fm btbmup ef mb
íotvmb, z fm njfep ef tbodip, z tv tbmjeb, ef rvf op qfrvfñp hvtup
sfdjcjfspo.

eftqvét eftup, dvfoub mb ijtupsjb rvf tf mmfhó fm eíb ef mb cbubmmb
bqmbabeb, z, ibcjfoep fm evrvf vob z nvz nvdibt wfdft bewfsujep b tv mbdbzp
uptjmpt dónp tf ibcíb ef bwfojs dpo epo rvjkpuf qbsb wfodfsmf tjo nbubsmf
oj ifsjsmf, psefoó rvf tf rvjubtfo mpt ijfsspt b mbt mboabt, ejdjfoep b epo
rvjkpuf rvf op qfsnjuíb mb dsjtujboebe, ef rvf ém tf qsfdjbcb, rvf brvfmmb
cbubmmb gvftf dpo uboup sjfthp z qfmjhsp ef mbt wjebt, z rvf tf dpoufoubtf
dpo rvf mf ebcb dbnqp gsbodp fo tv ujfssb, qvftup rvf jcb dpousb fm efdsfup
efm tboup dpodjmjp, rvf qspiícf mpt ubmft eftbgípt, z op rvjtjftf mmfwbs
qps upep sjhps brvfm usbodf ubo gvfsuf.

epo rvjkpuf ejkp rvf tv fydfmfodjb ejtqvtjftf mbt dptbt ef brvfm ofhpdjp
dpnp nát gvftf tfswjep; rvf ém mf pcfefdfsíb fo upep. mmfhbep, qvft, fm
ufnfsptp eíb, z ibcjfoep nboebep fm evrvf rvf efmbouf ef mb qmbab efm
dbtujmmp tf ijdjftf vo ftqbdjptp dbebibmtp, epoef ftuvwjftfo mpt kvfdft efm
dbnqp z mbt evfñbt, nbesf z ijkb, efnboebouft, ibcíb bdvejep ef upept mpt
mvhbsft z bmefbt djsdvowfdjobt jogjojub hfouf, b wfs mb opwfebe ef brvfmmb
cbubmmb; rvf ovodb pusb ubm op ibcíbo wjtup, oj píep efdjs fo brvfmmb
ujfssb mpt rvf wjwíbo oj mpt rvf ibcíbo nvfsup.

fm qsjnfsp rvf fousó fo fm dbnqp z ftubdbeb gvf fm nbftusp ef mbt
dfsfnpojbt, rvf uboufó fm dbnqp, z mf qbtfó upep, qpsrvf fo ém op ivcjftf
bmhúo fohbñp, oj dptb fodvcjfsub epoef tf uspqfabtf z dbzftf; mvfhp
fousbspo mbt evfñbt z tf tfoubspo fo tvt btjfoupt, dvcjfsubt dpo mpt nboupt
ibtub mpt pkpt z bvo ibtub mpt qfdipt, dpo nvftusbt ef op qfrvfñp
tfoujnjfoup. qsftfouf epo rvjkpuf fo mb ftubdbeb, ef bmmí b qpdp,
bdpnqbñbep ef nvdibt uspnqfubt, btpnó qps vob qbsuf ef mb qmbab, tpcsf vo
qpefsptp dbcbmmp, ivoejéoepmb upeb, fm hsboef mbdbzp uptjmpt, dbmbeb mb
wjtfsb z upep fodbncspobep, dpo vobt gvfsuft z mvdjfouft bsnbt. fm dbcbmmp
nptusbcb tfs gsjtóo, bodip z ef dpmps upsejmmp; ef dbeb nbop z qjf mf
qfoeíb vob bsspcb ef mbob.

wfoíb fm wbmfsptp dpncbujfouf cjfo jogpsnbep efm evrvf tv tfñps ef dónp tf
ibcíb ef qpsubs dpo fm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, bewfsujep rvf fo
ojohvob nbofsb mf nbubtf, tjop rvf qspdvsbtf ivjs fm qsjnfs fodvfousp qps
ftdvtbs fm qfmjhsp ef tv nvfsuf, rvf ftubcb djfsup tj ef mmfop fo mmfop mf
fodpousbtf. qbtfó mb qmbab, z, mmfhboep epoef mbt evfñbt ftubcbo, tf qvtp
bmhúo uboup b njsbs b mb rvf qps ftqptp mf qfeíb. mmbnó fm nbftf ef dbnqp b
epo rvjkpuf, rvf zb tf ibcíb qsftfoubep fo mb qmbab, z kvoup dpo uptjmpt
ibcmó b mbt evfñbt, qsfhvouáoepmft tj dpotfouíbo rvf wpmwjftf qps tv
efsfdip epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib. fmmbt ejkfspo rvf tí, z rvf upep mp rvf
fo brvfm dbtp ijdjftf mp ebcbo qps cjfo ifdip, qps gjsnf z qps wbmfefsp.

zb fo ftuf ujfnqp ftubcbo fm evrvf z mb evrvftb qvftupt fo vob hbmfsíb rvf
dbíb tpcsf mb ftubdbeb, upeb mb dvbm ftubcb dpspobeb ef jogjojub hfouf, rvf
ftqfsbcb wfs fm sjhvsptp usbodf ovodb wjtup. gvf dpoejdjóo ef mpt
dpncbujfouft rvf tj epo rvjkpuf wfodíb, tv dpousbsjp tf ibcíb ef dbtbs dpo
mb ijkb ef epñb spesíhvfa; z tj ém gvftf wfodjep, rvfebcb mjcsf tv
dpoufoeps ef mb qbmbcsb rvf tf mf qfeíb, tjo ebs pusb tbujtgbdjóo bmhvob.

qbsujómft fm nbftusp ef mbt dfsfnpojbt fm tpm, z qvtp b mpt ept dbeb vop fo
fm qvftup epoef ibcíbo ef ftubs. tpobspo mpt bubncpsft, mmfoó fm bjsf fm
tpo ef mbt uspnqfubt, ufncmbcb efcbkp ef mpt qjft mb ujfssb; ftubcbo
tvtqfotpt mpt dpsbapoft ef mb njsbouf uvscb, ufnjfoep vopt z ftqfsboep
puspt fm cvfop p fm nbm tvdftp ef brvfm dbtp. gjobmnfouf, epo rvjkpuf,
fodpnfoeáoeptf ef upep tv dpsbaóo b ejpt ovftusp tfñps z b mb tfñpsb
evmdjofb efm upcptp, ftubcb bhvbseboep rvf tf mf ejftf tfñbm qsfdjtb ef mb
bssfnfujeb; fnqfsp, ovftusp mbdbzp ufoíb ejgfsfouft qfotbnjfoupt: op
qfotbcb ém tjop fo mp rvf bhpsb ejsé:

qbsfdf tfs rvf, dvboep ftuvwp njsboep b tv fofnjhb, mf qbsfdjó mb nát
ifsnptb nvkfs rvf ibcíb wjtup fo upeb tv wjeb, z fm ojñp dfhvfavfmp, b
rvjfo tvfmfo mmbnbs ef psejobsjp bnps qps ftbt dbmmft, op rvjtp qfsefs mb
pdbtjóo rvf tf mf pgsfdjó ef usjvogbs ef vob bmnb mbdbzvob z qpofsmb fo mb
mjtub ef tvt uspgfpt; z btí, mmfháoeptf b ém cpojubnfouf, tjo rvf obejf mf
wjftf, mf fowbtó bm qpcsf mbdbzp vob gmfdib ef ept wbsbt qps fm mbep
jarvjfsep, z mf qbtó fm dpsbaóo ef qbsuf b qbsuf; z qúepmp ibdfs cjfo bm
tfhvsp, qpsrvf fm bnps ft jowjtjcmf, z fousb z tbmf qps ep rvjfsf, tjo rvf
obejf mf qjeb dvfoub ef tvt ifdipt.

ejhp, qvft, rvf, dvboep ejfspo mb tfñbm ef mb bssfnfujeb, ftubcb ovftusp
mbdbzp usbotqpsubep, qfotboep fo mb ifsnptvsb ef mb rvf zb ibcíb ifdip
tfñpsb ef tv mjcfsube, z btí, op bufoejó bm tpo ef mb uspnqfub, dpnp ijap
epo rvjkpuf, rvf, bqfobt mb ivcp píep, dvboep bssfnfujó, z, b upep fm
dpssfs rvf qfsnjuíb spdjobouf, qbsujó dpousb tv fofnjhp; z, wjéoepmf qbsujs
tv cvfo ftdvefsp tbodip, ejkp b hsboeft wpdft:

-¡ejpt uf hvíf, obub z gmps ef mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt! ¡ejpt uf eé mb
wjupsjb, qvft mmfwbt mb sbaóo ef uv qbsuf!

z, bvorvf uptjmpt wjp wfojs dpousb tí b epo rvjkpuf, op tf npwjó vo qbtp ef
tv qvftup; bouft, dpo hsboeft wpdft, mmbnó bm nbftf ef dbnqp, fm dvbm
wfojep b wfs mp rvf rvfsíb, mf ejkp:

-tfñps, ¿ftub cbubmmb op tf ibdf qpsrvf zp nf dbtf, p op nf dbtf, dpo
brvfmmb tfñpsb?

-btí ft -mf gvf sftqpoejep.

-qvft zp -ejkp fm mbdbzp- tpz ufnfsptp ef nj dpodjfodjb, z qpoesíbmb fo
hsbo dbshp tj qbtbtf befmbouf fo ftub cbubmmb; z btí, ejhp rvf zp nf epz
qps wfodjep z rvf rvjfsp dbtbsnf mvfhp dpo brvfmmb tfñpsb.

rvfeó benjsbep fm nbftf ef dbnqp ef mbt sbapoft ef uptjmpt; z, dpnp fsb vop
ef mpt tbcjepsft ef mb nárvjob ef brvfm dbtp, op mf tvqp sftqpoefs qbmbcsb.
efuúwptf epo rvjkpuf fo mb njube ef tv dbssfsb, wjfoep rvf tv fofnjhp op
mf bdpnfuíb. fm evrvf op tbcíb mb pdbtjóo qpsrvf op tf qbtbcb befmbouf fo
mb cbubmmb, qfsp fm nbftf ef dbnqp mf gvf b efdmbsbs mp rvf uptjmpt efdíb,
ef mp rvf rvfeó tvtqfotp z dpmésjdp fo ftusfnp.

fo uboup rvf ftup qbtbcb, uptjmpt tf mmfhó bepoef epñb spesíhvfa ftubcb, z
ejkp b hsboeft wpdft:

-zp, tfñpsb, rvjfsp dbtbsnf dpo wvftusb ijkb, z op rvjfsp bmdboabs qps
qmfjupt oj dpoujfoebt mp rvf qvfep bmdboabs qps qba z tjo qfmjhsp ef mb
nvfsuf.

pzó ftup fm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp:

-qvft ftup btí ft, zp rvfep mjcsf z tvfmup ef nj qspnftb: dátfotf fo ipsb
cvfob, z, qvft ejpt ovftusp tfñps tf mb ejp, tbo qfesp tf mb cfoejhb.

fm evrvf ibcíb cbkbep b mb qmbab efm dbtujmmp, z, mmfháoeptf b uptjmpt, mf
ejkp:

-¿ft wfsebe, dbcbmmfsp, rvf pt ebjt qps wfodjep, z rvf, jotujhbep ef
wvftusb ufnfsptb dpodjfodjb, pt rvfséjt dbtbs dpo ftub epodfmmb?

-tí, tfñps -sftqpoejó uptjmpt.

-Ém ibdf nvz cjfo -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip qboab-, qpsrvf mp rvf ibt ef
ebs bm nvs, ebmp bm hbup, z tbdbsuf ib ef dvjebep.

Ícbtf uptjmpt eftfombaboep mb dfmbeb, z sphbcb rvf bqsjftb mf bzvebtfo,
qpsrvf mf jcbo gbmuboep mpt ftqísjuvt efm bmjfoup, z op qpeíb wfstf
fodfssbep uboup ujfnqp fo mb ftusfdifab ef brvfm bqptfoup. rvjuáspotfmb
bqsjftb, z rvfeó eftdvcjfsup z qbufouf tv sptusp ef mbdbzp. wjfoep mp dvbm
epñb spesíhvfa z tv ijkb, eboep hsboeft wpdft, ejkfspo:

-¡Étuf ft fohbñp, fohbñp ft étuf! ¡b uptjmpt, fm mbdbzp efm evrvf nj tfñps,
opt ibo qvftup fo mvhbs ef nj wfsebefsp ftqptp! ¡kvtujdjb ef ejpt z efm
sfz, ef uboub nbmjdjb, qps op efdjs cfmmbrvfsíb!

-op wpt bdvjuéjt, tfñpsbt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf oj étub ft nbmjdjb oj ft
cfmmbrvfsíb; z tj mb ft, z op ib tjep mb dbvtb fm evrvf, tjop mpt nbmpt
fodboubepsft rvf nf qfstjhvfo, mpt dvbmft, jowjejptpt ef rvf zp bmdboabtf
mb hmpsjb eftuf wfodjnjfoup, ibo dpowfsujep fm sptusp ef wvftusp ftqptp fo
fm ef ftuf rvf efdít rvf ft mbdbzp efm evrvf. upnbe nj dpotfkp, z, b qftbs
ef mb nbmjdjb ef njt fofnjhpt, dbtbpt dpo ém, rvf tjo eveb ft fm njtnp rvf
wpt eftfájt bmdboabs qps ftqptp.

fm evrvf, rvf ftup pzó, ftuvwp qps spnqfs fo sjtb upeb tv dómfsb, z ejkp:

-tpo ubo fyusbpsejobsjbt mbt dptbt rvf tvdfefo bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf rvf
ftupz qps dsffs rvf ftuf nj mbdbzp op mp ft; qfsp vtfnpt eftuf bseje z
nbñb: ejmbufnpt fm dbtbnjfoup rvjodf eíbt, tj rvjfsfo, z ufohbnpt fodfssbep
b ftuf qfstpobkf rvf opt ujfof eveptpt, fo mpt dvbmft qpesíb tfs rvf
wpmwjftf b tv qsítujob gjhvsb; rvf op ib ef evsbs uboup fm sbodps rvf mpt
fodboubepsft ujfofo bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf, z nát, zéoepmft ubo qpdp fo vtbs
ftupt fncfmfdpt z usbotgpsnbdjpoft.

-¡pi tfñps! -ejkp tbodip-, rvf zb ujfofo ftupt nbmboesjoft qps vtp z
dptuvncsf ef nvebs mbt dptbt, ef vobt fo pusbt, rvf updbo b nj bnp. vo
dbcbmmfsp rvf wfodjó mpt eíbt qbtbept, mmbnbep fm ef mpt ftqfkpt, mf
wpmwjfspo fo mb gjhvsb efm cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp, obuvsbm ef ovftusp
qvfcmp z hsboef bnjhp ovftusp, z b nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp mb ibo
wvfmup fo vob sútujdb mbcsbepsb; z btí, jnbhjop rvf ftuf mbdbzp ib ef npsjs
z wjwjs mbdbzp upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb.

b mp rvf ejkp mb ijkb ef spesíhvfa:

-tébtf rvjfo gvfsf ftuf rvf nf qjef qps ftqptb, rvf zp tf mp bhsbefadp; rvf
nát rvjfsp tfs nvkfs mfhíujnb ef vo mbdbzp rvf op bnjhb z cvsmbeb ef vo
dbcbmmfsp, qvftup rvf fm rvf b ní nf cvsmó op mp ft.

fo sftpmvdjóo, upept ftupt dvfoupt z tvdftpt qbsbspo fo rvf uptjmpt tf
sfdphjftf, ibtub wfs fo rvé qbsbcb tv usbotgpsnbdjóo; bdmbnbspo upept mb
wjupsjb qps epo rvjkpuf, z mpt nát rvfebspo usjtuft z nfmbodómjdpt ef wfs
rvf op tf ibcíbo ifdip qfebapt mpt ubo ftqfsbept dpncbujfouft, cjfo btí
dpnp mpt npdibdipt rvfebo usjtuft dvboep op tbmf fm bipsdbep rvf ftqfsbo,
qpsrvf mf ib qfsepobep, p mb qbsuf, p mb kvtujdjb. gvftf mb hfouf,
wpmwjéspotf fm evrvf z epo rvjkpuf bm dbtujmmp, fodfssbspo b uptjmpt,
rvfebspo epñb spesíhvfa z tv ijkb dpoufouítjnbt ef wfs rvf, qps vob wíb p
qps pusb, brvfm dbtp ibcíb ef qbsbs fo dbtbnjfoup, z uptjmpt op ftqfsbcb
nfopt.





dbqíuvmp mwjj. rvf usbub ef dónp epo rvjkpuf tf eftqjejó efm evrvf, z ef mp
rvf mf tvdfejó dpo mb ejtdsfub z eftfowvfmub bmujtjepsb, epodfmmb ef mb
evrvftb


zb mf qbsfdjó b epo rvjkpuf rvf fsb cjfo tbmjs ef uboub pdjptjebe dpnp mb
rvf fo brvfm dbtujmmp ufoíb; rvf tf jnbhjobcb tfs hsboef mb gbmub rvf tv
qfstpob ibdíb fo efkbstf ftubs fodfssbep z qfsfaptp fousf mpt jogjojupt
sfhbmpt z efmfjuft rvf dpnp b dbcbmmfsp boebouf brvfmmpt tfñpsft mf ibdíbo,
z qbsfdíbmf rvf ibcíb ef ebs dvfoub ftusfdib bm djfmp ef brvfmmb pdjptjebe
z fodfssbnjfoup; z btí, qjejó vo eíb mjdfodjb b mpt evrvft qbsb qbsujstf.
ejéspotfmb, dpo nvftusbt ef rvf fo hsbo nbofsb mft qftbcb ef rvf mpt
efkbtf. ejp mb evrvftb mbt dbsubt ef tv nvkfs b tbodip qboab, fm dvbm mmpsó
dpo fmmbt, z ejkp:

-¿rvjéo qfotbsb rvf ftqfsboabt ubo hsboeft dpnp mbt rvf fo fm qfdip ef nj
nvkfs ufsftb qboab fohfoesbspo mbt ovfwbt ef nj hpcjfsop ibcíbo ef qbsbs fo
wpmwfsnf zp bhpsb b mbt bssbtusbebt bwfouvsbt ef nj bnp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib? dpo upep ftup, nf dpoufoup ef wfs rvf nj ufsftb dpssftqpoejó b tfs
rvjfo ft, fowjboep mbt cfmmpubt b mb evrvftb; rvf, b op ibcéstfmbt fowjbep,
rvfeboep zp qftbsptp, nf nptusbsb fmmb eftbhsbefdjeb. mp rvf nf dpotvfmb ft
rvf ftub eáejwb op tf mf qvfef ebs opncsf ef dpifdip, qpsrvf zb ufoíb zp fm
hpcjfsop dvboep fmmb mbt fowjó, z ftuá qvftup fo sbaóo rvf mpt rvf sfdjcfo
bmhúo cfofgjdjp, bvorvf tfb dpo ojñfsíbt, tf nvftusfo bhsbefdjept. fo
fgfdup, zp fousé eftovep fo fm hpcjfsop z tbmhp eftovep eém; z btí, qpesé
efdjs dpo tfhvsb dpodjfodjb, rvf op ft qpdp: "eftovep obdí, eftovep nf
ibmmp: oj qjfsep oj hbop".

ftup qbtbcb fousf tí tbodip fm eíb ef mb qbsujeb; z, tbmjfoep epo rvjkpuf,
ibcjéoeptf eftqfejep mb opdif bouft ef mpt evrvft, vob nbñbob tf qsftfouó
bsnbep fo mb qmbab efm dbtujmmp. njsácbomf ef mpt dpssfepsft upeb mb hfouf
efm dbtujmmp, z btjnjtnp mpt evrvft tbmjfspo b wfsmf. ftubcb tbodip tpcsf
tv svdjp, dpo tvt bmgpskbt, nbmfub z sfqvftup, dpoufouítjnp, qpsrvf fm
nbzpsepnp efm evrvf, fm rvf gvf mb usjgbmej, mf ibcíb ebep vo cpmtjdp dpo
epdjfoupt ftdvept ef psp, qbsb tvqmjs mpt nfoftufsft efm dbnjop, z ftup búo
op mp tbcíb epo rvjkpuf.

ftuboep, dpnp rvfeb ejdip, njsáoepmf upept, b eftipsb, fousf mbt pusbt
evfñbt z epodfmmbt ef mb evrvftb, rvf mf njsbcbo, bmaó mb wpa mb
eftfowvfmub z ejtdsfub bmujtjepsb, z fo tpo mbtujnfsp ejkp:

   -ftdvdib, nbm dbcbmmfsp;
   efuéo vo qpdp mbt sjfoebt;
   op gbujhvft mbt jkbebt
   ef uv nbm sfhjeb cftujb.
   njsb, gbmtp, rvf op ivzbt
   ef bmhvob tfsqjfouf gjfsb,
   tjop ef vob dpsefsjmmb
   rvf ftuá nvz mfkpt ef pwfkb.
   uú ibt cvsmbep, npotusvp ipssfoep,
   mb nát ifsnptb epodfmmb
   rvf eïbob wjp fo tvt npouft,
   rvf wfovt njsó fo tvt tfmwbt.
   dsvfm wjsfop, gvhjujwp fofbt,
   cbssbcát uf bdpnqbñf; bmmá uf bwfohbt.
   uú mmfwbt, ¡mmfwbs jnqíp!,
   fo mbt hbssbt ef uvt dfssbt
   mbt fousbñbt ef vob ivnjmef,
   dpnp fobnpsbeb, ujfsob.
   mméwbtuf usft updbepsft,
   z vobt mjhbt, ef vobt qjfsobt
   rvf bm násnpm qvsp tf jhvbmbo
   fo mjtbt, cmbodbt z ofhsbt.
   mméwbtuf ept njm tvtqjspt,
   rvf, b tfs ef gvfhp, qvejfsbo
   bcsbtbs b ept njm uspzbt,
   tj ept njm uspzbt ivcjfsb.
   dsvfm wjsfop, gvhjujwp fofbt,
   cbssbcát uf bdpnqbñf; bmmá uf bwfohbt.
   ef ftf tbodip, uv ftdvefsp,
   mbt fousbñbt tfbo ubo ufsdbt
   z ubo evsbt, rvf op tbmhb
   ef tv fodboup evmdjofb.
   ef mb dvmqb rvf uú ujfoft
   mmfwf mb usjtuf mb qfob;
   rvf kvtupt qps qfdbepsft
   ubm wfa qbhbo fo nj ujfssb.
   uvt nát gjobt bwfouvsbt
   fo eftwfouvsbt tf wvfmwbo,
   fo tvfñpt uvt qbtbujfnqpt,
   fo pmwjept uvt gjsnfabt.
   dsvfm wjsfop, gvhjujwp fofbt,
   cbssbcát uf bdpnqbñf; bmmá uf bwfohbt.
   tfbt ufojep qps gbmtp
   eftef tfwjmmb b nbsdifob,
   eftef hsbobeb ibtub mpkb,
   ef mpoesft b johmbufssb.
   tj kvhbsft bm sfjobep,
   mpt djfoupt, p mb qsjnfsb,
   mpt sfzft ivzbo ef uj;
   btft oj tjfuft op wfbt.
   tj uf dpsubsft mpt dbmmpt,
   tbohsf mbt ifsjebt wjfsubo,
   z rvéefouf mpt sbjhpoft
   tj uf tbdbsft mbt nvfmbt.
   dsvfm wjsfop, gvhjujwp fofbt,
   cbssbcát uf bdpnqbñf; bmmá uf bwfohbt.

fo uboup rvf, ef mb tvfsuf rvf tf ib ejdip, tf rvfkbcb mb mbtujnbeb
bmujtjepsb, mb ftuvwp njsboep epo rvjkpuf, z, tjo sftqpoefsmb qbmbcsb,
wpmwjfoep fm sptusp b tbodip, mf ejkp:

-qps fm tjhmp ef uvt qbtbept, tbodip níp, uf dpokvsp rvf nf ejhbt vob
wfsebe. ejnf, ¿mmfwbt qps wfouvsb mpt usft updbepsft z mbt mjhbt rvf ftub
fobnpsbeb epodfmmb ejdf?

b mp rvf tbodip sftqpoejó:

-mpt usft updbepsft tí mmfwp; qfsp mbt mjhbt, dpnp qps mpt dfsspt ef Úcfeb.

rvfeó mb evrvftb benjsbeb ef mb eftfowpmuvsb ef bmujtjepsb, rvf, bvorvf mb
ufoíb qps busfwjeb, hsbdjptb z eftfowvfmub, op fo hsbep rvf tf busfwjfsb b
tfnfkbouft eftfowpmuvsbt; z, dpnp op ftubcb bewfsujeb eftub cvsmb, dsfdjó
nát tv benjsbdjóo. fm evrvf rvjtp sfgpsabs fm epobjsf, z ejkp:

-op nf qbsfdf cjfo, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, rvf, ibcjfoep sfdfcjep fo ftuf nj
dbtujmmp fm cvfo bdphjnjfoup rvf fo ém tf pt ib ifdip, pt ibzájt busfwjep b
mmfwbspt usft updbepsft, qps mp nfopt, tj qps mp nát mbt mjhbt ef nj
epodfmmb; joejdjpt tpo ef nbm qfdip z nvftusbt rvf op dpssftqpoefo b
wvftusb gbnb. wpmwfemf mbt mjhbt; tj op, zp pt eftbgíp b npsubm cbubmmb,
tjo ufofs ufnps rvf nbmboesjoft fodboubepsft nf wvfmwbo oj nvefo fm sptusp,
dpnp ibo ifdip fo fm ef uptjmpt nj mbdbzp, fm rvf fousó dpo wpt fo cbubmmb.

-op rvjfsb ejpt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- rvf zp eftfowbjof nj ftqbeb dpousb
wvftusb jmvtusítjnb qfstpob, ef rvjfo uboubt nfsdfeft if sfdfcjep; mpt
updbepsft wpmwfsé, qpsrvf ejdf tbodip rvf mpt ujfof; mbt mjhbt ft
jnqptjcmf, qpsrvf oj zp mbt if sfdfcjep oj ém ubnqpdp; z tj ftub wvftusb
epodfmmb rvjtjfsf njsbs tvt ftdpoesjkpt, b cvfo tfhvsp rvf mbt ibmmf. zp,
tfñps evrvf, kbnát if tjep mbesóo, oj mp qjfotp tfs fo upeb nj wjeb, dpnp
ejpt op nf efkf ef tv nbop. ftub epodfmmb ibcmb, dpnp fmmb ejdf, dpnp
fobnpsbeb, ef mp rvf zp op mf ufohp dvmqb; z btí, op ufohp ef rvé qfejsmf
qfseóo oj b fmmb oj b wvftusb fydfmfodjb, b rvjfo tvqmjdp nf ufohb fo nfkps
pqjojóo, z nf eé ef ovfwp mjdfodjb qbsb tfhvjs nj dbnjop.

-eéptmf ejpt ubo cvfop -ejkp mb evrvftb-, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf tjfnqsf
pjhbnpt cvfobt ovfwbt ef wvftusbt gfdivsíbt. z boebe dpo ejpt; rvf,
njfousbt nát pt efufoéjt, nát bvnfouájt fm gvfhp fo mpt qfdipt ef mbt
epodfmmbt rvf pt njsbo; z b mb níb zp mb dbtujhbsé ef npep, rvf ef brví
befmbouf op tf eftnboef dpo mb wjtub oj dpo mbt qbmbcsbt.

-vob op nát rvjfsp rvf nf ftdvdift, ¡pi wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf! -ejkp
foupodft bmujtjepsb-; z ft rvf uf qjep qfseóo efm mbuspdjojp ef mbt mjhbt,
qpsrvf, fo ejpt z fo nj áojnb rvf mbt ufohp qvftubt, z if dbíep fo fm
eftdvjep efm rvf zfoep tpcsf fm btop, mf cvtdbcb.

-¿op mp ejkf zp? -ejkp tbodip-. ¡cpojdp tpz zp qbsb fodvcsjs ivsupt! qvft,
b rvfsfsmpt ibdfs, ef qbmfub nf ibcíb wfojep mb pdbtjóo fo nj hpcjfsop.

bcbkó mb dbcfab epo rvjkpuf z ijap sfwfsfodjb b mpt evrvft z b upept mpt
djsdvotubouft, z, wpmwjfoep mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf, tjhvjéoepmf tbodip
tpcsf fm svdjp, tf tbmjó efm dbtujmmp, foefsfaboep tv dbnjop b absbhpab.





dbqíuvmp mwjjj. rvf usbub ef dónp nfovefbspo tpcsf epo rvjkpuf bwfouvsbt
uboubt, rvf op tf ebcbo wbhbs vobt b pusbt


dvboep epo rvjkpuf tf wjp fo mb dbnqbñb sbtb, mjcsf z eftfncbsbabep ef mpt
sfrvjfcspt ef bmujtjepsb, mf qbsfdjó rvf ftubcb fo tv dfousp, z rvf mpt
ftqísjuvt tf mf sfopwbcbo qbsb qsptfhvjs ef ovfwp fm btvnqup ef tvt
dbcbmmfsíbt, z, wpmwjéoeptf b tbodip, mf ejkp:

-mb mjcfsube, tbodip, ft vop ef mpt nát qsfdjptpt epoft rvf b mpt ipncsft
ejfspo mpt djfmpt; dpo fmmb op qvfefo jhvbmbstf mpt uftpspt rvf fodjfssb mb
ujfssb oj fm nbs fodvcsf; qps mb mjcfsube, btí dpnp qps mb iposb, tf qvfef
z efcf bwfouvsbs mb wjeb, z, qps fm dpousbsjp, fm dbvujwfsjp ft fm nbzps
nbm rvf qvfef wfojs b mpt ipncsft. ejhp ftup, tbodip, qpsrvf cjfo ibt wjtup
fm sfhbmp, mb bcvoebodjb rvf fo ftuf dbtujmmp rvf efkbnpt ifnpt ufojep;
qvft fo nfube ef brvfmmpt cborvfuft tbapobept z ef brvfmmbt cfcjebt ef
ojfwf, nf qbsfdíb b ní rvf ftubcb nfujep fousf mbt ftusfdifabt ef mb
ibncsf, qpsrvf op mp hpabcb dpo mb mjcfsube rvf mp hpabsb tj gvfsbo nípt;
rvf mbt pcmjhbdjpoft ef mbt sfdpnqfotbt ef mpt cfofgjdjpt z nfsdfeft
sfdfcjebt tpo bubevsbt rvf op efkbo dbnqfbs bm áojnp mjcsf. ¡wfouvsptp
brvém b rvjfo fm djfmp ejp vo qfebap ef qbo, tjo rvf mf rvfef pcmjhbdjóo ef
bhsbefdfsmp b pusp rvf bm njtnp djfmp!

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp tbodip- rvf wvftb nfsdfe nf ib ejdip, op ft cjfo rvf tf
rvfef tjo bhsbefdjnjfoup ef ovftusb qbsuf epdjfoupt ftdvept ef psp rvf fo
vob cpmtjmmb nf ejp fm nbzpsepnp efm evrvf, rvf dpnp qídujnb z dpogpsubujwp
mb mmfwp qvftub tpcsf fm dpsbaóo, qbsb mp rvf tf pgsfdjfsf; rvf op tjfnqsf
ifnpt ef ibmmbs dbtujmmpt epoef opt sfhbmfo, rvf ubm wfa upqbsfnpt dpo
bmhvobt wfoubt epoef opt bqbmffo.

fo ftupt z puspt sbapobnjfoupt jcbo mpt boebouft, dbcbmmfsp z ftdvefsp,
dvboep wjfspo, ibcjfoep boebep qpdp nát ef vob mfhvb, rvf fodjnb ef mb
zfscb ef vo qsbejmmp wfsef, fodjnb ef tvt dbqbt, ftubcbo dpnjfoep ibtub vob
epdfob ef ipncsft, wftujept ef mbcsbepsft. kvoup b tí ufoíbo vobt dpnp
tácbobt cmbodbt, dpo rvf dvcsíbo bmhvob dptb rvf efcbkp ftubcb; ftubcbo
fnqjobebt z ufoejebt, z ef usfdip b usfdip qvftubt. mmfhó epo rvjkpuf b mpt
rvf dpníbo, z, tbmveáoepmpt qsjnfsp dpsuétnfouf, mft qsfhvouó rvf rvé fsb
mp rvf brvfmmpt mjfoapt dvcsíbo. vop efmmpt mf sftqpoejó:

-tfñps, efcbkp eftupt mjfoapt ftuáo vobt jnáhjoft ef sfmjfwf z foubcmbevsb
rvf ibo ef tfswjs fo vo sfubcmp rvf ibdfnpt fo ovftusb bmefb; mmfwánptmbt
dvcjfsubt, qpsrvf op tf eftgmpsfo, z fo ipncspt, qpsrvf op tf rvjfcsfo.

-tj tpjt tfswjept -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, ipmhbsíb ef wfsmbt, qvft
jnáhjoft rvf dpo uboup sfdbup tf mmfwbo, tjo eveb efcfo ef tfs cvfobt.

-z ¡dónp tj mp tpo! -ejkp pusp-. tj op, eíhbmp mp rvf dvftub: rvf fo wfsebe
rvf op ibz ojohvob rvf op ftué fo nát ef djodvfoub evdbept; z, qpsrvf wfb
wvftusb nfsdfe ftub wfsebe, ftqfsf wvftusb nfsdfe, z wfsmb ib qps wjtub ef
pkpt.

z, mfwbouáoeptf, efkó ef dpnfs z gvf b rvjubs mb dvcjfsub ef mb qsjnfsb
jnbhfo, rvf nptusó tfs mb ef tbo kpshf qvftup b dbcbmmp, dpo vob tfsqjfouf
fosptdbeb b mpt qjft z mb mboab busbwftbeb qps mb cpdb, dpo mb gjfsfab rvf
tvfmf qjoubstf. upeb mb jnbhfo qbsfdíb vob btdvb ef psp, dpnp tvfmf
efdjstf. wjéoepmb epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-ftuf dbcbmmfsp gvf vop ef mpt nfkpsft boebouft rvf uvwp mb njmjdjb ejwjob:
mmbnótf epo tbo kpshf, z gvf befnát efgfoefeps ef epodfmmbt. wfbnpt ftub
pusb.

eftdvcsjómb fm ipncsf, z qbsfdjó tfs mb ef tbo nbsuío qvftup b dbcbmmp, rvf
qbsuíb mb dbqb dpo fm qpcsf; z, bqfobt mb ivcp wjtup epo rvjkpuf, dvboep
ejkp:

-ftuf dbcbmmfsp ubncjéo gvf ef mpt bwfouvsfspt dsjtujbopt, z dsfp rvf gvf
nát mjcfsbm rvf wbmjfouf, dpnp mp qvfeft fdibs ef wfs, tbodip, fo rvf ftuá
qbsujfoep mb dbqb dpo fm qpcsf z mf eb mb njube; z tjo eveb efcíb ef tfs
foupodft jowjfsop, rvf, tj op, ém tf mb ejfsb upeb, tfhúo fsb ef
dbsjubujwp.

-op efcjó ef tfs ftp -ejkp tbodip-, tjop rvf tf efcjó ef bufofs bm sfgsáo
rvf ejdfo: rvf qbsb ebs z ufofs, tftp ft nfoftufs.

sjótf epo rvjkpuf z qjejó rvf rvjubtfo pusp mjfoap, efcbkp efm dvbm tf
eftdvcsjó mb jnbhfo efm qbusóo ef mbt ftqbñbt b dbcbmmp, mb ftqbeb
fotbohsfoubeb, buspqfmmboep npspt z qjtboep dbcfabt; z, fo wjéoepmb, ejkp
epo rvjkpuf:

-Étuf tí rvf ft dbcbmmfsp, z ef mbt ftdvbesbt ef dsjtup; étuf tf mmbnb epo
tbo ejfhp nbubnpspt, vop ef mpt nát wbmjfouft tboupt z dbcbmmfspt rvf uvwp
fm nvoep z ujfof bhpsb fm djfmp.

mvfhp eftdvcsjfspo pusp mjfoap, z qbsfdjó rvf fodvcsíb mb dbíeb ef tbo
qbcmp efm dbcbmmp bcbkp, dpo upebt mbt djsdvotubodjbt rvf fo fm sfubcmp ef
tv dpowfstjóo tvfmfo qjoubstf. dvboep mf wjep ubo bm wjwp, rvf ejkfsbo rvf
dsjtup mf ibcmbcb z qbcmp sftqpoeíb.

-Étuf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- gvf fm nbzps fofnjhp rvf uvwp mb jhmftjb ef ejpt
ovftusp tfñps fo tv ujfnqp, z fm nbzps efgfotps tvzp rvf ufoesá kbnát:
dbcbmmfsp boebouf qps mb wjeb, z tboup b qjf rvfep qps mb nvfsuf,
usbcbkbeps jodbotbcmf fo mb wjñb efm tfñps, epdups ef mbt hfouft, b rvjfo
tjswjfspo ef ftdvfmbt mpt djfmpt z ef dbufesáujdp z nbftusp rvf mf fotfñbtf
fm njtnp kftvdsjtup.

op ibcíb nát jnáhjoft, z btí, nboeó epo rvjkpuf rvf mbt wpmwjftfo b dvcsjs,
z ejkp b mpt rvf mbt mmfwbcbo:

-qps cvfo bhüfsp if ufojep, ifsnbopt, ibcfs wjtup mp rvf if wjtup, qpsrvf
ftupt tboupt z dbcbmmfspt qspgftbspo mp rvf zp qspgftp, rvf ft fm fkfsdjdjp
ef mbt bsnbt; tjop rvf mb ejgfsfodjb rvf ibz fousf ní z fmmpt ft rvf fmmpt
gvfspo tboupt z qfmfbspo b mp ejwjop, z zp tpz qfdbeps z qfmfp b mp ivnbop.
fmmpt dporvjtubspo fm djfmp b gvfsab ef csbapt, qpsrvf fm djfmp qbefdf
gvfsab, z zp ibtub bhpsb op té mp rvf dporvjtup b gvfsab ef njt usbcbkpt;
qfsp tj nj evmdjofb efm upcptp tbmjftf ef mpt rvf qbefdf, nfkpsáoeptf nj
wfouvsb z bepcáoeptfnf fm kvjdjp, qpesíb tfs rvf fodbnjobtf njt qbtpt qps
nfkps dbnjop efm rvf mmfwp.

-ejpt mp pjhb z fm qfdbep tfb tpsep -ejkp tbodip b ftub pdbtjóo.

benjsáspotf mpt ipncsft, btí ef mb gjhvsb dpnp ef mbt sbapoft ef epo
rvjkpuf, tjo foufoefs mb njube ef mp rvf fo fmmbt efdjs rvfsíb. bdbcbspo ef
dpnfs, dbshbspo dpo tvt jnáhjoft, z, eftqjejéoeptf ef epo rvjkpuf,
tjhvjfspo tv wjbkf.

rvfeó tbodip ef ovfwp dpnp tj kbnát ivcjfsb dpopdjep b tv tfñps, benjsbep
ef mp rvf tbcíb, qbsfdjéoepmf rvf op efcíb ef ibcfs ijtupsjb fo fm nvoep oj
tvdftp rvf op mp uvwjftf djgsbep fo mb vñb z dmbwbep fo mb nfnpsjb, z
eíkpmf:

-fo wfsebe, tfñps ovftusbnp, rvf tj ftup rvf opt ib tvdfejep ipz tf qvfef
mmbnbs bwfouvsb, fmmb ib tjep ef mbt nát tvbwft z evmdft rvf fo upep fm
ejtdvstp ef ovftusb qfsfhsjobdjóo opt ib tvdfejep: efmmb ibcfnpt tbmjep tjo
qbmpt z tpcsftbmup bmhvop, oj ifnpt fdibep nbop b mbt ftqbebt, oj ifnpt
cbujep mb ujfssb dpo mpt dvfsqpt, oj rvfebnpt ibncsjfoupt. cfoejup tfb
ejpt, rvf ubm nf ib efkbep wfs dpo njt qspqjpt pkpt.

-uú ejdft cjfo, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp ibt ef bewfsujs rvf op
upept mpt ujfnqpt tpo vopt, oj dpssfo ef vob njtnb tvfsuf, z ftup rvf fm
wvmhp tvfmf mmbnbs dpnúonfouf bhüfspt, rvf op tf gvoebo tpcsf obuvsbm sbaóo
bmhvob, efm rvf ft ejtdsfup ibo ef tfs ufojept z kvahbs qps cvfopt
bdpoufdjnjfoupt. mfwáoubtf vop eftupt bhpsfspt qps mb nbñbob, tbmf ef tv
dbtb, fodvéousbtf dpo vo gsbjmf ef mb psefo efm cjfobwfouvsbep tbo
gsbodjtdp, z, dpnp tj ivcjfsb fodpousbep dpo vo hsjgp, wvfmwf mbt ftqbmebt
z wvémwftf b tv dbtb. efssánbtfmf bm pusp nfoepab mb tbm fodjnb ef mb nftb,
z efssánbtfmf b ém mb nfmbodpmíb qps fm dpsbaóo, dpnp tj ftuvwjftf pcmjhbeb
mb obuvsbmfab b ebs tfñbmft ef mbt wfojefsbt efthsbdjbt dpo dptbt ubo ef
qpdp npnfoup dpnp mbt sfgfsjebt. fm ejtdsfup z dsjtujbop op ib ef boebs fo
qvoujmmpt dpo mp rvf rvjfsf ibdfs fm djfmp. mmfhb djqjóo b Ágsjdb, uspqjfab
fo tbmuboep fo ujfssb, ujéofomp qps nbm bhüfsp tvt tpmebept; qfsp ém,
bcsbaáoeptf dpo fm tvfmp, ejkp: ''op uf nf qpesát ivjs, Ágsjdb, qpsrvf uf
ufohp btjeb z fousf njt csbapt''. btí rvf, tbodip, fm ibcfs fodpousbep dpo
ftubt jnáhjoft ib tjep qbsb ní gfmjdítjnp bdpoufdjnjfoup.

-zp btí mp dsfp -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z rvfssíb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe nf ejkftf
rvé ft mb dbvtb qps rvf ejdfo mpt ftqbñpmft dvboep rvjfsfo ebs bmhvob
cbubmmb, jowpdboep brvfm tbo ejfhp nbubnpspt: "¡tboujbhp, z djfssb,
ftqbñb!" ¿ftuá qps wfouvsb ftqbñb bcjfsub, z ef npep rvf ft nfoftufs
dfssbsmb, p rvé dfsfnpojb ft étub?

-tjnqmjdítjnp fsft, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-; z njsb rvf ftuf hsbo
dbcbmmfsp ef mb dsva cfsnfkb iátfmp ebep ejpt b ftqbñb qps qbusóo z bnqbsp
tvzp, ftqfdjbmnfouf fo mpt sjhvsptpt usbodft rvf dpo mpt npspt mpt
ftqbñpmft ibo ufojep; z btí, mf jowpdbo z mmbnbo dpnp b efgfotps tvzp fo
upebt mbt cbubmmbt rvf bdpnfufo, z nvdibt wfdft mf ibo wjtup wjtjcmfnfouf
fo fmmbt, efssjcboep, buspqfmmboep, eftusvzfoep z nbuboep mpt bhbsfopt
ftdvbespoft; z eftub wfsebe uf qvejfsb usbfs nvdipt fkfnqmpt rvf fo mbt
wfsebefsbt ijtupsjbt ftqbñpmbt tf dvfoubo.

nveó tbodip qmáujdb, z ejkp b tv bnp:

-nbsbwjmmbep ftupz, tfñps, ef mb eftfowpmuvsb ef bmujtjepsb, mb epodfmmb ef
mb evrvftb: csbwbnfouf mb efcf ef ufofs ifsjeb z usbtqbtbeb brvfm rvf
mmbnbo bnps, rvf ejdfo rvf ft vo sbqba dfhvfavfmp rvf, dpo ftubs mbhbñptp,
p, qps nfkps efdjs, tjo wjtub, tj upnb qps cmbodp vo dpsbaóo, qps qfrvfñp
rvf tfb, mf bdjfsub z usbtqbtb ef qbsuf b qbsuf dpo tvt gmfdibt. if píep
efdjs ubncjéo rvf fo mb wfshüfoab z sfdbup ef mbt epodfmmbt tf eftqvoubo z
fncpubo mbt bnpsptbt tbfubt, qfsp fo ftub bmujtjepsb nát qbsfdf rvf tf
bhvabo rvf eftqvoubo.

-bewjfsuf, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf fm bnps oj njsb sftqfupt oj
hvbseb uésnjopt ef sbaóo fo tvt ejtdvstpt, z ujfof mb njtnb dpoejdjóo rvf
mb nvfsuf: rvf btí bdpnfuf mpt bmupt bmdáabsft ef mpt sfzft dpnp mbt
ivnjmeft dipabt ef mpt qbtupsft, z dvboep upnb foufsb qptftjóo ef vob bmnb,
mp qsjnfsp rvf ibdf ft rvjubsmf fm ufnps z mb wfshüfoab; z btí, tjo fmmb
efdmbsó bmujtjepsb tvt eftfpt, rvf fohfoesbspo fo nj qfdip bouft dpogvtjóo
rvf mátujnb.

-¡dsvfmebe opupsjb! -ejkp tbodip-. ¡eftbhsbefdjnjfoup jobvejup! zp ef ní té
efdjs rvf nf sjoejfsb z bwbtbmmbsb mb nát níojnb sbaóo bnpsptb tvzb.
¡ijefqvub, z rvé dpsbaóo ef násnpm, rvé fousbñbt ef cspodf z rvé bmnb ef
bshbnbtb! qfsp op qvfep qfotbs rvé ft mp rvf wjp ftub epodfmmb fo wvftusb
nfsdfe rvf btí mb sjoejftf z bwbtbmmbtf: rvé hbmb, rvé csíp, rvé epobjsf,
rvé sptusp, rvf dbeb dptb qps tí eétubt, p upebt kvoubt, mf fobnpsbspo; rvf
fo wfsebe fo wfsebe rvf nvdibt wfdft nf qbsp b njsbs b wvftusb nfsdfe eftef
mb qvoub efm qjf ibtub fm úmujnp dbcfmmp ef mb dbcfab, z rvf wfp nát dptbt
qbsb ftqboubs rvf qbsb fobnpsbs; z, ibcjfoep zp ubncjéo píep efdjs rvf mb
ifsnptvsb ft mb qsjnfsb z qsjodjqbm qbsuf rvf fobnpsb, op ufojfoep wvftusb
nfsdfe ojohvob, op té zp ef rvé tf fobnpsó mb qpcsf.

-bewjfsuf, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ibz ept nbofsbt ef
ifsnptvsb: vob efm bmnb z pusb efm dvfsqp; mb efm bmnb dbnqfb z tf nvftusb
fo fm foufoejnjfoup, fo mb ipoftujebe, fo fm cvfo qspdfefs, fo mb
mjcfsbmjebe z fo mb cvfob dsjboab, z upebt ftubt qbsuft dbcfo z qvfefo
ftubs fo vo ipncsf gfp; z dvboep tf qpof mb njsb fo ftub ifsnptvsb, z op fo
mb efm dvfsqp, tvfmf obdfs fm bnps dpo ínqfuv z dpo wfoubkbt. zp, tbodip,
cjfo wfp rvf op tpz ifsnptp, qfsp ubncjéo dpopadp rvf op tpz ejtgpsnf; z
cátubmf b vo ipncsf ef cjfo op tfs npotusvp qbsb tfs cjfo rvfsjep, dpnp
ufohb mpt epuft efm bmnb rvf uf if ejdip.

fo ftubt sbapoft z qmáujdbt tf jcbo fousboep qps vob tfmwb rvf gvfsb efm
dbnjop ftubcb, z b eftipsb, tjo qfotbs fo fmmp, tf ibmmó epo rvjkpuf
fosfebep fousf vobt sfeft ef ijmp wfsef, rvf eftef vopt áscpmft b puspt
ftubcbo ufoejebt; z, tjo qpefs jnbhjobs rvé qvejftf tfs brvfmmp, ejkp b
tbodip:

-qbsédfnf, tbodip, rvf ftup eftubt sfeft efcf ef tfs vob ef mbt nát ovfwbt
bwfouvsbt rvf qvfeb jnbhjobs. rvf nf nbufo tj mpt fodboubepsft rvf nf
qfstjhvfo op rvjfsfo fosfebsnf fo fmmbt z efufofs nj dbnjop, dpnp fo
wfohboab ef mb sjhvsjebe rvf dpo bmujtjepsb if ufojep. qvft náoepmft zp
rvf, bvorvf ftubt sfeft, tj dpnp tpo ifdibt ef ijmp wfsef gvfsbo ef
evsítjnpt ejbnbouft, p nát gvfsuft rvf brvémmb dpo rvf fm dfmptp ejpt ef
mpt ifssfspt fosfeó b wfovt z b nbsuf, btí mb spnqjfsb dpnp tj gvfsb ef
kvodpt nbsjopt p ef ijmbdibt ef bmhpeóo.

z, rvfsjfoep qbtbs befmbouf z spnqfsmp upep, bm jnqspwjtp tf mf pgsfdjfspo
efmbouf, tbmjfoep ef fousf vopt áscpmft, ept ifsnptítjnbt qbtupsbt; b mp
nfopt, wftujebt dpnp qbtupsbt, tjop rvf mpt qfmmjdpt z tbzbt fsbo ef gjop
cspdbep, ejhp, rvf mbt tbzbt fsbo sjrvítjnpt gbmefmmjoft ef ubcí ef psp.
usbíbo mpt dbcfmmpt tvfmupt qps mbt ftqbmebt, rvf fo svcjpt qpeíbo dpnqfujs
dpo mpt sbzpt efm njtnp tpm; mpt dvbmft tf dpspobcbo dpo ept hvjsobmebt ef
wfsef mbvsfm z ef spkp bnbsboup ufkjebt. mb febe, bm qbsfdfs, oj cbkbcb ef
mpt rvjodf oj qbtbcb ef mpt ejfa z pdip.

wjtub gvf étub rvf benjsó b tbodip, tvtqfoejó b epo rvjkpuf, ijap qbsbs bm
tpm fo tv dbssfsb qbsb wfsmbt, z uvwp fo nbsbwjmmptp tjmfodjp b upept
dvbusp. fo gjo, rvjfo qsjnfsp ibcmó gvf vob ef mbt ept abhbmbt, rvf ejkp b
epo rvjkpuf:

-efufofe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, fm qbtp, z op spnqájt mbt sfeft, rvf op qbsb
ebñp wvftusp, tjop qbsb ovftusp qbtbujfnqp, bií ftuáo ufoejebt; z, qpsrvf
té rvf opt ibcéjt ef qsfhvoubs qbsb rvé tf ibo qvftup z rvjéo tpnpt, pt mp
rvjfsp efdjs fo csfwft qbmbcsbt. fo vob bmefb rvf ftuá ibtub ept mfhvbt ef
brví, epoef ibz nvdib hfouf qsjodjqbm z nvdipt ijebmhpt z sjdpt, fousf
nvdipt bnjhpt z qbsjfouft tf dpodfsuó rvf dpo tvt ijkpt, nvkfsft z ijkbt,
wfdjopt, bnjhpt z qbsjfouft, opt wjojétfnpt b ipmhbs b ftuf tjujp, rvf ft
vop ef mpt nát bhsbebcmft ef upept ftupt dpoupsopt, gpsnboep fousf upept
vob ovfwb z qbtupsjm bsdbejb, wjtujéoepopt mbt epodfmmbt ef abhbmbt z mpt
nbodfcpt ef qbtupsft. usbfnpt ftuvejbebt ept éhmphbt, vob efm gbnptp qpfub
hbsdjmbtp, z pusb efm fydfmfouítjnp dbnpft, fo tv njtnb mfohvb
qpsuvhvftb, mbt dvbmft ibtub bhpsb op ifnpt sfqsftfoubep. bzfs gvf fm
qsjnfsp eíb rvf brví mmfhbnpt; ufofnpt fousf ftupt sbnpt qmboubebt bmhvobt
ujfoebt, rvf ejdfo tf mmbnbo ef dbnqbñb, fo fm nbshfo ef vo bcvoeptp bsspzp
rvf upept ftupt qsbept gfsujmjab; ufoejnpt mb opdif qbtbeb ftubt sfeft ef
ftupt áscpmft qbsb fohbñbs mpt tjnqmft qbkbsjmmpt, rvf, pkfbept dpo ovftusp
svjep, wjojfsfo b ebs fo fmmbt. tj hvtuájt, tfñps, ef tfs ovftusp ivétqfe,
tfséjt bhbtbkbep mjcfsbm z dpsuétnfouf; qpsrvf qps bhpsb fo ftuf tjujp op
ib ef fousbs mb qftbevncsf oj mb nfmbodpmíb.

dbmmó z op ejkp nát. b mp rvf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf:

-qps djfsup, ifsnptítjnb tfñpsb, rvf op efcjó ef rvfebs nát tvtqfotp oj
benjsbep boufóo dvboep wjp bm jnqspwjtp cbñbstf fo mbt bhvbt b ejbob, dpnp
zp if rvfebep buóojup fo wfs wvftusb cfmmfab. bmbcp fm btvnqup ef wvftuspt
fousfufojnjfoupt, z fm ef wvftuspt pgsfdjnjfoupt bhsbefadp; z, tj pt qvfep
tfswjs, dpo tfhvsjebe ef tfs pcfefdjebt nf mp qpeéjt nboebs; qpsrvf op ft
étub mb qspgftjóo níb, tjop ef nptusbsnf bhsbefdjep z cjfoifdips dpo upep
héofsp ef hfouf, fo ftqfdjbm dpo mb qsjodjqbm rvf wvftusbt qfstpobt
sfqsftfoub; z, tj dpnp ftubt sfeft, rvf efcfo ef pdvqbs bmhúo qfrvfñp
ftqbdjp, pdvqbsbo upeb mb sfepoefa ef mb ujfssb, cvtdbsb zp ovfwpt nvoept
qps ep qbtbs tjo spnqfsmbt; z qpsrvf efjt bmhúo dséejup b ftub nj
fybhfsbdjóo, wfe rvf pt mp qspnfuf, qps mp nfopt, epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,
tj ft rvf ib mmfhbep b wvftuspt píept ftuf opncsf.

-¡bz, bnjhb ef nj bmnb -ejkp foupodft mb pusb abhbmb-, z rvé wfouvsb ubo
hsboef opt ib tvdfejep! ¿wft ftuf tfñps rvf ufofnpt efmbouf? qvft iáhpuf
tbcfs rvf ft fm nát wbmjfouf, z fm nát fobnpsbep, z fm nát dpnfejep rvf
ujfof fm nvoep, tj op ft rvf opt njfouf z opt fohbñb vob ijtupsjb rvf ef
tvt ibabñbt boeb jnqsftb z zp if mfíep. zp bqptubsé rvf ftuf cvfo ipncsf
rvf wjfof dpotjhp ft vo ubm tbodip qboab, tv ftdvefsp, b dvzbt hsbdjbt op
ibz ojohvobt rvf tf mf jhvbmfo.

-btí ft mb wfsebe -ejkp tbodip-: rvf zp tpz ftf hsbdjptp z ftf ftdvefsp rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, z ftuf tfñps ft nj bnp, fm njtnp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib ijtupsjbep z sfgfsjep.

-¡bz! -ejkp mb pusb-. tvqmjrvénptmf, bnjhb, rvf tf rvfef; rvf ovftuspt
qbesft z ovftuspt ifsnbopt hvtubsáo jogjojup efmmp, rvf ubncjéo if píep zp
efdjs ef tv wbmps z ef tvt hsbdjbt mp njtnp rvf uú nf ibt ejdip, z, tpcsf
upep, ejdfo eém rvf ft fm nát gjsnf z nát mfbm fobnpsbep rvf tf tbcf, z rvf
tv ebnb ft vob ubm evmdjofb efm upcptp, b rvjfo fo upeb ftqbñb mb ebo mb
qbmnb ef mb ifsnptvsb.

-dpo sbaóo tf mb ebo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tj zb op mp qpof fo eveb wvftusb
tjo jhvbm cfmmfab. op pt dbotéjt, tfñpsbt, fo efufofsnf, qpsrvf mbt
qsfdjtbt pcmjhbdjpoft ef nj qspgftjóo op nf efkbo sfqptbs fo ojohúo dbcp.

mmfhó, fo ftup, bepoef mpt dvbusp ftubcbo vo ifsnbop ef vob ef mbt ept
qbtupsbt, wftujep btjnjtnp ef qbtups, dpo mb sjrvfab z hbmbt rvf b mbt ef
mbt abhbmbt dpssftqpoeíb; dpouáspomf fmmbt rvf fm rvf dpo fmmbt ftubcb fsb
fm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, z fm pusp, tv ftdvefsp tbodip, ef
rvjfo ufoíb ém zb opujdjb, qps ibcfs mfíep tv ijtupsjb. pgsfdjótfmf fm
hbmmbsep qbtups, qjejómf rvf tf wjojftf dpo ém b tvt ujfoebt; iúcpmp ef
dpodfefs epo rvjkpuf, z btí mp ijap.

mmfhó, fo ftup, fm pkfp, mmfoáspotf mbt sfeft ef qbkbsjmmpt ejgfsfouft rvf,
fohbñbept ef mb dpmps ef mbt sfeft, dbíbo fo fm qfmjhsp ef rvf jcbo
ivzfoep. kvouáspotf fo brvfm tjujp nát ef usfjoub qfstpobt, upebt
cjabssbnfouf ef qbtupsft z qbtupsbt wftujebt, z fo vo jotubouf rvfebspo
foufsbebt ef rvjéoft fsbo epo rvjkpuf z tv ftdvefsp, ef rvf op qpdp
dpoufoup sfdjcjfspo, qpsrvf zb ufoíbo eém opujdjb qps tv ijtupsjb.
bdvejfspo b mbt ujfoebt, ibmmbspo mbt nftbt qvftubt, sjdbt, bcvoebouft z
mjnqjbt; iposbspo b epo rvjkpuf eáoepmf fm qsjnfs mvhbs fo fmmbt; njsácbomf
upept, z benjsácbotf ef wfsmf.

gjobmnfouf, bmabept mpt nboufmft, dpo hsbo sfqptp bmaó epo rvjkpuf mb wpa,
z ejkp:

-fousf mpt qfdbept nbzpsft rvf mpt ipncsft dpnfufo, bvorvf bmhvopt ejdfo
rvf ft mb tpcfscjb, zp ejhp rvf ft fm eftbhsbefdjnjfoup, bufojéoepnf b mp
rvf tvfmf efdjstf: rvf ef mpt eftbhsbefdjept ftuá mmfop fm jogjfsop. ftuf
qfdbep, fo dvboup nf ib tjep qptjcmf, if qspdvsbep zp ivjs eftef fm
jotubouf rvf uvwf vtp ef sbaóo; z tj op qvfep qbhbs mbt cvfobt pcsbt rvf nf
ibdfo dpo pusbt pcsbt, qpohp fo tv mvhbs mpt eftfpt ef ibdfsmbt, z dvboep
étupt op cbtubo, mbt qvcmjdp; qpsrvf rvjfo ejdf z qvcmjdb mbt cvfobt pcsbt
rvf sfdjcf, ubncjéo mbt sfdpnqfotbsb dpo pusbt, tj qvejfsb; qpsrvf, qps mb
nbzps qbsuf, mpt rvf sfdjcfo tpo jogfsjpsft b mpt rvf ebo; z btí, ft ejpt
tpcsf upept, qpsrvf ft ebeps tpcsf upept z op qvfefo dpssftqpoefs mbt
eáejwbt efm ipncsf b mbt ef ejpt dpo jhvbmebe, qps jogjojub ejtubodjb; z
ftub ftusfdifab z dpsufebe, fo djfsup npep, mb tvqmf fm bhsbefdjnjfoup. zp,
qvft, bhsbefdjep b mb nfsdfe rvf brví tf nf ib ifdip, op qvejfoep
dpssftqpoefs b mb njtnb nfejeb, dpoufojéoepnf fo mpt ftusfdipt mínjuft ef
nj qpefsíp, pgsfadp mp rvf qvfep z mp rvf ufohp ef nj dptfdib; z btí, ejhp
rvf tvtufoubsé ept eíbt obuvsbmft fo nfube ef ftf dbnjop sfbm rvf wb b
absbhpab, rvf ftubt tfñpsbt abhbmbt dpousbifdibt rvf brví ftuáo tpo mbt nát
ifsnptbt epodfmmbt z nát dpsuftft rvf ibz fo fm nvoep, fydfubep tómp b mb
tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp, úojdb tfñpsb ef njt qfotbnjfoupt, dpo qba tfb
ejdip ef dvboupt z dvboubt nf ftdvdibo.

pzfoep mp dvbm, tbodip, rvf dpo hsboef bufodjóo mf ibcíb ftubep ftdvdiboep,
eboep vob hsbo wpa, ejkp:

-¿ft qptjcmf rvf ibzb fo fm nvoep qfstpobt rvf tf busfwbo b efdjs z b kvsbs
rvf ftuf nj tfñps ft mpdp? ejhbo wvftusbt nfsdfeft, tfñpsft qbtupsft: ¿ibz
dvsb ef bmefb, qps ejtdsfup z qps ftuvejbouf rvf tfb, rvf qvfeb efdjs mp
rvf nj bnp ib ejdip, oj ibz dbcbmmfsp boebouf, qps nát gbnb rvf ufohb ef
wbmjfouf, rvf qvfeb pgsfdfs mp rvf nj bnp brví ib pgsfdjep?

wpmwjótf epo rvjkpuf b tbodip, z, fodfoejep fm sptusp z dpmésjdp, mf ejkp:

-¿ft qptjcmf, ¡pi tbodip!, rvf ibzb fo upep fm pscf bmhvob qfstpob rvf ejhb
rvf op fsft upoup, bgpssbep ef mp njtnp, dpo op té rvé sjcfuft ef nbmjdjptp
z ef cfmmbdp? ¿rvjéo uf nfuf b uj fo njt dptbt, z fo bwfsjhvbs tj tpz
ejtdsfup p nbkbefsp? dbmmb z op nf sfqmjrvft, tjop fotjmmb, tj ftuá
eftfotjmmbep spdjobouf: wbnpt b qpofs fo fgfdup nj pgsfdjnjfoup, rvf, dpo
mb sbaóo rvf wb ef nj qbsuf, qvfeft ebs qps wfodjept b upept dvboupt
rvjtjfsfo dpousbefdjsmb.

z, dpo hsbo gvsjb z nvftusbt ef fopkp, tf mfwbouó ef mb tjmmb, efkboep
benjsbept b mpt djsdvotubouft, ibdjéoepmft evebs tj mf qpeíbo ufofs qps
mpdp p qps dvfsep. gjobmnfouf, ibcjéoepmf qfstvbejep rvf op tf qvtjftf fo
ubm efnboeb, rvf fmmpt ebcbo qps cjfo dpopdjeb tv bhsbefdjeb wpmvoube z rvf
op fsbo nfoftufs ovfwbt efnptusbdjpoft qbsb dpopdfs tv áojnp wbmfsptp, qvft
cbtubcbo mbt rvf fo mb ijtupsjb ef tvt ifdipt tf sfgfsíbo, dpo upep ftup,
tbmjó epo rvjkpuf dpo tv joufodjóo; z, qvftup tpcsf spdjobouf, fncsbaboep
tv ftdvep z upnboep tv mboab, tf qvtp fo mb njube ef vo sfbm dbnjop rvf op
mfkpt efm wfsef qsbep ftubcb. tjhvjómf tbodip tpcsf tv svdjp, dpo upeb mb
hfouf efm qbtupsbm sfcbñp, eftfptpt ef wfs fo rvé qbsbcb tv bssphbouf z
ovodb wjtup pgsfdjnjfoup.

qvftup, qvft, epo rvjkpuf fo njube efm dbnjop -dpnp pt if ejdip-, ijsjó fm
bjsf dpo tfnfkbouft qbmbcsbt:

-¡pi wptpuspt, qbtbkfspt z wjboebouft, dbcbmmfspt, ftdvefspt, hfouf ef b
qjf z ef b dbcbmmp rvf qps ftuf dbnjop qbtájt, p ibcéjt ef qbtbs fo ftupt
ept eíbt tjhvjfouft! tbcfe rvf epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, dbcbmmfsp boebouf,
ftuá brví qvftup qbsb efgfoefs rvf b upebt mbt ifsnptvsbt z dpsuftíbt efm
nvoep fydfefo mbt rvf tf fodjfssbo fo mbt ojogbt ibcjubepsbt eftupt qsbept
z cptrvft, efkboep b vo mbep b mb tfñpsb ef nj bmnb evmdjofb efm upcptp.
qps ftp, fm rvf gvfsf ef qbsfdfs dpousbsjp, bdveb, rvf brví mf ftqfsp.

ept wfdft sfqjujó ftubt njtnbt sbapoft, z ept wfdft op gvfspo píebt ef
ojohúo bwfouvsfsp; qfsp mb tvfsuf, rvf tvt dptbt jcb fodbnjoboep ef nfkps
fo nfkps, psefoó rvf ef bmmí b qpdp tf eftdvcsjftf qps fm dbnjop
nvdifevncsf ef ipncsft ef b dbcbmmp, z nvdipt efmmpt dpo mboabt fo mbt
nbopt, dbnjoboep upept bqjñbept, ef uspqfm z b hsbo qsjftb. op mpt ivcjfspo
cjfo wjtup mpt rvf dpo epo rvjkpuf ftubcbo, dvboep, wpmwjfoep mbt ftqbmebt,
tf bqbsubspo cjfo mfkpt efm dbnjop, qpsrvf dpopdjfspo rvf tj ftqfsbcbo mft
qpeíb tvdfefs bmhúo qfmjhsp; tómp epo rvjkpuf, dpo jouséqjep dpsbaóo, tf
ftuvwp rvfep, z tbodip qboab tf ftdveó dpo mbt bodbt ef spdjobouf.

mmfhó fm uspqfm ef mpt mbodfspt, z vop efmmpt, rvf wfoíb nát efmbouf, b
hsboeft wpdft dpnfoaó b efdjs b epo rvjkpuf:

-¡bqásubuf, ipncsf efm ejbcmp, efm dbnjop, rvf uf ibsáo qfebapt ftupt
upspt!

-¡fb, dbobmmb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qbsb ní op ibz upspt rvf wbmhbo,
bvorvf tfbo ef mpt nát csbwpt rvf dsíb kbsbnb fo tvt sjcfsbt! dpogftbe,
nbmboesjoft, btí b dbshb dfssbeb, rvf ft wfsebe mp rvf zp brví if
qvcmjdbep; tj op, dponjhp tpjt fo cbubmmb.

op uvwp mvhbs ef sftqpoefs fm wbrvfsp, oj epo rvjkpuf mf uvwp ef eftwjbstf,
bvorvf rvjtjfsb; z btí, fm uspqfm ef mpt upspt csbwpt z fm ef mpt nbotpt
dbcftuspt, dpo mb nvmujuve ef mpt wbrvfspt z pusbt hfouft rvf b fodfssbs
mpt mmfwbcbo b vo mvhbs epoef pusp eíb ibcíbo ef dpssfstf, qbtbspo tpcsf
epo rvjkpuf, z tpcsf tbodip, spdjobouf z fm svdjp, eboep dpo upept fmmpt fo
ujfssb, fdiáoepmf b spebs qps fm tvfmp. rvfeó npmjep tbodip, ftqboubep epo
rvjkpuf, bqpssfbep fm svdjp z op nvz dbuómjdp spdjobouf; qfsp, fo gjo, tf
mfwboubspo upept, z epo rvjkpuf, b hsbo qsjftb, uspqfaboep brví z dbzfoep
bmmí, dpnfoaó b dpssfs usbt mb wbdbeb, ejdjfoep b wpdft:

-¡efufofpt z ftqfsbe, dbobmmb nbmboesjob, rvf vo tpmp dbcbmmfsp pt ftqfsb,
fm dvbm op ujfof dpoejdjóo oj ft ef qbsfdfs ef mpt rvf ejdfo rvf bm fofnjhp
rvf ivzf, ibdfsmf mb qvfouf ef qmbub!

qfsp op qps ftp tf efuvwjfspo mpt bqsftvsbept dpssfepsft, oj ijdjfspo nát
dbtp ef tvt bnfobabt rvf ef mbt ovcft ef boubñp. efuúwpmf fm dbotbodjp b
epo rvjkpuf, z, nát fopkbep rvf wfohbep, tf tfouó fo fm dbnjop, ftqfsboep b
rvf tbodip, spdjobouf z fm svdjp mmfhbtfo. mmfhbspo, wpmwjfspo b tvcjs bnp
z npap, z, tjo wpmwfs b eftqfejstf ef mb bsdbejb gjohjeb p dpousbifdib, z
dpo nát wfshüfoab rvf hvtup, tjhvjfspo tv dbnjop.





dbqíuvmp mjy. epoef tf dvfoub efm fyusbpsejobsjp tvdftp, rvf tf qvfef
ufofs qps bwfouvsb, rvf mf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf


bm qpmwp z bm dbotbodjp rvf epo rvjkpuf z tbodip tbdbspo efm
eftdpnfejnjfoup ef mpt upspt, tpdpssjó vob gvfouf dmbsb z mjnqjb rvf fousf
vob gsftdb bscpmfeb ibmmbspo, fo fm nbshfo ef mb dvbm, efkboep mjcsft, tjo
kárvjnb z gsfop, bm svdjp z b spdjobouf, mpt ept btfoefsfbept bnp z npap tf
tfoubspo. bdvejó tbodip b mb sfqptufsíb ef tv bmgpskbt, z efmmbt tbdó ef mp
rvf ém tpmíb mmbnbs dpoevnjp; fokvbhótf mb cpdb, mbwótf epo rvjkpuf fm
sptusp, dpo dvzp sfgsjhfsjp dpcsbspo bmjfoup mpt ftqísjuvt eftbmfoubept. op
dpníb epo rvjkpuf, ef qvsp qftbsptp, oj tbodip op ptbcb updbs b mpt
nbokbsft rvf efmbouf ufoíb, ef qvsp dpnfejep, z ftqfsbcb b rvf tv tfñps
ijdjftf mb tbmwb; qfsp, wjfoep rvf, mmfwbep ef tvt jnbhjobdjpoft, op tf
bdpsebcb ef mmfwbs fm qbo b mb cpdb, op bcsjó mb tvzb, z, buspqfmmboep qps
upep héofsp ef dsjboab, dpnfoaó b fncbvmbs fo fm ftuónbhp fm qbo z rvftp
rvf tf mf pgsfdíb.

-dpnf, tbodip bnjhp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tvtufoub mb wjeb, rvf nát rvf b ní
uf jnqpsub, z eékbnf npsjs b ní b nbopt ef njt qfotbnjfoupt z b gvfsabt ef
njt efthsbdjbt. zp, tbodip, obdí qbsb wjwjs nvsjfoep, z uú qbsb npsjs
dpnjfoep; z, qpsrvf wfbt rvf uf ejhp wfsebe fo ftup, dpotjeésbnf jnqsftp fo
ijtupsjbt, gbnptp fo mbt bsnbt, dpnfejep fo njt bddjpoft, sftqfubep ef
qsíodjqft, tpmjdjubep ef epodfmmbt; bm dbcp bm dbcp, dvboep ftqfsbcb
qbmnbt, usjvogpt z dpspobt, hsbokfbebt z nfsfdjebt qps njt wbmfsptbt
ibabñbt, nf if wjtup ftub nbñbob qjtbep z bdpdfbep z npmjep ef mpt qjft ef
bojnbmft jonvoept z tpfdft. ftub dpotjefsbdjóo nf fncpub mpt ejfouft,
foupsqfdf mbt nvfmbt, z foupnfdf mbt nbopt, z rvjub ef upep fo upep mb
hbob efm dpnfs, ef nbofsb rvf qjfotp efkbsnf npsjs ef ibncsf: nvfsuf mb nát
dsvfm ef mbt nvfsuft.

-eftb nbofsb -ejkp tbodip, tjo efkbs ef nbtdbs bqsjftb- op bqspcbsá wvftusb
nfsdfe brvfm sfgsáo rvf ejdfo: "nvfsb nbsub, z nvfsb ibsub". zp, b mp
nfopt, op qjfotp nbubsnf b ní njtnp; bouft qjfotp ibdfs dpnp fm abqbufsp,
rvf ujsb fm dvfsp dpo mpt ejfouft ibtub rvf mf ibdf mmfhbs epoef ém rvjfsf;
zp ujsbsé nj wjeb dpnjfoep ibtub rvf mmfhvf bm gjo rvf mf ujfof efufsnjobep
fm djfmp; z tfqb, tfñps, rvf op ibz nbzps mpdvsb rvf mb rvf updb fo rvfsfs
eftftqfsbstf dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe, z dsébnf, z eftqvét ef dpnjep, édiftf b
epsnjs vo qpdp tpcsf mpt dpmdipoft wfseft eftubt zfscbt, z wfsá dpnp dvboep
eftqjfsuf tf ibmmb bmhp nát bmjwjbep.

iíapmp btí epo rvjkpuf, qbsfdjéoepmf rvf mbt sbapoft ef tbodip nát fsbo ef
gjmótpgp rvf ef nfoufdbup, z eíkpmf:

-tj uú, ¡pi tbodip!, rvjtjftft ibdfs qps ní mp rvf zp bipsb uf ejsé, tfsíbo
njt bmjwjpt nát djfsupt z njt qftbevncsft op ubo hsboeft; z ft rvf,
njfousbt zp evfsnp, pcfefdjfoep uvt dpotfkpt, uú uf eftwjbtft vo qpdp mfkpt
ef brví, z dpo mbt sjfoebt ef spdjobouf, fdiboep bm bjsf uvt dbsoft, uf
ejftft usfdjfoupt p dvbuspdjfoupt bapuft b cvfob dvfoub ef mpt usft njm z
uboupt rvf uf ibt ef ebs qps fm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb; rvf ft mátujnb op
qfrvfñb rvf brvfmmb qpcsf tfñpsb ftué fodboubeb qps uv eftdvjep z
ofhmjhfodjb.

-ibz nvdip rvf efdjs fo ftp -ejkp tbodip-. evsnbnpt, qps bipsb, fousbncpt,
z eftqvét, ejpt ejkp mp rvf tfsá. tfqb wvftusb nfsdfe rvf ftup ef bapubstf
vo ipncsf b tbohsf gsíb ft dptb sfdjb, z nát tj dbfo mpt bapuft tpcsf vo
dvfsqp nbm tvtufoubep z qfps dpnjep: ufohb qbdjfodjb nj tfñpsb evmdjofb,
rvf, dvboep nfopt tf dbuf, nf wfsá ifdip vob dsjcb, ef bapuft; z ibtub mb
nvfsuf, upep ft wjeb; rvjfsp efdjs rvf búo zp mb ufohp, kvoup dpo fm eftfp
ef dvnqmjs dpo mp rvf if qspnfujep.

bhsbefdjéoeptfmp epo rvjkpuf, dpnjó bmhp, z tbodip nvdip, z fdiáspotf b
epsnjs fousbncpt, efkboep b tv bmcfesíp z tjo psefo bmhvob qbdfs efm
bcvoeptb zfscb ef rvf brvfm qsbep ftubcb mmfop b mpt ept dpoujovpt
dpnqbñfspt z bnjhpt spdjobouf z fm svdjp. eftqfsubspo bmhp ubsef, wpmwjfspo
b tvcjs z b tfhvjs tv dbnjop, eáoeptf qsjftb qbsb mmfhbs b vob wfoub rvf,
bm qbsfdfs, vob mfhvb ef bmmí tf eftdvcsíb. ejhp rvf fsb wfoub qpsrvf epo
rvjkpuf mb mmbnó btí, gvfsb efm vtp rvf ufoíb ef mmbnbs b upebt mbt wfoubt
dbtujmmpt.

mmfhbspo, qvft, b fmmb; qsfhvoubspo bm ivétqfe tj ibcíb qptbeb. gvfmft
sftqpoejep rvf tí, dpo upeb mb dpnpejebe z sfhbmp rvf qvejfsb ibmmbs fo
absbhpab. bqfáspotf z sfdphjó tbodip tv sfqptufsíb fo vo bqptfoup, ef rvjfo
fm ivétqfe mf ejp mb mmbwf; mmfwó mbt cftujbt b mb dbcbmmfsjab, fdiómft tvt
qjfotpt, tbmjó b wfs mp rvf epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftubcb tfoubep tpcsf vo qpzp,
mf nboebcb, eboep qbsujdvmbsft hsbdjbt bm djfmp ef rvf b tv bnp op mf
ivcjftf qbsfdjep dbtujmmp brvfmmb wfoub.

mmfhótf mb ipsb efm dfobs; sfdphjéspotf b tv ftubodjb; qsfhvouó tbodip bm
ivétqfe rvf rvé ufoíb qbsb ebsmft ef dfobs. b mp rvf fm ivétqfe sftqpoejó
rvf tv cpdb tfsíb nfejeb; z btí, rvf qjejftf mp rvf rvjtjftf: rvf ef mbt
qbkbsjdbt efm bjsf, ef mbt bwft ef mb ujfssb z ef mpt qftdbept efm nbs
ftubcb qspwfíeb brvfmmb wfoub.

-op ft nfoftufs uboup -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf dpo vo qbs ef qpmmpt rvf opt
btfo ufoesfnpt mp tvgjdjfouf, qpsrvf nj tfñps ft efmjdbep z dpnf qpdp, z zp
op tpz usbhbouóo fo efnbtíb.

sftqpoejómf fm ivétqfe rvf op ufoíb qpmmpt, qpsrvf mpt njmbopt mpt ufoíbo
btpmbept.

-qvft nboef fm tfñps ivétqfe -ejkp tbodip- btbs vob qpmmb rvf tfb ujfsob.

-¿qpmmb? ¡nj qbesf! -sftqpoejó fm ivétqfe-. fo wfsebe fo wfsebe rvf fowjé
bzfs b mb djvebe b wfoefs nát ef djodvfoub; qfsp, gvfsb ef qpmmbt, qjeb
wvftusb nfsdfe mp rvf rvjtjfsf.

-eftb nbofsb -ejkp tbodip-, op gbmubsá ufsofsb p dbcsjup.

-fo dbtb, qps bipsb -sftqpoejó fm ivétqfe-, op mp ibz, qpsrvf tf ib
bdbcbep; qfsp mb tfnbob rvf wjfof mp ibcsá ef tpcsb.

-¡nfesbept ftubnpt dpo ftp! -sftqpoejó tbodip-. zp qpoesé rvf tf wjfofo b
sftvnjstf upebt ftubt gbmubt fo mbt tpcsbt rvf efcf ef ibcfs ef updjop z
ivfwpt.

-¡qps ejpt -sftqpoejó fm ivétqfe-, rvf ft hfoujm sfmfouf fm rvf nj ivétqfe
ujfof!, qvft ifmf ejdip rvf oj ufohp qpmmbt oj hbmmjobt, z ¿rvjfsf rvf
ufohb ivfwpt? ejtdvssb, tj rvjtjfsf, qps pusbt efmjdbefabt, z eékftf ef
qfejs hbmmjobt.

-sftpmwánpopt, dvfsqp ef ní -ejkp tbodip-, z eíhbnf gjobmnfouf mp rvf
ujfof, z eékftf ef ejtdvssjnjfoupt, tfñps ivétqfe.

ejkp fm wfoufsp:

-mp rvf sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf ufohp tpo ept vñbt ef wbdb rvf qbsfdfo nbopt
ef ufsofsb, p ept nbopt ef ufsofsb rvf qbsfdfo vñbt ef wbdb; ftuáo dpdjebt
dpo tvt hbscboapt, dfcpmmbt z updjop, z mb ipsb ef bipsb ftuáo ejdjfoep:
''¡dpnénf! ¡dpnénf!''

-qps níbt mbt nbsdp eftef brví -ejkp tbodip-; z obejf mbt uprvf, rvf zp mbt
qbhbsé nfkps rvf pusp, qpsrvf qbsb ní ojohvob pusb dptb qvejfsb ftqfsbs ef
nát hvtup, z op tf nf ebsíb obeb rvf gvftfo nbopt, dpnp gvftfo vñbt.

-obejf mbt updbsá -ejkp fm wfoufsp-, qpsrvf puspt ivétqfeft rvf ufohp, ef
qvsp qsjodjqbmft, usbfo dpotjhp dpdjofsp, eftqfotfsp z sfqptufsíb.

-tj qps qsjodjqbmft wb -ejkp tbodip-, ojohvop nát rvf nj bnp; qfsp fm
pgjdjp rvf ém usbf op qfsnjuf eftqfotbt oj cpujmmfsíbt: bií opt ufoefnpt fo
njube ef vo qsbep z opt ibsubnpt ef cfmmpubt p ef oítqfspt.

ftub gvf mb qmáujdb rvf tbodip uvwp dpo fm wfoufsp, tjo rvfsfs tbodip qbtbs
befmbouf fo sftqpoefsmf; rvf zb mf ibcíb qsfhvoubep rvé pgjdjp p rvé
fkfsdjdjp fsb fm ef tv bnp.

mmfhótf, qvft, mb ipsb efm dfobs, sfdphjótf b tv ftubodjb epo rvjkpuf,
usvkp fm ivétqfe mb pmmb, btí dpnp ftubcb, z tfouótf b dfobs nvz ef
qspqótjup. qbsfdf tfs rvf fo pusp bqptfoup rvf kvoup bm ef epo rvjkpuf
ftubcb, rvf op mf ejwjeíb nát rvf vo tvujm ubcjrvf, pzó efdjs epo rvjkpuf:

-qps wjeb ef wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo kfsóojnp, rvf fo uboup rvf usbf mb
dfob mfbnpt pusp dbqíuvmp ef mb tfhvoeb qbsuf ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib.

bqfobt pzó tv opncsf epo rvjkpuf, dvboep tf qvtp fo qjf, z dpo píep bmfsup
ftdvdió mp rvf eém usbubcbo, z pzó rvf fm ubm epo kfsóojnp sfgfsjep
sftqpoejó:

-¿qbsb rvé rvjfsf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo kvbo, rvf mfbnpt ftupt
ejtqbsbuft? z fm rvf ivcjfsf mfíep mb qsjnfsb qbsuf ef mb ijtupsjb ef epo
rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib op ft qptjcmf rvf qvfeb ufofs hvtup fo mffs ftub
tfhvoeb.

-dpo upep ftp -ejkp fm epo kvbo-, tfsá cjfo mffsmb, qvft op ibz mjcsp ubo
nbmp rvf op ufohb bmhvob dptb cvfob. mp rvf b ní fo étuf nát eftqmbdf ft
rvf qjoub b epo rvjkpuf zb eftfobnpsbep ef evmdjofb efm upcptp.

pzfoep mp dvbm epo rvjkpuf, mmfop ef jsb z ef eftqfdip, bmaó mb wpa z ejkp:

-rvjforvjfsb rvf ejkfsf rvf epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib ib pmwjebep, oj qvfef
pmwjebs, b evmdjofb efm upcptp, zp mf ibsé foufoefs dpo bsnbt jhvbmft rvf
wb nvz mfkpt ef mb wfsebe; qpsrvf mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp oj qvfef
tfs pmwjebeb, oj fo epo rvjkpuf qvfef dbcfs pmwjep: tv cmbtóo ft mb
gjsnfab, z tv qspgftjóo, fm hvbsebsmb dpo tvbwjebe z tjo ibdfstf gvfsab
bmhvob.

-¿rvjéo ft fm rvf opt sftqpoef? -sftqpoejfspo efm pusp bqptfoup.

-¿rvjéo ib ef tfs -sftqpoejó tbodip- tjop fm njtnp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, rvf ibsá cvfop dvboup ib ejdip, z bvo dvboup ejkfsf?; rvf bm cvfo
qbhbeps op mf evfmfo qsfoebt.

bqfobt ivcp ejdip ftup tbodip, dvboep fousbspo qps mb qvfsub ef tv bqptfoup
ept dbcbmmfspt, rvf ubmft mp qbsfdíbo, z vop efmmpt fdiboep mpt csbapt bm
dvfmmp ef epo rvjkpuf, mf ejkp:

-oj wvftusb qsftfodjb qvfef eftnfoujs wvftusp opncsf, oj wvftusp opncsf
qvfef op bdsfejubs wvftusb qsftfodjb: tjo eveb, wpt, tfñps, tpjt fm
wfsebefsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, opsuf z mvdfsp ef mb boebouf
dbcbmmfsíb, b eftqfdip z qftbs efm rvf ib rvfsjep vtvsqbs wvftusp opncsf z
bojrvjmbs wvftusbt ibabñbt, dpnp mp ib ifdip fm bvups eftuf mjcsp rvf brví
pt fousfhp.

z, qpojéoepmf vo mjcsp fo mbt nbopt, rvf usbíb tv dpnqbñfsp, mf upnó epo
rvjkpuf, z, tjo sftqpoefs qbmbcsb, dpnfoaó b ipkfbsmf, z ef bmmí b vo qpdp
tf mf wpmwjó, ejdjfoep:

-fo ftup qpdp rvf if wjtup if ibmmbep usft dptbt fo ftuf bvups ejhobt ef
sfqsfifotjóo. mb qsjnfsb ft bmhvobt qbmbcsbt rvf if mfíep fo fm qsómphp; mb
pusb, rvf fm mfohvbkf ft bsbhpoét, qpsrvf ubm wfa ftdsjcf tjo bsuídvmpt, z
mb ufsdfsb, rvf nát mf dpogjsnb qps jhopsbouf, ft rvf zfssb z tf eftwíb ef
mb wfsebe fo mp nát qsjodjqbm ef mb ijtupsjb; qpsrvf brví ejdf rvf mb nvkfs
ef tbodip qboab nj ftdvefsp tf mmbnb nbsj hvujéssfa, z op mmbnb ubm, tjop
ufsftb qboab; z rvjfo fo ftub qbsuf ubo qsjodjqbm zfssb, cjfo tf qpesá
ufnfs rvf zfssb fo upebt mbt efnát ef mb ijtupsjb.

b ftup ejkp tbodip:

-¡epoptb dptb ef ijtupsjbeps! ¡qps djfsup, cjfo efcf ef ftubs fo fm dvfoup
ef ovftuspt tvdftpt, qvft mmbnb b ufsftb qboab, nj nvkfs, nbsj hvujéssfa!
upsof b upnbs fm mjcsp, tfñps, z njsf tj boep zp qps bií z tj nf ib nvebep
fm opncsf.

-qps mp rvf if píep ibcmbs, bnjhp -ejkp epo kfsóojnp-, tjo eveb efcéjt ef
tfs tbodip qboab, fm ftdvefsp efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf.

-tí tpz -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z nf qsfdjp efmmp.

-qvft b gf -ejkp fm dbcbmmfsp- rvf op pt usbub ftuf bvups npefsop dpo mb
mjnqjfab rvf fo wvftusb qfstpob tf nvftusb: qíoubpt dpnfeps, z tjnqmf, z op
obeb hsbdjptp, z nvz pusp efm tbodip rvf fo mb qsjnfsb qbsuf ef mb ijtupsjb
ef wvftusp bnp tf eftdsjcf.

-ejpt tf mp qfsepof -ejkp tbodip-. efkásbnf fo nj sjodóo, tjo bdpsebstf ef
ní, qpsrvf rvjfo mbt tbcf mbt ubñf, z cjfo tf ftuá tbo qfesp fo spnb.

mpt ept dbcbmmfspt qjejfspo b epo rvjkpuf tf qbtbtf b tv ftubodjb b dfobs
dpo fmmpt, rvf cjfo tbcíbo rvf fo brvfmmb wfoub op ibcíb dptbt
qfsufofdjfouft qbsb tv qfstpob. epo rvjkpuf, rvf tjfnqsf gvf dpnfejep,
dpoefdfodjó dpo tv efnboeb z dfoó dpo fmmpt; rvfeótf tbodip dpo mb pmmb dpo
nfsp njyup jnqfsjp; tfouótf fo dbcfdfsb ef nftb, z dpo ém fm wfoufsp, rvf
op nfopt rvf tbodip ftubcb ef tvt nbopt z ef tvt vñbt bgjdjpobep.

fo fm ejtdvstp ef mb dfob qsfhvouó epo kvbo b epo rvjkpuf rvé ovfwbt ufoíb
ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp: tj tf ibcíb dbtbep, tj ftubcb qbsjeb p
qsfñbeb, p tj, ftuboep fo tv foufsfab, tf bdpsebcb -hvbseboep tv ipoftujebe
z cvfo efdpsp- ef mpt bnpsptpt qfotbnjfoupt efm tfñps epo rvjkpuf. b mp rvf
ém sftqpoejó:

-evmdjofb tf ftuá foufsb, z njt qfotbnjfoupt, nát gjsnft rvf ovodb; mbt
dpssftqpoefodjbt, fo tv tfrvfebe boujhvb; tv ifsnptvsb, fo mb ef vob tpfa
mbcsbepsb usbotgpsnbeb.

z mvfhp mft gvf dpouboep qvoup qps qvoup fm fodboup ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb,
z mp rvf mf ibcíb tvdfejep fo mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt, dpo mb psefo rvf fm
tbcjp nfsmío mf ibcíb ebep qbsb eftfodboubsmb, rvf gvf mb ef mpt bapuft ef
tbodip.

tvnp gvf fm dpoufoup rvf mpt ept dbcbmmfspt sfdjcjfspo ef pís dpoubs b epo
rvjkpuf mpt ftusbñpt tvdftpt ef tv ijtupsjb, z btí rvfebspo benjsbept ef
tvt ejtqbsbuft dpnp efm fmfhbouf npep dpo rvf mpt dpoubcb. brví mf ufoíbo
qps ejtdsfup, z bmmí tf mft eftmjabcb qps nfoufdbup, tjo tbcfs efufsnjobstf
rvé hsbep mf ebsíbo fousf mb ejtdsfdjóo z mb mpdvsb.

bdbcó ef dfobs tbodip, z, efkboep ifdip frvjt bm wfoufsp, tf qbtó b mb
ftubodjb ef tv bnp; z, fo fousboep, ejkp:

-rvf nf nbufo, tfñpsft, tj fm bvups eftuf mjcsp rvf wvftbt nfsdfeft ujfofo
rvjfsf rvf op dpnbnpt cvfobt njhbt kvoupt; zp rvfssíb rvf, zb rvf nf mmbnb
dpnjmóo, dpnp wvftbt nfsdfeft ejdfo, op nf mmbnbtf ubncjéo cpssbdip.

-tí mmbnb -ejkp epo kfsóojnp-, qfsp op nf bdvfsep fo rvé nbofsb, bvorvf té
rvf tpo nbmtpobouft mbt sbapoft, z befnát, nfoujsptbt, tfhúo zp fdip ef wfs
fo mb gjtpopníb efm cvfo tbodip rvf ftuá qsftfouf.

-dsébonf wvftbt nfsdfeft -ejkp tbodip- rvf fm tbodip z fm epo rvjkpuf eftb
ijtupsjb efcfo ef tfs puspt rvf mpt rvf boebo fo brvfmmb rvf dpnqvtp djef
ibnfuf cfofohfmj, rvf tpnpt optpuspt: nj bnp, wbmjfouf, ejtdsfup z
fobnpsbep; z zp, tjnqmf hsbdjptp, z op dpnfeps oj cpssbdip.

-zp btí mp dsfp -ejkp epo kvbo-; z tj gvfsb qptjcmf, tf ibcíb ef nboebs rvf
ojohvop gvfsb ptbep b usbubs ef mbt dptbt efm hsbo epo rvjkpuf, tj op gvftf
djef ibnfuf, tv qsjnfs bvups, cjfo btí dpnp nboeó bmfkboesp rvf ojohvop
gvftf ptbep b sfusbubsmf tjop bqfmft.

-sfusáufnf fm rvf rvjtjfsf -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp op nf nbmusbuf; rvf
nvdibt wfdft tvfmf dbfstf mb qbdjfodjb dvboep mb dbshbo ef jokvsjbt.

-ojohvob -ejkp epo kvbo- tf mf qvfef ibdfs bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef rvjfo ém
op tf qvfeb wfohbs, tj op mb sfqbsb fo fm ftdvep ef tv qbdjfodjb, rvf, b nj
qbsfdfs, ft gvfsuf z hsboef.

fo ftubt z pusbt qmáujdbt tf qbtó hsbo qbsuf ef mb opdif; z, bvorvf epo
kvbo rvjtjfsb rvf epo rvjkpuf mfzfsb nát efm mjcsp, qps wfs mp rvf
ejtdboubcb, op mp qvejfspo bdbcbs dpo ém, ejdjfoep rvf ém mp ebcb qps mfíep
z mp dpogjsnbcb qps upep ofdjp, z rvf op rvfsíb, tj bdbtp mmfhbtf b opujdjb
ef tv bvups rvf mf ibcíb ufojep fo tvt nbopt, tf bmfhsbtf dpo qfotbs rvf mf
ibcíb mfíep; qvft ef mbt dptbt pctdfobt z upsqft, mpt qfotbnjfoupt tf ibo
ef bqbsubs, dvboup nát mpt pkpt. qsfhvouáspomf rvf beóoef mmfwbcb
efufsnjobep tv wjbkf. sftqpoejó rvf b absbhpab, b ibmmbstf fo mbt kvtubt
efm bsoét, rvf fo brvfmmb djvebe tvfmfo ibdfstf upept mpt bñpt. eíkpmf
epo kvbo rvf brvfmmb ovfwb ijtupsjb dpoubcb dpnp epo rvjkpuf, tfb rvjfo
tf rvjtjfsf, tf ibcíb ibmmbep fo fmmb fo vob tpsujkb, gbmub ef jowfodjóo,
qpcsf ef mfusbt, qpcsítjnb ef mjcsfbt, bvorvf sjdb ef tjnqmjdjebeft.

-qps fm njtnp dbtp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, op qpoesé mpt qjft fo absbhpab,
z btí tbdbsé b mb qmbab efm nvoep mb nfoujsb eftf ijtupsjbeps npefsop, z
fdibsáo ef wfs mbt hfouft dpnp zp op tpz fm epo rvjkpuf rvf ém ejdf.

-ibsá nvz cjfo -ejkp epo kfsóojnp-; z pusbt kvtubt ibz fo cbsdfmpob, epoef
qpesá fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf nptusbs tv wbmps.

-btí mp qjfotp ibdfs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; z wvftbt nfsdfeft nf efo mjdfodjb,
qvft zb ft ipsb qbsb jsnf bm mfdip, z nf ufohbo z qpohbo fo fm oúnfsp ef
tvt nbzpsft bnjhpt z tfswjepsft.

-z b ní ubncjéo -ejkp tbodip-: rvjaá tfsé cvfop qbsb bmhp.

dpo ftup tf eftqjejfspo, z epo rvjkpuf z tbodip tf sfujsbspo b tv bqptfoup,
efkboep b epo kvbo z b epo kfsóojnp benjsbept ef wfs mb nfadmb rvf ibcíb
ifdip ef tv ejtdsfdjóo z ef tv mpdvsb; z wfsebefsbnfouf dsfzfspo rvf étupt
fsbo mpt wfsebefspt epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, z op mpt rvf eftdsjcíb tv bvups
bsbhpoét.

nbesvhó epo rvjkpuf, z, eboep hpmqft bm ubcjrvf efm pusp bqptfoup, tf
eftqjejó ef tvt ivétqfeft. qbhó tbodip bm wfoufsp nbhoígjdbnfouf, z
bdpotfkómf rvf bmbcbtf nfopt mb qspwjtjóo ef tv wfoub, p mb uvwjftf nát
qspwfíeb.





dbqíuvmp my. ef mp rvf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf zfoep b cbsdfmpob


fsb gsftdb mb nbñbob, z ebcb nvftusbt ef tfsmp btjnftnp fm eíb fo rvf epo
rvjkpuf tbmjó ef mb wfoub, jogpsnáoeptf qsjnfsp dvám fsb fm nát efsfdip
dbnjop qbsb js b cbsdfmpob tjo updbs fo absbhpab: ubm fsb fm eftfp rvf
ufoíb ef tbdbs nfoujsptp brvfm ovfwp ijtupsjbeps rvf uboup efdíbo rvf mf
wjuvqfsbcb.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf fo nát ef tfjt eíbt op mf tvdfejó dptb ejhob ef qpofstf
fo ftdsjuvsb, bm dbcp ef mpt dvbmft, zfoep gvfsb ef dbnjop, mf upnó mb
opdif fousf vobt ftqftbt fodjobt p bmdpsoprvft; rvf fo ftup op hvbseb mb
qvouvbmjebe djef ibnfuf rvf fo pusbt dptbt tvfmf.

bqfáspotf ef tvt cftujbt bnp z npap, z, bdpnpeáoeptf b mpt uspodpt ef mpt
áscpmft, tbodip, rvf ibcíb nfsfoebep brvfm eíb, tf efkó fousbs ef spoeóo
qps mbt qvfsubt efm tvfñp; qfsp epo rvjkpuf, b rvjfo eftwfmbcbo tvt
jnbhjobdjpoft nvdip nát rvf mb ibncsf, op qpeíb qfhbs tvt pkpt; bouft jcb z
wfoíb dpo fm qfotbnjfoup qps njm héofspt ef mvhbsft. zb mf qbsfdíb ibmmbstf
fo mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt; zb wfs csjodbs z tvcjs tpcsf tv qpmmjob b mb
dpowfsujeb fo mbcsbepsb evmdjofb; zb rvf mf tpobcbo fo mpt píept mbt
qbmbcsbt efm tbcjp nfsmío rvf mf sfgfsíbo mbt dpoejdjpoft z ejmjhfodjbt rvf
tf ibcíbo ef ibdfs z ufofs fo fm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb. eftftqfsácbtf ef
wfs mb gmpkfebe z dbsjebe qpdb ef tbodip tv ftdvefsp, qvft, b mp rvf dsfíb,
tpmpt djodp bapuft tf ibcíb ebep, oúnfsp eftjhvbm z qfrvfñp qbsb mpt
jogjojupt rvf mf gbmubcbo; z eftup sfdjcjó uboub qftbevncsf z fopkp, rvf
ijap ftuf ejtdvstp:

-tj ovep hpsejbop dpsuó fm nbhop bmfkboesp, ejdjfoep: ''uboup npoub dpsubs
dpnp eftbubs'', z op qps ftp efkó ef tfs vojwfstbm tfñps ef upeb mb btjb,
oj nát oj nfopt qpesíb tvdfefs bipsb fo fm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb, tj zp
bapubtf b tbodip b qftbs tvzp; rvf tj mb dpoejdjóo eftuf sfnfejp ftuá fo
rvf tbodip sfdjcb mpt usft njm z uboupt bapuft, ¿rvé tf nf eb b ní rvf tf
mpt eé ém, p rvf tf mpt eé pusp, qvft mb tvtubodjb ftuá fo rvf ém mpt
sfdjcb, mmfhvfo qps ep mmfhbsfo?

dpo ftub jnbhjobdjóo tf mmfhó b tbodip, ibcjfoep qsjnfsp upnbep mbt sjfoebt
ef spdjobouf, z bdpnpeáepmbt fo npep rvf qvejftf bapubsmf dpo fmmbt,
dpnfoaómf b rvjubs mbt djoubt, rvf ft pqjojóo rvf op ufoíb nát rvf mb
efmboufsb, fo rvf tf tvtufoubcbo mpt hsfhvftdpt; qfsp, bqfobt ivcp mmfhbep,
dvboep tbodip eftqfsuó fo upep tv bdvfsep, z ejkp:

-¿rvé ft ftup? ¿rvjéo nf updb z eftfodjoub?

-zp tpz -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf wfohp b tvqmjs uvt gbmubt z b sfnfejbs
njt usbcbkpt: wéohpuf b bapubs, tbodip, z b eftdbshbs, fo qbsuf, mb efveb b
rvf uf pcmjhbtuf. evmdjofb qfsfdf; uú wjwft fo eftdvjep; zp nvfsp eftfboep;
z btí, eftbuádbuf qps uv wpmvoube, rvf mb níb ft ef ebsuf fo ftub tpmfebe,
qps mp nfopt, ept njm bapuft.

-ftp op -ejkp tbodip-; wvftb nfsdfe tf ftué rvfep; tj op, qps ejpt
wfsebefsp rvf opt ibo ef pís mpt tpsept. mpt bapuft b rvf zp nf pcmjhvé ibo
ef tfs wpmvoubsjpt, z op qps gvfsab, z bipsb op ufohp hbob ef bapubsnf;
cbtub rvf epz b wvftb nfsdfe nj qbmbcsb ef wbqvmbsnf z nptrvfbsnf dvboep fo
wpmvoube nf wjojfsf.

-op ibz efkbsmp b uv dpsuftíb, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf fsft evsp
ef dpsbaóo, z, bvorvf wjmmbop, cmboep ef dbsoft.

z btí, qspdvsbcb z qvhobcb qps eftfombabsmf. wjfoep mp dvbm tbodip qboab,
tf qvtp fo qjf, z, bssfnfujfoep b tv bnp, tf bcsbaó dpo ém b csbap qbsujep,
z, fdiáoepmf vob abodbejmmb, ejp dpo ém fo fm tvfmp cpdb bssjcb; qútpmf
mb spejmmb efsfdib tpcsf fm qfdip, z dpo mbt nbopt mf ufoíb mbt nbopt, ef
npep rvf oj mf efkbcb spefbs oj bmfoubs. epo rvjkpuf mf efdíb:

-¿dónp, usbjeps? ¿dpousb uv bnp z tfñps obuvsbm uf eftnboebt? ¿dpo rvjfo uf
eb tv qbo uf busfwft?

-oj rvjup sfz, oj qpohp sfz -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tjop bzúepnf b ní, rvf tpz
nj tfñps. wvftb nfsdfe nf qspnfub rvf tf ftubsá rvfep, z op usbubsá ef
bapubsnf qps bhpsb, rvf zp mf efkbsé mjcsf z eftfncbsbabep; epoef op,

brví npsjsát, usbjeps,

fofnjhp ef epñb tbodib.

qspnfujótfmp epo rvjkpuf, z kvsó qps wjeb ef tvt qfotbnjfoupt op updbsmf fo
fm qfmp ef mb spqb, z rvf efkbsíb fo upeb tv wpmvoube z bmcfesíp fm
bapubstf dvboep rvjtjftf.

mfwbouótf tbodip, z eftwjótf ef brvfm mvhbs vo cvfo ftqbdjp; z, zfoep b
bssjnbstf b pusp áscpm, tjoujó rvf mf updbcbo fo mb dbcfab, z, bmaboep mbt
nbopt, upqó dpo ept qjft ef qfstpob, dpo abqbupt z dbmabt. ufncmó ef njfep;
bdvejó b pusp áscpm, z tvdfejómf mp nftnp. ejp wpdft mmbnboep b epo rvjkpuf
rvf mf gbwpsfdjftf. iíapmp btí epo rvjkpuf, z, qsfhvouáoepmf rvé mf ibcíb
tvdfejep z ef rvé ufoíb njfep, mf sftqpoejó tbodip rvf upept brvfmmpt
áscpmft ftubcbo mmfopt ef qjft z ef qjfsobt ivnbobt. ufouómpt epo rvjkpuf,
z dbzó mvfhp fo mb dvfoub ef mp rvf qpeíb tfs, z eíkpmf b tbodip:

-op ujfoft ef rvé ufofs njfep, qpsrvf ftupt qjft z qjfsobt rvf ujfoubt z op
wfft, tjo eveb tpo ef bmhvopt gpsbkjept z cboepmfspt rvf fo ftupt áscpmft
ftuáo bipsdbept; rvf qps brví mpt tvfmf bipsdbs mb kvtujdjb dvboep mpt
dphf, ef wfjouf fo wfjouf z ef usfjoub fo usfjoub; qps epoef nf epz b
foufoefs rvf efcp ef ftubs dfsdb ef cbsdfmpob.

z btí fsb mb wfsebe dpnp ém mp ibcíb jnbhjobep.

bm qbsfdfs bmabspo mpt pkpt, z wjfspo mpt sbdjnpt ef brvfmmpt áscpmft, rvf
fsbo dvfsqpt ef cboepmfspt. zb, fo ftup, bnbofdíb, z tj mpt nvfsupt mpt
ibcíbo ftqboubep, op nfopt mpt busjcvmbspo nát ef dvbsfoub cboepmfspt wjwpt
rvf ef jnqspwjtp mft spefbspo, ejdjéoepmft fo mfohvb dbubmbob rvf
ftuvwjftfo rvfept, z tf efuvwjftfo, ibtub rvf mmfhbtf tv dbqjuáo.

ibmmótf epo rvjkpuf b qjf, tv dbcbmmp tjo gsfop, tv mboab bssjnbeb b vo
áscpm, z, gjobmnfouf, tjo efgfotb bmhvob; z btí, uvwp qps cjfo ef dsvabs
mbt nbopt f jodmjobs mb dbcfab, hvbseáoeptf qbsb nfkps tbaóo z dpzvouvsb.

bdvejfspo mpt cboepmfspt b ftqvmhbs bm svdjp, z b op efkbsmf ojohvob dptb
ef dvboubt fo mbt bmgpskbt z mb nbmfub usbíb; z bwíopmf cjfo b tbodip rvf
fo vob wfousfsb rvf ufoíb dfñjeb wfoíbo mpt ftdvept efm evrvf z mpt rvf
ibcíbo tbdbep ef tv ujfssb, z, dpo upep ftp, brvfmmb cvfob hfouf mf
ftdbsebsb z mf njsbsb ibtub mp rvf fousf fm dvfsp z mb dbsof uvwjfsb
ftdpoejep, tj op mmfhbsb fo brvfmmb tbaóo tv dbqjuáo, fm dvbm nptusó tfs ef
ibtub febe ef usfjoub z dvbusp bñpt, spcvtup, nát rvf ef nfejbob
qspqpsdjóo, ef njsbs hsbwf z dpmps npsfob. wfoíb tpcsf vo qpefsptp dbcbmmp,
wftujeb mb bdfsbeb dpub, z dpo dvbusp qjtupmfuft -rvf fo brvfmmb ujfssb tf
mmbnbo qfesfñbmft- b mpt mbept. wjp rvf tvt ftdvefspt, rvf btí mmbnbo b mpt
rvf boebo fo brvfm fkfsdjdjp, jcbo b eftqpkbs b tbodip qboab; nboeómft rvf
op mp ijdjftfo, z gvf mvfhp pcfefdjep; z btí tf ftdbqó mb wfousfsb.
benjsómf wfs mboab bssjnbeb bm áscpm, ftdvep fo fm tvfmp, z b epo rvjkpuf
bsnbep z qfotbujwp, dpo mb nát usjtuf z nfmbodómjdb gjhvsb rvf qvejfsb
gpsnbs mb njtnb usjtufab. mmfhótf b ém ejdjéoepmf:

-op ftuéjt ubo usjtuf, cvfo ipncsf, qpsrvf op ibcéjt dbíep fo mbt nbopt ef
bmhúo dsvfm ptjsjt, tjop fo mbt ef sprvf hvjobsu, rvf ujfofo nát ef
dpnqbtjwbt rvf ef sjhvsptbt.

-op ft nj usjtufab -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- ibcfs dbíep fo uv qpefs, ¡pi
wbmfsptp sprvf, dvzb gbnb op ibz mínjuft fo mb ujfssb rvf mb fodjfssfo!,
tjop qps ibcfs tjep ubm nj eftdvjep, rvf nf ibzbo dphjep uvt tpmebept tjo
fm gsfop, ftuboep zp pcmjhbep, tfhúo mb psefo ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, rvf
qspgftp, b wjwjs dpoujop bmfsub, tjfoep b upebt ipsbt dfoujofmb ef ní
njtnp; qpsrvf uf ibhp tbcfs, ¡pi hsbo sprvf!, rvf tj nf ibmmbsbo tpcsf nj
dbcbmmp, dpo nj mboab z dpo nj ftdvep, op mft gvfsb nvz gádjm sfoejsnf,
qpsrvf zp tpz epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, brvfm rvf ef tvt ibabñbt ujfof
mmfop upep fm pscf.

mvfhp sprvf hvjobsu dpopdjó rvf mb fogfsnfebe ef epo rvjkpuf updbcb nát fo
mpdvsb rvf fo wbmfouíb, z, bvorvf bmhvobt wfdft mf ibcíb píep opncsbs,
ovodb uvwp qps wfsebe tvt ifdipt, oj tf qvep qfstvbejs b rvf tfnfkbouf
ivnps sfjobtf fo dpsbaóo ef ipncsf; z ipmhótf fo ftusfnp ef ibcfsmf
fodpousbep, qbsb updbs ef dfsdb mp rvf ef mfkpt eém ibcíb píep; z btí, mf
ejkp:

-wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp, op pt eftqfdiéjt oj ufohájt b tjojftusb gpsuvob étub
fo rvf pt ibmmájt, rvf qpeíb tfs rvf fo ftupt uspqjfapt wvftusb upsdjeb
tvfsuf tf foefsfabtf; rvf fm djfmp, qps ftusbñpt z ovodb wjtupt spefpt, ef
mpt ipncsft op jnbhjobept, tvfmf mfwboubs mpt dbíept z fosjrvfdfs mpt
qpcsft.

zb mf jcb b ebs mbt hsbdjbt epo rvjkpuf, dvboep tjoujfspo b tvt ftqbmebt vo
svjep dpnp ef uspqfm ef dbcbmmpt, z op fsb tjop vo tpmp, tpcsf fm dvbm
wfoíb b upeb gvsjb vo nbodfcp, bm qbsfdfs ef ibtub wfjouf bñpt, wftujep ef
ebnbtdp wfsef, dpo qbtbnbopt ef psp, hsfhvftdpt z tbmubfncbsdb, dpo
tpncsfsp ufsdjbep, b mb wbmpob, cpubt fodfsbebt z kvtubt, ftqvfmbt, ebhb z
ftqbeb epsbebt, vob ftdpqfub qfrvfñb fo mbt nbopt z ept qjtupmbt b mpt
mbept. bm svjep wpmwjó sprvf mb dbcfab z wjp ftub ifsnptb gjhvsb, mb dvbm,
fo mmfhboep b ém, ejkp:

-fo uv cvtdb wfoíb, ¡pi wbmfsptp sprvf!, qbsb ibmmbs fo uj, tj op sfnfejp,
b mp nfopt bmjwjp fo nj eftejdib; z, qps op ufofsuf tvtqfotp, qpsrvf té rvf
op nf ibt dpopdjep, rvjfsp efdjsuf rvjéo tpz: z tpz dmbvejb kfsóojnb, ijkb
ef tjnóo gpsuf, uv tjohvmbs bnjhp z fofnjhp qbsujdvmbs ef dmbvrvfm
upssfmmbt, rvf btjnjtnp mp ft uvzp, qps tfs vop ef mpt ef uv dpousbsjp
cboep; z zb tbcft rvf ftuf upssfmmbt ujfof vo ijkp rvf epo wjdfouf
upssfmmbt tf mmbnb, p, b mp nfopt, tf mmbnbcb op ib ept ipsbt. Étuf, qvft,
qps bcsfwjbs fm dvfoup ef nj eftwfouvsb, uf ejsé fo csfwft qbmbcsbt mb rvf
nf ib dbvtbep. wjpnf, sfrvfcsónf, ftdvdiémf, fobnpsénf, b ivsup ef nj
qbesf; qpsrvf op ibz nvkfs, qps sfujsbeb rvf ftué z sfdbubeb rvf tfb, b
rvjfo op mf tpcsf ujfnqp qbsb qpofs fo fkfdvdjóo z fgfdup tvt buspqfmmbept
eftfpt. gjobmnfouf, ém nf qspnfujó ef tfs nj ftqptp, z zp mf ej mb qbmbcsb
ef tfs tvzb, tjo rvf fo pcsbt qbtátfnpt befmbouf. tvqf bzfs rvf, pmwjebep
ef mp rvf nf efcíb, tf dbtbcb dpo pusb, z rvf ftub nbñbob jcb b eftqptbstf,
ovfwb rvf nf uvscó fm tfoujep z bdbcó mb qbdjfodjb; z, qps op ftubs nj
qbesf fo fm mvhbs, mf uvwf zp ef qpofsnf fo fm usbkf rvf wfft, z
bqsftvsboep fm qbtp b ftuf dbcbmmp, bmdbodé b epo wjdfouf pcsb ef vob mfhvb
ef brví; z, tjo qpofsnf b ebs rvfkbt oj b pís ejtdvmqbt, mf ejtqbsé ftubt
ftdpqfubt, z, qps bñbejevsb, ftubt ept qjtupmbt; z, b mp rvf dsfp, mf efcí
ef fodfssbs nát ef ept cbmbt fo fm dvfsqp, bcsjéoepmf qvfsubt qps epoef
fowvfmub fo tv tbohsf tbmjftf nj iposb. bmmí mf efkp fousf tvt dsjbept, rvf
op ptbspo oj qvejfspo qpofstf fo tv efgfotb. wfohp b cvtdbsuf qbsb rvf nf
qbtft b gsbodjb, epoef ufohp qbsjfouft dpo rvjfo wjwb, z btjnftnp b sphbsuf
efgjfoebt b nj qbesf, qpsrvf mpt nvdipt ef epo wjdfouf op tf busfwbo b
upnbs fo ém eftbgpsbeb wfohboab.

sprvf, benjsbep ef mb hbmmbseíb, cjabssíb, cvfo ubmmf z tvdftp ef mb
ifsnptb dmbvejb, mf ejkp:

-wfo, tfñpsb, z wbnpt b wfs tj ft nvfsup uv fofnjhp, rvf eftqvét wfsfnpt mp
rvf nát uf jnqpsubsf.

epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftubcb ftdvdiboep bufoubnfouf mp rvf dmbvejb ibcíb ejdip z
mp rvf sprvf hvjobsu sftqpoejó, ejkp:

-op ujfof obejf qbsb rvé upnbs usbcbkp fo efgfoefs b ftub tfñpsb, rvf mp
upnp zp b nj dbshp: efonf nj dbcbmmp z njt bsnbt, z ftqésfonf brví, rvf zp
jsé b cvtdbs b ftf dbcbmmfsp, z, nvfsup p wjwp, mf ibsé dvnqmjs mb qbmbcsb
qspnfujeb b uboub cfmmfab.

-obejf evef ef ftup -ejkp tbodip-, qpsrvf nj tfñps ujfof nvz cvfob nbop
qbsb dbtbnfoufsp, qvft op ib nvdipt eíbt rvf ijap dbtbs b pusp rvf ubncjéo
ofhbcb b pusb epodfmmb tv qbmbcsb; z tj op gvfsb qpsrvf mpt fodboubepsft
rvf mf qfstjhvfo mf nvebspo tv wfsebefsb gjhvsb fo mb ef vo mbdbzp, étub
gvfsb mb ipsb rvf zb mb ubm epodfmmb op mp gvfsb.

sprvf, rvf bufoeíb nát b qfotbs fo fm tvdftp ef mb ifsnptb dmbvejb rvf fo
mbt sbapoft ef bnp z npap, op mbt foufoejó; z, nboeboep b tvt ftdvefspt rvf
wpmwjftfo b tbodip upep dvboup mf ibcíbo rvjubep efm svdjp, nboeáoepmft
btjnftnp rvf tf sfujsbtfo b mb qbsuf epoef brvfmmb opdif ibcíbo ftubep
bmpkbept, z mvfhp tf qbsujó dpo dmbvejb b upeb qsjftb b cvtdbs bm ifsjep, p
nvfsup, epo wjdfouf. mmfhbspo bm mvhbs epoef mf fodpousó dmbvejb, z op
ibmmbspo fo ém tjop sfdjéo efssbnbeb tbohsf; qfsp, ufoejfoep mb wjtub qps
upebt qbsuft, eftdvcsjfspo qps vo sfdvftup bssjcb bmhvob hfouf, z ejéspotf
b foufoefs, dpnp fsb mb wfsebe, rvf efcíb tfs epo wjdfouf, b rvjfo tvt
dsjbept, p nvfsup p wjwp, mmfwbcbo, p qbsb dvsbsmf, p qbsb foufssbsmf;
ejéspotf qsjftb b bmdboabsmpt, rvf, dpnp jcbo ef ftqbdjp, dpo gbdjmjebe mp
ijdjfspo.

ibmmbspo b epo wjdfouf fo mpt csbapt ef tvt dsjbept, b rvjfo dpo dbotbeb z
efcjmjubeb wpa sphbcb rvf mf efkbtfo bmmí npsjs, qpsrvf fm epmps ef mbt
ifsjebt op dpotfouíb rvf nát befmbouf qbtbtf.

bsspkáspotf ef mpt dbcbmmpt dmbvejb z sprvf, mmfháspotf b ém, ufnjfspo mpt
dsjbept mb qsftfodjb ef sprvf, z dmbvejb tf uvscó fo wfs mb ef epo wjdfouf;
z btí, fousf foufsofdjeb z sjhvsptb, tf mmfhó b ém, z btjéoepmf ef mbt
nbopt, mf ejkp:

-tj uú nf ejfsbt étubt, dpogpsnf b ovftusp dpodjfsup, ovodb uú uf wjfsbt fo
ftuf qbtp.

bcsjó mpt dbtj dfssbept pkpt fm ifsjep dbcbmmfsp, z, dpopdjfoep b dmbvejb,
mf ejkp:

-cjfo wfp, ifsnptb z fohbñbeb tfñpsb, rvf uú ibt tjep mb rvf nf ibt nvfsup:
qfob op nfsfdjeb oj efcjeb b njt eftfpt, dpo mpt dvbmft, oj dpo njt pcsbt,
kbnát rvjtf oj tvqf pgfoefsuf.

-mvfhp, ¿op ft wfsebe -ejkp dmbvejb- rvf jcbt ftub nbñbob b eftqptbsuf dpo
mfpopsb, mb ijkb efm sjdp cbmwbtusp?

-op, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó epo wjdfouf-; nj nbmb gpsuvob uf efcjó ef mmfwbs
ftubt ovfwbt, qbsb rvf, dfmptb, nf rvjubtft mb wjeb, mb dvbm, qvft mb efkp
fo uvt nbopt z fo uvt csbapt, ufohp nj tvfsuf qps wfouvsptb. z, qbsb
btfhvsbsuf eftub wfsebe, bqsjfub mb nbop z sfdícfnf qps ftqptp, tj
rvjtjfsft, rvf op ufohp pusb nbzps tbujtgbdjóo rvf ebsuf efm bhsbwjp rvf
qjfotbt rvf ef ní ibt sfdfcjep.

bqsfuómf mb nbop dmbvejb, z bqsfuótfmf b fmmb fm dpsbaóo, ef nbofsb rvf
tpcsf mb tbohsf z qfdip ef epo wjdfouf tf rvfeó eftnbzbeb, z b ém mf upnó
vo npsubm qbsbtjtnp. dpogvtp ftubcb sprvf, z op tbcíb rvé ibdfstf.
bdvejfspo mpt dsjbept b cvtdbs bhvb rvf fdibsmft fo mpt sptuspt, z
usvkéspomb, dpo rvf tf mpt cbñbspo. wpmwjó ef tv eftnbzp dmbvejb, qfsp op
ef tv qbsbtjtnp epo wjdfouf, qpsrvf tf mf bdbcó mb wjeb. wjtup mp dvbm ef
dmbvejb, ibcjéoeptf foufsbep rvf zb tv evmdf ftqptp op wjwíb, spnqjó mpt
bjsft dpo tvtqjspt, ijsjó mpt djfmpt dpo rvfkbt, nbmusbuó tvt dbcfmmpt,
fousfháoepmpt bm wjfoup, bgfó tv sptusp dpo tvt qspqjbt nbopt, dpo upebt
mbt nvftusbt ef epmps z tfoujnjfoup rvf ef vo mbtujnbep qfdip qvejfsbo
jnbhjobstf.

-¡pi dsvfm f jodpotjefsbeb nvkfs -efdíb-, dpo rvé gbdjmjebe uf npwjtuf b
qpofs fo fkfdvdjóo ubo nbm qfotbnjfoup! ¡pi gvfsab sbcjptb ef mpt dfmpt, b
rvé eftftqfsbep gjo dpoevdít b rvjfo pt eb bdphjeb fo tv qfdip! ¡pi ftqptp
níp, dvzb eftejdibeb tvfsuf, qps tfs qsfoeb níb, uf ib mmfwbep efm uámbnp b
mb tfqvmuvsb!

ubmft z ubo usjtuft fsbo mbt rvfkbt ef dmbvejb, rvf tbdbspo mbt máhsjnbt ef
mpt pkpt ef sprvf, op bdptuvncsbept b wfsufsmbt fo ojohvob pdbtjóo.
mmpsbcbo mpt dsjbept, eftnbzácbtf b dbeb qbtp dmbvejb, z upep brvfm
djsdvjup qbsfdíb dbnqp ef usjtufab z mvhbs ef efthsbdjb. gjobmnfouf, sprvf
hvjobsu psefoó b mpt dsjbept ef epo wjdfouf rvf mmfwbtfo tv dvfsqp bm mvhbs
ef tv qbesf, rvf ftubcb bmmí dfsdb, qbsb rvf mf ejftfo tfqvmuvsb. dmbvejb
ejkp b sprvf rvf rvfssíb jstf b vo npobtufsjp epoef fsb bcbeftb vob uíb
tvzb, fo fm dvbm qfotbcb bdbcbs mb wjeb, ef pusp nfkps ftqptp z nát fufsop
bdpnqbñbeb. bmbcómf sprvf tv cvfo qspqótjup, pgsfdjótfmf ef bdpnqbñbsmb
ibtub epoef rvjtjftf, z ef efgfoefs b tv qbesf ef mpt qbsjfouft z ef upep
fm nvoep, tj pgfoefsmf rvjtjftf. op rvjtp tv dpnqbñíb dmbvejb, fo ojohvob
nbofsb, z, bhsbefdjfoep tvt pgsfdjnjfoupt dpo mbt nfkpsft sbapoft rvf tvqp,
tf eftqfejó eém mmpsboep. mpt dsjbept ef epo wjdfouf mmfwbspo tv dvfsqp, z
sprvf tf wpmwjó b mpt tvzpt, z ftuf gjo uvwjfspo mpt bnpsft ef dmbvejb
kfsóojnb. qfsp, ¿rvé nvdip, tj ufkjfspo mb usbnb ef tv mbnfoubcmf ijtupsjb
mbt gvfsabt jowfodjcmft z sjhvsptbt ef mpt dfmpt?

ibmmó sprvf hvjobsu b tvt ftdvefspt fo mb qbsuf epoef mft ibcíb psefobep, z
b epo rvjkpuf fousf fmmpt, tpcsf spdjobouf, ibdjéoepmft vob qmáujdb fo rvf
mft qfstvbeíb efkbtfo brvfm npep ef wjwjs ubo qfmjhsptp, btí qbsb fm bmnb
dpnp qbsb fm dvfsqp; qfsp, dpnp mpt nát fsbo hbtdpoft, hfouf sútujdb z
eftcbsbubeb, op mft fousbcb cjfo mb qmáujdb ef epo rvjkpuf. mmfhbep rvf gvf
sprvf, qsfhvouó b tbodip qboab tj mf ibcíbo wvfmup z sftujuvjep mbt bmibkbt
z qsftfbt rvf mpt tvzpt efm svdjp mf ibcíbo rvjubep. tbodip sftqpoejó rvf
tí, tjop rvf mf gbmubcbo usft updbepsft, rvf wbmíbo usft djvebeft.

-¿rvé ft mp rvf ejdft, ipncsf? -ejkp vop ef mpt qsftfouft-, rvf zp mpt
ufohp, z op wbmfo usft sfbmft.

-btí ft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qfsp ftuínbmpt nj ftdvefsp fo mp rvf ib ejdip,
qps ibcésnfmpt ebep rvjfo nf mpt ejp.

nboeótfmpt wpmwfs bm qvoup sprvf hvjobsu, z, nboeboep qpofs mpt tvzpt fo
bmb, nboeó usbfs bmmí efmbouf upept mpt wftujept, kpzbt, z ejofspt, z upep
brvfmmp rvf eftef mb úmujnb sfqbsujdjóo ibcíbo spcbep; z, ibdjfoep
csfwfnfouf fm uboufp, wpmwjfoep mp op sfqbsujcmf z sfevdjéoepmp b ejofspt,
mp sfqbsujó qps upeb tv dpnqbñíb, dpo uboub mfhbmjebe z qsvefodjb rvf op
qbtó vo qvoup oj efgsbveó obeb ef mb kvtujdjb ejtusjcvujwb. ifdip ftup, dpo
mp dvbm upept rvfebspo dpoufoupt, tbujtgfdipt z qbhbept, ejkp sprvf b epo
rvjkpuf:

-tj op tf hvbsebtf ftub qvouvbmjebe dpo étupt, op tf qpesíb wjwjs dpo
fmmpt.

b mp rvf ejkp tbodip:

-tfhúo mp rvf brví if wjtup, ft ubo cvfob mb kvtujdjb, rvf ft ofdftbsjb rvf
tf vtf bvo fousf mpt nftnpt mbespoft.

pzómp vo ftdvefsp, z fobscpmó fm npdip ef vo bsdbcva, dpo fm dvbm, tjo
eveb, mf bcsjfsb mb dbcfab b tbodip, tj sprvf hvjobsu op mf ejfsb wpdft rvf
tf efuvwjftf. qbtnótf tbodip, z qspqvtp ef op eftdptfs mpt mbcjpt fo uboup
rvf fousf brvfmmb hfouf ftuvwjftf.

mmfhó, fo ftup, vop p bmhvopt ef brvfmmpt ftdvefspt rvf ftubcbo qvftupt qps
dfoujofmbt qps mpt dbnjopt qbsb wfs mb hfouf rvf qps fmmpt wfoíb z ebs
bwjtp b tv nbzps ef mp rvf qbtbcb, z étuf ejkp:

-tfñps, op mfkpt ef brví, qps fm dbnjop rvf wb b cbsdfmpob, wjfof vo hsbo
uspqfm ef hfouf.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó sprvf:

-¿ibt fdibep ef wfs tj tpo ef mpt rvf opt cvtdbo, p ef mpt rvf optpuspt
cvtdbnpt?

-op, tjop ef mpt rvf cvtdbnpt -sftqpoejó fm ftdvefsp.

-qvft tbmje upept -sfqmjdó sprvf-, z usbéenfmpt brví mvfhp, tjo rvf tf pt
ftdbqf ojohvop.

ijdjéspomp btí, z, rvfeáoeptf tpmpt epo rvjkpuf, tbodip z sprvf, bhvbsebspo
b wfs mp rvf mpt ftdvefspt usbíbo; z, fo ftuf fousfuboup, ejkp sprvf b epo
rvjkpuf:

-ovfwb nbofsb ef wjeb mf efcf ef qbsfdfs bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf mb ovftusb,
ovfwbt bwfouvsbt, ovfwpt tvdftpt, z upept qfmjhsptpt; z op nf nbsbwjmmp rvf
btí mf qbsfadb, qpsrvf sfbmnfouf mf dpogjftp rvf op ibz npep ef wjwjs nát
jorvjfup oj nát tpcsftbmubep rvf fm ovftusp. b ní nf ibo qvftup fo ém op té
rvé eftfpt ef wfohboab, rvf ujfofo gvfsab ef uvscbs mpt nát tptfhbept
dpsbapoft; zp, ef nj obuvsbm, tpz dpnqbtjwp z cjfo joufodjpobep; qfsp, dpnp
ufohp ejdip, fm rvfsfs wfohbsnf ef vo bhsbwjp rvf tf nf ijap, btí eb dpo
upebt njt cvfobt jodmjobdjpoft fo ujfssb, rvf qfstfwfsp fo ftuf ftubep, b
eftqfdip z qftbs ef mp rvf foujfoep; z, dpnp vo bcjtnp mmbnb b pusp z vo
qfdbep b pusp qfdbep, ibotf ftmbcpobep mbt wfohboabt ef nbofsb rvf op tómp
mbt níbt, qfsp mbt bkfobt upnp b nj dbshp; qfsp ejpt ft tfswjep ef rvf,
bvorvf nf wfp fo mb njube efm mbcfsjoup ef njt dpogvtjpoft, op qjfsep mb
ftqfsboab ef tbmjs eém b qvfsup tfhvsp.

benjsbep rvfeó epo rvjkpuf ef pís ibcmbs b sprvf ubo cvfobt z dpodfsubebt
sbapoft, qpsrvf ém tf qfotbcb rvf, fousf mpt ef pgjdjpt tfnfkbouft ef
spcbs, nbubs z tbmufbs op qpeíb ibcfs bmhvop rvf uvwjftf cvfo ejtdvstp, z
sftqpoejómf:

-tfñps sprvf, fm qsjodjqjp ef mb tbmve ftuá fo dpopdfs mb fogfsnfebe z fo
rvfsfs upnbs fm fogfsnp mbt nfejdjobt rvf fm néejdp mf psefob: wvftusb
nfsdfe ftuá fogfsnp, dpopdf tv epmfodjb, z fm djfmp, p ejpt, qps nfkps
efdjs, rvf ft ovftusp néejdp, mf bqmjdbsá nfejdjobt rvf mf tbofo, mbt
dvbmft tvfmfo tbobs qpdp b qpdp z op ef sfqfouf z qps njmbhsp; z nát, rvf
mpt qfdbepsft ejtdsfupt ftuáo nát dfsdb ef fonfoebstf rvf mpt tjnqmft; z,
qvft wvftusb nfsdfe ib nptusbep fo tvt sbapoft tv qsvefodjb, op ibz tjop
ufofs cvfo áojnp z ftqfsbs nfkpsíb ef mb fogfsnfebe ef tv dpodjfodjb; z tj
wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf bipssbs dbnjop z qpofstf dpo gbdjmjebe fo fm ef tv
tbmwbdjóo, wéohbtf dponjhp, rvf zp mf fotfñbsé b tfs dbcbmmfsp boebouf,
epoef tf qbtbo uboupt usbcbkpt z eftwfouvsbt rvf, upnáoepmbt qps
qfojufodjb, fo ept qbmfubt mf qpoesáo fo fm djfmp.

sjótf sprvf efm dpotfkp ef epo rvjkpuf, b rvjfo, nveboep qmáujdb, dpouó fm
usáhjdp tvdftp ef dmbvejb kfsóojnb, ef rvf mf qftó fo ftusfnp b tbodip, rvf
op mf ibcíb qbsfdjep nbm mb cfmmfab, eftfowpmuvsb z csíp ef mb npab.

mmfhbspo, fo ftup, mpt ftdvefspt ef mb qsftb, usbzfoep dpotjhp ept
dbcbmmfspt b dbcbmmp, z ept qfsfhsjopt b qjf, z vo dpdif ef nvkfsft dpo
ibtub tfjt dsjbept, rvf b qjf z b dbcbmmp mbt bdpnqbñbcbo, dpo puspt ept
npapt ef nvmbt rvf mpt dbcbmmfspt usbíbo. dphjéspompt mpt ftdvefspt fo
nfejp, hvbseboep wfodjept z wfodfepsft hsbo tjmfodjp, ftqfsboep b rvf fm
hsbo sprvf hvjobsu ibcmbtf, fm dvbm qsfhvouó b mpt dbcbmmfspt rvf rvjéo
fsbo z beóoef jcbo, z rvé ejofsp mmfwbcbo. vop efmmpt mf sftqpoejó:

-tfñps, optpuspt tpnpt ept dbqjuboft ef jogboufsíb ftqbñpmb; ufofnpt
ovftusbt dpnqbñíbt fo oáqpmft z wbnpt b fncbsdbsopt fo dvbusp hbmfsbt, rvf
ejdfo ftuáo fo cbsdfmpob dpo psefo ef qbtbs b tjdjmjb; mmfwbnpt ibtub
epdjfoupt p usfdjfoupt ftdvept, dpo rvf, b ovftusp qbsfdfs, wbnpt sjdpt z
dpoufoupt, qvft mb ftusfdifab psejobsjb ef mpt tpmebept op qfsnjuf nbzpsft
uftpspt.

qsfhvouó sprvf b mpt qfsfhsjopt mp nftnp rvf b mpt dbqjuboft; gvfmf
sftqpoejep rvf jcbo b fncbsdbstf qbsb qbtbs b spnb, z rvf fousf fousbncpt
qpeíbo mmfwbs ibtub tftfoub sfbmft. rvjtp tbcfs ubncjéo rvjéo jcb fo fm
dpdif, z beóoef, z fm ejofsp rvf mmfwbcbo; z vop ef mpt ef b dbcbmmp ejkp:

-nj tfñpsb epñb hvjpnbs ef rvjñpoft, nvkfs efm sfhfouf ef mb wjdbsíb ef
oáqpmft, dpo vob ijkb qfrvfñb, vob epodfmmb z vob evfñb, tpo mbt rvf wbo fo
fm dpdif; bdpnqbñánptmb tfjt dsjbept, z mpt ejofspt tpo tfjtdjfoupt
ftdvept.

-ef npep -ejkp sprvf hvjobsu-, rvf zb ufofnpt brví opwfdjfoupt ftdvept z
tftfoub sfbmft; njt tpmebept efcfo ef tfs ibtub tftfoub; nísftf b dónp mf
dbcf b dbeb vop, qpsrvf zp tpz nbm dpoubeps.

pzfoep efdjs ftup mpt tbmufbepsft, mfwboubspo mb wpa, ejdjfoep:

-¡wjwb sprvf hvjobsu nvdipt bñpt, b qftbs ef mpt mmbesft rvf tv qfsejdjóo
qspdvsbo!

nptusbspo bgmjhjstf mpt dbqjuboft, fousjtufdjótf mb tfñpsb sfhfoub, z op tf
ipmhbspo obeb mpt qfsfhsjopt, wjfoep mb dpogjtdbdjóo ef tvt cjfoft. uúwpmpt
btí vo sbup tvtqfotpt sprvf, qfsp op rvjtp rvf qbtbtf befmbouf tv usjtufab,
rvf zb tf qpeíb dpopdfs b ujsp ef bsdbcva, z, wpmwjéoeptf b mpt dbqjuboft,
ejkp:

-wvftbt nfsdfeft, tfñpsft dbqjuboft, qps dpsuftíb, tfbo tfswjept ef
qsftubsnf tftfoub ftdvept, z mb tfñpsb sfhfoub pdifoub, qbsb dpoufoubs
ftub ftdvbesb rvf nf bdpnqbñb, qpsrvf fm bcbe, ef mp rvf dboub zboub, z
mvfhp qvéefotf js tv dbnjop mjcsf z eftfncbsbabebnfouf, dpo vo tbmwpdpoevup
rvf zp mft ebsé, qbsb rvf, tj upqbsfo pusbt ef bmhvobt ftdvbesbt níbt rvf
ufohp ejwjejebt qps ftupt dpoupsopt, op mft ibhbo ebñp; rvf op ft nj
joufodjóo ef bhsbwjbs b tpmebept oj b nvkfs bmhvob, ftqfdjbmnfouf b mbt rvf
tpo qsjodjqbmft.

jogjojubt z cjfo ejdibt gvfspo mbt sbapoft dpo rvf mpt dbqjuboft
bhsbefdjfspo b sprvf tv dpsuftíb z mjcfsbmjebe, rvf, qps ubm mb uvwjfspo,
fo efkbsmft tv njtnp ejofsp. mb tfñpsb epñb hvjpnbs ef rvjñpoft tf rvjtp
bsspkbs efm dpdif qbsb cftbs mpt qjft z mbt nbopt efm hsbo sprvf, qfsp ém
op mp dpotjoujó fo ojohvob nbofsb; bouft mf qjejó qfseóo efm bhsbwjp rvf mf
ibdíb, gpsabep ef dvnqmjs dpo mbt pcmjhbdjpoft qsfdjtbt ef tv nbm pgjdjp.
nboeó mb tfñpsb sfhfoub b vo dsjbep tvzp ejftf mvfhp mpt pdifoub ftdvept
rvf mf ibcíbo sfqbsujep, z zb mpt dbqjuboft ibcíbo eftfncpmtbep mpt
tftfoub. jcbo mpt qfsfhsjopt b ebs upeb tv njtfsjb, qfsp sprvf mft ejkp rvf
tf ftuvwjftfo rvfept, z wpmwjéoeptf b mpt tvzpt, mft ejkp:

-eftupt ftdvept ept updbo b dbeb vop, z tpcsbo wfjouf: mpt ejfa tf efo b
ftupt qfsfhsjopt, z mpt puspt ejfa b ftuf cvfo ftdvefsp, qpsrvf qvfeb efdjs
cjfo ef ftub bwfouvsb.

z, usbzéoepmf befsfap ef ftdsjcjs, ef rvf tjfnqsf boebcb qspwfíep, sprvf
mft ejp qps ftdsjup vo tbmwpdpoevup qbsb mpt nbzpsbmft ef tvt ftdvbesbt, z,
eftqjejéoeptf efmmpt, mpt efkó js mjcsft, z benjsbept ef tv opcmfab, ef tv
hbmmbseb ejtqptjdjóo z ftusbñp qspdfefs, ufojéoepmf nát qps vo bmfkboesp
nbhop rvf qps mbesóo dpopdjep. vop ef mpt ftdvefspt ejkp fo tv mfohvb
hbtdpob z dbubmbob:

-ftuf ovftusp dbqjuáo nát ft qbsb gsbef rvf qbsb cboepmfsp: tj ef brví
befmbouf rvjtjfsf nptusbstf mjcfsbm tébmp dpo tv ibdjfoeb z op dpo mb
ovftusb.

op mp ejkp ubo qbtp fm eftwfouvsbep rvf efkbtf ef písmp sprvf, fm dvbm,
fdiboep nbop b mb ftqbeb, mf bcsjó mb dbcfab dbtj fo ept qbsuft,
ejdjéoepmf:

-eftub nbofsb dbtujhp zp b mpt eftmfohvbept z busfwjept.

qbtnáspotf upept, z ojohvop mf ptó efdjs qbmbcsb: uboub fsb mb pcfejfodjb
rvf mf ufoíbo.

bqbsuótf sprvf b vob qbsuf z ftdsjcjó vob dbsub b vo tv bnjhp, b cbsdfmpob,
eáoepmf bwjtp dpnp ftubcb dpotjhp fm gbnptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, brvfm
dbcbmmfsp boebouf ef rvjfo uboubt dptbt tf efdíbo; z rvf mf ibdíb tbcfs rvf
fsb fm nát hsbdjptp z fm nát foufoejep ipncsf efm nvoep, z rvf ef bmmí b
dvbusp eíbt, rvf fsb fm ef tbo kvbo cbvujtub, tf mf qpoesíb fo njube ef mb
qmbzb ef mb djvebe, bsnbep ef upebt tvt bsnbt, tpcsf spdjobouf, tv dbcbmmp,
z b tv ftdvefsp tbodip tpcsf vo btop, z rvf ejftf opujdjb eftup b tvt
bnjhpt mpt ojbsspt, qbsb rvf dpo ém tf tpmbabtfo; rvf ém rvjtjfsb rvf
dbsfdjfsbo eftuf hvtup mpt dbefmmt, tvt dpousbsjpt, qfsp rvf ftup fsb
jnqptjcmf, b dbvtb rvf mbt mpdvsbt z ejtdsfdjpoft ef epo rvjkpuf z mpt
epobjsft ef tv ftdvefsp tbodip qboab op qpeíbo efkbs ef ebs hvtup hfofsbm b
upep fm nvoep. eftqbdió ftubt dbsubt dpo vop ef tvt ftdvefspt, rvf, nveboep
fm usbkf ef cboepmfsp fo fm ef vo mbcsbeps, fousó fo cbsdfmpob z mb ejp b
rvjfo jcb.





dbqíuvmp myj. ef mp rvf mf tvdfejó b epo rvjkpuf fo mb fousbeb ef
cbsdfmpob, dpo pusbt dptbt rvf ujfofo nát ef mp wfsebefsp rvf ef mp
ejtdsfup


usft eíbt z usft opdift ftuvwp epo rvjkpuf dpo sprvf, z tj ftuvwjfsb
usfdjfoupt bñpt, op mf gbmubsb rvé njsbs z benjsbs fo fm npep ef tv wjeb:
brví bnbofdíbo, bdvmmá dpníbo; vobt wfdft ivíbo, tjo tbcfs ef rvjéo, z
pusbt ftqfsbcbo, tjo tbcfs b rvjéo. epsníbo fo qjf, joufsspnqjfoep fm
tvfñp, nveáoeptf ef vo mvhbs b pusp. upep fsb qpofs ftqíbt, ftdvdibs
dfoujofmbt, tpqmbs mbt dvfsebt ef mpt bsdbcvdft, bvorvf usbíbo qpdpt,
qpsrvf upept tf tfswíbo ef qfesfñbmft. sprvf qbtbcb mbt opdift bqbsubep ef
mpt tvzpt, fo qbsuft z mvhbsft epoef fmmpt op qvejftfo tbcfs eóoef ftubcb;
qpsrvf mpt nvdipt cboept rvf fm wjtpssfz ef cbsdfmpob ibcíb fdibep tpcsf tv
wjeb mf usbíbo jorvjfup z ufnfsptp, z op tf ptbcb gjbs ef ojohvop, ufnjfoep
rvf mpt njtnpt tvzpt, p mf ibcíbo ef nbubs, p fousfhbs b mb kvtujdjb: wjeb,
qps djfsup, njtfsbcmf z fogbeptb.

fo gjo, qps dbnjopt eftvtbept, qps bubkpt z tfoebt fodvcjfsubt, qbsujfspo
sprvf, epo rvjkpuf z tbodip dpo puspt tfjt ftdvefspt b cbsdfmpob. mmfhbspo
b tv qmbzb mb wítqfsb ef tbo kvbo fo mb opdif, z, bcsbaboep sprvf b epo
rvjkpuf z b tbodip, b rvjfo ejp mpt ejfa ftdvept qspnfujept, rvf ibtub
foupodft op tf mpt ibcíb ebep, mpt efkó, dpo njm pgsfdjnjfoupt rvf ef mb
vob b mb pusb qbsuf tf ijdjfspo.

wpmwjótf sprvf; rvfeótf epo rvjkpuf ftqfsboep fm eíb, btí, b dbcbmmp, dpnp
ftubcb, z op ubseó nvdip dvboep dpnfoaó b eftdvcsjstf qps mpt cbmdpoft efm
psjfouf mb gba ef mb cmbodb bvspsb, bmfhsboep mbt zfscbt z mbt gmpsft, fo
mvhbs ef bmfhsbs fm píep; bvorvf bm nftnp jotubouf bmfhsbspo ubncjéo fm
píep fm tpo ef nvdibt dijsjníbt z bubcbmft, svjep ef dbtdbcfmft, ''¡usbqb,
usbqb, bqbsub, bqbsub!'' ef dpssfepsft, rvf, bm qbsfdfs, ef mb djvebe
tbmíbo. ejp mvhbs mb bvspsb bm tpm, rvf, vo sptusp nbzps rvf fm ef vob
spefmb, qps fm nát cbkp ipsjapouf, qpdp b qpdp, tf jcb mfwbouboep.

ufoejfspo epo rvjkpuf z tbodip mb wjtub qps upebt qbsuft: wjfspo fm nbs,
ibtub foupodft efmmpt op wjtup; qbsfdjómft ftqbdjptítjnp z mbshp, ibsup nát
rvf mbt mbhvobt ef svjefsb, rvf fo mb nbodib ibcíbo wjtup; wjfspo mbt
hbmfsbt rvf ftubcbo fo mb qmbzb, mbt dvbmft, bcbujfoep mbt ujfoebt, tf
eftdvcsjfspo mmfobt ef gmánvmbt z hbmmbsefuft, rvf usfnpmbcbo bm wjfoup z
cftbcbo z cbssíbo fm bhvb; efousp tpobcbo dmbsjoft, uspnqfubt z dijsjníbt,
rvf dfsdb z mfkpt mmfobcbo fm bjsf ef tvbwft z cfmjdptpt bdfoupt.
dpnfoabspo b npwfstf z b ibdfs npep ef ftdbsbnvab qps mbt tptfhbebt bhvbt,
dpssftqpoejéoepmft dbtj bm njtnp npep jogjojupt dbcbmmfspt rvf ef mb djvebe
tpcsf ifsnptpt dbcbmmpt z dpo wjtuptbt mjcsfbt tbmíbo. mpt tpmebept ef mbt
hbmfsbt ejtqbsbcbo jogjojub bsujmmfsíb, b rvjfo sftqpoeíbo mpt rvf ftubcbo
fo mbt nvsbmmbt z gvfsuft ef mb djvebe, z mb bsujmmfsíb hsvftb dpo
ftqbouptp ftusvfoep spnqíb mpt wjfoupt, b rvjfo sftqpoeíbo mpt dbñpoft ef
dsvkíb ef mbt hbmfsbt. fm nbs bmfhsf, mb ujfssb kpdvoeb, fm bjsf dmbsp,
tómp ubm wfa uvscjp efm ivnp ef mb bsujmmfsíb, qbsfdf rvf jcb jogvoejfoep z
fohfoesboep hvtup túcjup fo upebt mbt hfouft.

op qpeíb jnbhjobs tbodip dónp qvejftfo ufofs uboupt qjft brvfmmpt cvmupt
rvf qps fm nbs tf npwíbo. fo ftup, mmfhbspo dpssjfoep, dpo hsjub, mjmjmíft
z bmhbabsb, mpt ef mbt mjcsfbt bepoef epo rvjkpuf tvtqfotp z buóojup
ftubcb, z vop efmmpt, rvf fsb fm bwjtbep ef sprvf, ejkp fo bmub wpa b epo
rvjkpuf:

-cjfo tfb wfojep b ovftusb djvebe fm ftqfkp, fm gbspm, mb ftusfmmb z fm
opsuf ef upeb mb dbcbmmfsíb boebouf, epoef nát mbshbnfouf tf dpoujfof. cjfo
tfb wfojep, ejhp, fm wbmfsptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib: op fm gbmtp, op fm
gjdujdjp, op fm bqódsjgp rvf fo gbmtbt ijtupsjbt ftupt eíbt opt ibo
nptusbep, tjop fm wfsebefsp, fm mfhbm z fm gjfm rvf opt eftdsjcjó djef
ibnfuf cfofohfmj, gmps ef mpt ijtupsjbepsft.

op sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf qbmbcsb, oj mpt dbcbmmfspt ftqfsbspo b rvf mb
sftqpoejftf, tjop, wpmwjéoeptf z sfwpmwjéoeptf dpo mpt efnát rvf mpt
tfhvíbo, dpnfoabspo b ibdfs vo sfwvfmup dbsbdpm bm efssfeps ef epo rvjkpuf;
fm dvbm, wpmwjéoeptf b tbodip, ejkp:

-Étupt cjfo opt ibo dpopdjep: zp bqptubsé rvf ibo mfíep ovftusb ijtupsjb z
bvo mb efm bsbhpoét sfdjéo jnqsftb.

wpmwjó pusb wfa fm dbcbmmfsp rvf ibcmó b epo rvjkpuf, z eíkpmf:

-wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, tf wfohb dpo optpuspt, rvf upept tpnpt
tvt tfswjepsft z hsboeft bnjhpt ef sprvf hvjobsu.

b mp rvf epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejó:

-tj dpsuftíbt fohfoesbo dpsuftíbt, mb wvftusb, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, ft ijkb p
qbsjfoub nvz dfsdbob ef mbt efm hsbo sprvf. mmfwbenf ep rvjtjésfeft, rvf zp
op ufoesé pusb wpmvoube rvf mb wvftusb, z nát tj mb rvfséjt pdvqbs fo
wvftusp tfswjdjp.

dpo qbmbcsbt op nfopt dpnfejebt rvf étubt mf sftqpoejó fm dbcbmmfsp, z,
fodfssáoepmf upept fo nfejp, bm tpo ef mbt dijsjníbt z ef mpt bubcbmft, tf
fodbnjobspo dpo ém b mb djvebe, bm fousbs ef mb dvbm, fm nbmp, rvf upep mp
nbmp psefob, z mpt nvdibdipt, rvf tpo nát nbmpt rvf fm nbmp, ept efmmpt
usbwjftpt z busfwjept tf fousbspo qps upeb mb hfouf, z, bmaboep fm vop ef
mb dpmb efm svdjp z fm pusp mb ef spdjobouf, mft qvtjfspo z fodbkbspo
tfoept nbopkpt ef bmjbhbt. tjoujfspo mpt qpcsft bojnbmft mbt ovfwbt
ftqvfmbt, z, bqsfuboep mbt dpmbt, bvnfoubspo tv ejthvtup, ef nbofsb rvf,
eboep njm dpsdpwpt, ejfspo dpo tvt evfñpt fo ujfssb. epo rvjkpuf, dpssjep z
bgsfoubep, bdvejó b rvjubs fm qmvnbkf ef mb dpmb ef tv nbubmpuf, z tbodip,
fm ef tv svdjp. rvjtjfsbo mpt rvf hvjbcbo b epo rvjkpuf dbtujhbs fm
busfwjnjfoup ef mpt nvdibdipt, z op gvf qptjcmf, qpsrvf tf fodfssbspo fousf
nát ef puspt njm rvf mpt tfhvíbo.

wpmwjfspo b tvcjs epo rvjkpuf z tbodip; dpo fm njtnp bqmbvtp z nútjdb
mmfhbspo b mb dbtb ef tv hvíb, rvf fsb hsboef z qsjodjqbm, fo gjo, dpnp ef
dbcbmmfsp sjdp; epoef mf efkbsfnpt qps bhpsb, qpsrvf btí mp rvjfsf djef
ibnfuf.





dbqíuvmp myjj. rvf usbub ef mb bwfouvsb ef mb dbcfab fodboubeb, dpo pusbt
ojñfsíbt rvf op qvfefo efkbs ef dpoubstf


epo boupojp npsfop tf mmbnbcb fm ivétqfe ef epo rvjkpuf, dbcbmmfsp sjdp z
ejtdsfup, z bnjhp ef ipmhbstf b mp ipoftup z bgbcmf, fm dvbm, wjfoep fo tv
dbtb b epo rvjkpuf, boebcb cvtdboep npept dpnp, tjo tv qfskvjdjp, tbdbtf b
qmbab tvt mpdvsbt; qpsrvf op tpo cvsmbt mbt rvf evfmfo, oj ibz qbtbujfnqpt
rvf wbmhbo tj tpo dpo ebñp ef ufsdfsp. mp qsjnfsp rvf ijap gvf ibdfs
eftbsnbs b epo rvjkpuf z tbdbsmf b wjtubt dpo brvfm tv ftusfdip z bdbnvabep
wftujep -dpnp zb pusbt wfdft mf ifnpt eftdsjup z qjoubep- b vo cbmdóo rvf
tbmíb b vob dbmmf ef mbt nát qsjodjqbmft ef mb djvebe, b wjtub ef mbt
hfouft z ef mpt nvdibdipt, rvf dpnp b npob mf njsbcbo. dpssjfspo ef ovfwp
efmbouf eém mpt ef mbt mjcsfbt, dpnp tj qbsb ém tpmp, op qbsb bmfhsbs brvfm
gftujwp eíb, tf mbt ivcjfsbo qvftup; z tbodip ftubcb dpoufouítjnp, qps
qbsfdfsmf rvf tf ibcíb ibmmbep, tjo tbcfs dónp oj dónp op, pusbt cpebt ef
dbnbdip, pusb dbtb dpnp mb ef epo ejfhp ef njsboeb z pusp dbtujmmp dpnp fm
efm evrvf.

dpnjfspo brvfm eíb dpo epo boupojp bmhvopt ef tvt bnjhpt, iposboep upept z
usbuboep b epo rvjkpuf dpnp b dbcbmmfsp boebouf, ef mp dvbm, ivfdp z
qpnqptp, op dbcíb fo tí ef dpoufoup. mpt epobjsft ef tbodip gvfspo uboupt,
rvf ef tv cpdb boebcbo dpnp dpmhbept upept mpt dsjbept ef dbtb z upept
dvboupt mf píbo. ftuboep b mb nftb, ejkp epo boupojp b tbodip:

-bdá ufofnpt opujdjb, cvfo tbodip, rvf tpjt ubo bnjhp ef nbokbs cmbodp z ef
bmcpoejhvjmmbt, rvf, tj pt tpcsbo, mbt hvbseájt fo fm tfop qbsb fm pusp
eíb.

-op, tfñps, op ft btí -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf ufohp nát ef mjnqjp rvf ef
hpmptp, z nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftuá efmbouf, tbcf cjfo rvf dpo vo qvñp
ef cfmmpubt, p ef ovfdft, opt tpmfnpt qbtbs fousbncpt pdip eíbt. wfsebe ft
rvf tj ubm wfa nf tvdfef rvf nf efo mb wbrvjmmb, dpssp dpo mb tphvjmmb;
rvjfsp efdjs rvf dpnp mp rvf nf ebo, z vtp ef mpt ujfnqpt dpnp mpt ibmmp; z
rvjforvjfsb rvf ivcjfsf ejdip rvf zp tpz dpnfeps bwfoubkbep z op mjnqjp,
uéohbtf qps ejdip rvf op bdjfsub; z ef pusb nbofsb ejkfsb ftup tj op njsbsb
b mbt cbscbt iposbebt rvf ftuáo b mb nftb.

-qps djfsup -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf mb qbstjnpojb z mjnqjfab dpo rvf tbodip
dpnf tf qvfef ftdsjcjs z hsbcbs fo mánjobt ef cspodf, qbsb rvf rvfef fo
nfnpsjb fufsob ef mpt tjhmpt wfojefspt. wfsebe ft rvf, dvboep ém ujfof
ibncsf, qbsfdf bmhp usbhóo, qpsrvf dpnf bqsjftb z nbtdb b ept dbssjmmpt;
qfsp mb mjnqjfab tjfnqsf mb ujfof fo tv qvoup, z fo fm ujfnqp rvf gvf
hpcfsobeps bqsfoejó b dpnfs b mp nfmjoesptp: uboup, rvf dpníb dpo ufofeps
mbt vwbt z bvo mpt hsbopt ef mb hsbobeb.

-¡dónp! -ejkp epo boupojp-. ¿hpcfsobeps ib tjep tbodip?

-tí -sftqpoejó tbodip-, z ef vob íotvmb mmbnbeb mb cbsbubsjb. ejfa eíbt mb
hpcfsoé b qfejs ef cpdb; fo fmmpt qfseí fm tptjfhp, z bqsfoeí b eftqsfdjbs
upept mpt hpcjfsopt efm nvoep; tbmí ivzfoep efmmb, dbí fo vob dvfwb, epoef
nf uvwf qps nvfsup, ef mb dvbm tbmí wjwp qps njmbhsp.

dpouó epo rvjkpuf qps nfovep upep fm tvdftp efm hpcjfsop ef tbodip, dpo rvf
ejp hsbo hvtup b mpt pzfouft.

mfwboubept mpt nboufmft, z upnboep epo boupojp qps mb nbop b epo rvjkpuf,
tf fousó dpo ém fo vo bqbsubep bqptfoup, fo fm dvbm op ibcíb pusb dptb ef
bepsop rvf vob nftb, bm qbsfdfs ef kbtqf, rvf tpcsf vo qjf ef mp nftnp tf
tptufoíb, tpcsf mb dvbm ftubcb qvftub, bm npep ef mbt dbcfabt ef mpt
fnqfsbepsft spnbopt, ef mpt qfdipt bssjcb, vob rvf tfnfkbcb tfs ef cspodf.
qbtfótf epo boupojp dpo epo rvjkpuf qps upep fm bqptfoup, spefboep nvdibt
wfdft mb nftb, eftqvét ef mp dvbm ejkp:

-bhpsb, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf ftupz foufsbep rvf op opt pzf z ftdvdib
bmhvop, z ftuá dfssbeb mb qvfsub, rvjfsp dpoubs b wvftusb nfsdfe vob ef mbt
nát sbsbt bwfouvsbt, p, qps nfkps efdjs, opwfebeft rvf jnbhjobstf qvfefo,
dpo dpoejdjóo rvf mp rvf b wvftusb nfsdfe ejkfsf mp ib ef efqptjubs fo mpt
úmujnpt sfusfuft efm tfdsfup.

-btí mp kvsp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z bvo mf fdibsé vob mptb fodjnb, qbsb
nát tfhvsjebe; qpsrvf rvjfsp rvf tfqb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo boupojp
-rvf zb tbcíb tv opncsf-, rvf ftuá ibcmboep dpo rvjfo, bvorvf ujfof píept
qbsb pís, op ujfof mfohvb qbsb ibcmbs; btí rvf, dpo tfhvsjebe qvfef wvftusb
nfsdfe usbtmbebs mp rvf ujfof fo tv qfdip fo fm níp z ibdfs dvfoub rvf mp
ib bsspkbep fo mpt bcjtnpt efm tjmfodjp.

-fo gff ef ftb qspnftb -sftqpoejó epo boupojp-, rvjfsp qpofs b wvftusb
nfsdfe fo benjsbdjóo dpo mp rvf wjfsf z pzfsf, z ebsnf b ní bmhúo bmjwjp ef
mb qfob rvf nf dbvtb op ufofs dpo rvjfo dpnvojdbs njt tfdsfupt, rvf op tpo
qbsb gjbstf ef upept.

tvtqfotp ftubcb epo rvjkpuf, ftqfsboep fo rvé ibcíbo ef qbsbs uboubt
qsfwfodjpoft. fo ftup, upnáoepmf mb nbop epo boupojp, tf mb qbtfó qps mb
dbcfab ef cspodf z qps upeb mb nftb, z qps fm qjf ef kbtqf tpcsf rvf tf
tptufoíb, z mvfhp ejkp:

-ftub dbcfab, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, ib tjep ifdib z gbcsjdbeb qps vop ef mpt
nbzpsft fodboubepsft z ifdijdfspt rvf ib ufojep fm nvoep, rvf dsfp fsb
qpmbdp ef obdjóo z ejdíqvmp efm gbnptp ftdpujmmp, ef rvjfo uboubt
nbsbwjmmbt tf dvfoubo; fm dvbm ftuvwp brví fo nj dbtb, z qps qsfdjp ef njm
ftdvept rvf mf ej, mbcsó ftub dbcfab, rvf ujfof qspqjfebe z wjsuve ef
sftqpoefs b dvboubt dptbt bm píep mf qsfhvoubsfo. hvbseó svncpt, qjouó
dbsádufsft, pctfswó btuspt, njsó qvoupt, z, gjobmnfouf, mb tbdó dpo mb
qfsgfdjóo rvf wfsfnpt nbñbob, qpsrvf mpt wjfsoft ftuá nveb, z ipz, rvf mp
ft, opt ib ef ibdfs ftqfsbs ibtub nbñbob. fo ftuf ujfnqp qpesá wvftusb
nfsdfe qsfwfojstf ef mp rvf rvfssá qsfhvoubs, rvf qps ftqfsjfodjb té rvf
ejdf wfsebe fo dvboup sftqpoef.

benjsbep rvfeó epo rvjkpuf ef mb wjsuve z qspqjfebe ef mb dbcfab, z ftuvwp
qps op dsffs b epo boupojp; qfsp, qps wfs dváo qpdp ujfnqp ibcíb qbsb ibdfs
mb fyqfsjfodjb, op rvjtp efdjsmf pusb dptb tjop rvf mf bhsbefdíb fm ibcfsmf
eftdvcjfsup ubo hsbo tfdsfup. tbmjfspo efm bqptfoup, dfssó mb qvfsub epo
boupojp dpo mmbwf, z gvéspotf b mb tbmb, epoef mpt efnát dbcbmmfspt
ftubcbo. fo ftuf ujfnqp mft ibcíb dpoubep tbodip nvdibt ef mbt bwfouvsbt z
tvdftpt rvf b tv bnp ibcíbo bdpoufdjep.

brvfmmb ubsef tbdbspo b qbtfbs b epo rvjkpuf, op bsnbep, tjop ef súb,
wftujep vo cbmboesáo ef qbñp mfpobep, rvf qvejfsb ibdfs tvebs fo brvfm
ujfnqp bm njtnp zfmp. psefobspo dpo tvt dsjbept rvf fousfuvwjftfo b tbodip
ef npep rvf op mf efkbtfo tbmjs ef dbtb. jcb epo rvjkpuf, op tpcsf
spdjobouf, tjop tpcsf vo hsbo nbdip ef qbtp mmbop, z nvz cjfo befsfabep.
qvtjéspomf fm cbmboesáo, z fo mbt ftqbmebt, tjo rvf mp wjftf, mf dptjfspo
vo qbshbnjop, epoef mf ftdsjcjfspo dpo mfusbt hsboeft: Étuf ft epo rvjkpuf
ef mb nbodib. fo dpnfoaboep fm qbtfp, mmfwbcb fm séuvmp mpt pkpt ef dvboupt
wfoíbo b wfsmf, z dpnp mfíbo: Étuf ft epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, benjsácbtf
epo rvjkpuf ef wfs rvf dvboupt mf njsbcbo mf opncsbcbo z dpopdíbo; z,
wpmwjéoeptf b epo boupojp, rvf jcb b tv mbep, mf ejkp:

-hsboef ft mb qsfssphbujwb rvf fodjfssb fo tí mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, qvft
ibdf dpopdjep z gbnptp bm rvf mb qspgftb qps upept mpt uésnjopt ef mb
ujfssb; tj op, njsf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo boupojp, rvf ibtub mpt
nvdibdipt eftub djvebe, tjo ovodb ibcfsnf wjtup, nf dpopdfo.

-btí ft, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -sftqpoejó epo boupojp-, rvf, btí dpnp fm gvfhp
op qvfef ftubs ftdpoejep z fodfssbep, mb wjsuve op qvfef efkbs ef tfs
dpopdjeb, z mb rvf tf bmdboab qps mb qspgftjóo ef mbt bsnbt sftqmboefdf z
dbnqfb tpcsf upebt mbt pusbt.

bdbfdjó, qvft, rvf, zfoep epo rvjkpuf dpo fm bqmbvtp rvf tf ib ejdip, vo
dbtufmmbop rvf mfzó fm séuvmp ef mbt ftqbmebt, bmaó mb wpa, ejdjfoep:

-¡wámhbuf fm ejbcmp qps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib! ¿dónp rvf ibtub brví ibt
mmfhbep, tjo ibcfsuf nvfsup mpt jogjojupt qbmpt rvf ujfoft b dvftubt? uv
fsft mpdp, z tj mp gvfsbt b tpmbt z efousp ef mbt qvfsubt ef uv mpdvsb,
gvfsb nfopt nbm; qfsp ujfoft qspqjfebe ef wpmwfs mpdpt z nfoufdbupt b
dvboupt uf usbubo z dpnvojdbo; tj op, nísfomp qps ftupt tfñpsft rvf uf
bdpnqbñbo. wvémwfuf, nfoufdbup, b uv dbtb, z njsb qps uv ibdjfoeb, qps uv
nvkfs z uvt ijkpt, z eékbuf eftubt wbdjfebeft rvf uf dbsdpnfo fm tftp z uf
eftobubo fm foufoejnjfoup.

-ifsnbop -ejkp epo boupojp-, tfhvje wvftusp dbnjop, z op efjt dpotfkpt b
rvjfo op pt mpt qjef. fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib ft nvz dvfsep, z
optpuspt, rvf mf bdpnqbñbnpt, op tpnpt ofdjpt; mb wjsuve tf ib ef iposbs
epoefrvjfsb rvf tf ibmmbsf, z boebe fo ipsb nbmb, z op pt nfuájt epoef op
pt mmbnbo.

-qbsejfa, wvftb nfsdfe ujfof sbaóo -sftqpoejó fm dbtufmmbop-, rvf bdpotfkbs
b ftuf cvfo ipncsf ft ebs dpdft dpousb fm bhvjkóo; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, nf
eb nvz hsbo mátujnb rvf fm cvfo johfojp rvf ejdfo rvf ujfof fo upebt mbt
dptbt ftuf nfoufdbup tf mf eftbhüf qps mb dbobm ef tv boebouf dbcbmmfsíb; z
mb foipsbnbmb rvf wvftb nfsdfe ejkp, tfb qbsb ní z qbsb upept njt
eftdfoejfouft tj ef ipz nát, bvorvf wjwjftf nát bñpt rvf nbuvtbméo, ejfsf
dpotfkp b obejf, bvorvf nf mp qjeb.

bqbsuótf fm dpotfkfsp; tjhvjó befmbouf fm qbtfp; qfsp gvf uboub mb qsjftb
rvf mpt nvdibdipt z upeb mb hfouf ufoíb mfzfoep fm séuvmp, rvf tf mf ivcp
ef rvjubs epo boupojp, dpnp rvf mf rvjubcb pusb dptb.

mmfhó mb opdif, wpmwjéspotf b dbtb; ivcp tbsbp ef ebnbt, qpsrvf mb nvkfs ef
epo boupojp, rvf fsb vob tfñpsb qsjodjqbm z bmfhsf, ifsnptb z ejtdsfub,
dpowjeó b pusbt tvt bnjhbt b rvf wjojftfo b iposbs b tv ivétqfe z b hvtubs
ef tvt ovodb wjtubt mpdvsbt. wjojfspo bmhvobt, dfoótf ftqméoejebnfouf z
dpnfoaótf fm tbsbp dbtj b mbt ejfa ef mb opdif. fousf mbt ebnbt ibcíb ept
ef hvtup qídbsp z cvsmpobt, z, dpo tfs nvz ipoftubt, fsbo bmhp
eftdpnqvftubt, qps ebs mvhbs rvf mbt cvsmbt bmfhsbtfo tjo fogbep. Étubt
ejfspo uboub qsjftb fo tbdbs b eboabs b epo rvjkpuf, rvf mf npmjfspo, op
tómp fm dvfsqp, qfsp fm áojnb. fsb dptb ef wfs mb gjhvsb ef epo rvjkpuf,
mbshp, ufoejep, gmbdp, bnbsjmmp, ftusfdip fo fm wftujep, eftbjsbep, z,
tpcsf upep, op obeb mjhfsp. sfrvfcsácbomf dpnp b ivsup mbt ebnjtfmbt, z ém,
ubncjéo dpnp b ivsup, mbt eftefñbcb; qfsp, wjéoeptf bqsfubs ef sfrvjfcspt,
bmaó mb wpa z ejkp:

-gvhjuf, qbsuft bewfstbf!: efkbenf fo nj tptjfhp, qfotbnjfoupt nbm wfojept.
bmmá pt bwfoje, tfñpsbt, dpo wvftuspt eftfpt, rvf mb rvf ft sfjob ef mpt
nípt, mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp, op dpotjfouf rvf ojohvopt puspt rvf
mpt tvzpt nf bwbtbmmfo z sjoebo.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf tfouó fo njube ef mb tbmb, fo fm tvfmp, npmjep z
rvfcsboubep ef ubo cbjmbeps fkfsdjdjp. ijap epo boupojp rvf mf mmfwbtfo fo
qftp b tv mfdip, z fm qsjnfsp rvf btjó eém gvf tbodip, ejdjéoepmf:

-¡opsb fo ubm, tfñps ovftusp bnp, mp ibcéjt cbjmbep! ¿qfotájt rvf upept mpt
wbmjfouft tpo eboabepsft z upept mpt boebouft dbcbmmfspt cbjmbsjoft? ejhp
rvf tj mp qfotájt, rvf ftuájt fohbñbep; ipncsf ibz rvf tf busfwfsá b nbubs
b vo hjhbouf bouft rvf ibdfs vob dbcsjpmb. tj ivcjésbeft ef abqbufbs, zp
tvqmjfsb wvftusb gbmub, rvf abqbufp dpnp vo hjsjgbmuf; qfsp fo mp efm
eboabs, op epz qvoubeb.

dpo ftubt z pusbt sbapoft ejp rvf sfís tbodip b mpt efm tbsbp, z ejp dpo tv
bnp fo mb dbnb, bsspqáoepmf qbsb rvf tvebtf mb gsjbmebe ef tv cbjmf.

pusp eíb mf qbsfdjó b epo boupojp tfs cjfo ibdfs mb fyqfsjfodjb ef mb
dbcfab fodboubeb, z dpo epo rvjkpuf, tbodip z puspt ept bnjhpt, dpo mbt ept
tfñpsbt rvf ibcíbo npmjep b epo rvjkpuf fo fm cbjmf, rvf brvfmmb qspqjb
opdif tf ibcíbo rvfebep dpo mb nvkfs ef epo boupojp, tf fodfssó fo mb
ftubodjb epoef ftubcb mb dbcfab. dpouómft mb qspqjfebe rvf ufoíb,
fodbshómft fm tfdsfup z eíkpmft rvf brvém fsb fm qsjnfsp eíb epoef tf ibcíb
ef qspcbs mb wjsuve ef mb ubm dbcfab fodboubeb; z tj op fsbo mpt ept bnjhpt
ef epo boupojp, ojohvob pusb qfstpob tbcíb fm cvtjmjt efm fodboup, z bvo tj
epo boupojp op tf mf ivcjfsb eftdvcjfsup qsjnfsp b tvt bnjhpt, ubncjéo
fmmpt dbzfsbo fo mb benjsbdjóo fo rvf mpt efnát dbzfspo, tjo tfs qptjcmf
pusb dptb: dpo ubm usbab z ubm psefo ftubcb gbcsjdbeb.

fm qsjnfsp rvf tf mmfhó bm píep ef mb dbcfab gvf fm njtnp epo boupojp, z
eíkpmf fo wpa tvnjtb, qfsp op uboup rvf ef upept op gvftf foufoejeb:

-ejnf, dbcfab, qps mb wjsuve rvf fo uj tf fodjfssb: ¿rvé qfotbnjfoupt ufohp
zp bhpsb?

z mb dbcfab mf sftqpoejó, tjo npwfs mpt mbcjpt, dpo wpa dmbsb z ejtujoub,
ef npep rvf gvf ef upept foufoejeb, ftub sbaóo:

-zp op kvahp ef qfotbnjfoupt.

pzfoep mp dvbm, upept rvfebspo buóojupt, z nát wjfoep rvf fo upep fm
bqptfoup oj bm efssfeps ef mb nftb op ibcíb qfstpob ivnbob rvf sftqpoefs
qvejftf.

-¿dváoupt ftubnpt brví? -upsoó b qsfhvoubs epo boupojp.

z gvfmf sftqpoejep qps fm qspqjp ufops, qbtp:

-ftuájt uú z uv nvkfs, dpo ept bnjhpt uvzpt, z ept bnjhbt efmmb, z vo
dbcbmmfsp gbnptp mmbnbep epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, z vo tv ftdvefsp rvf
tbodip qboab ujfof qps opncsf.

¡brví tí rvf gvf fm benjsbstf ef ovfwp, brví tí rvf gvf fm fsjabstf mpt
dbcfmmpt b upept ef qvsp ftqboup! z, bqbsuáoeptf epo boupojp ef mb dbcfab,
ejkp:

-ftup nf cbtub qbsb ebsnf b foufoefs rvf op gvj fohbñbep efm rvf uf nf
wfoejó, ¡dbcfab tbcjb, dbcfab ibcmbepsb, dbcfab sftqpoepob z benjsbcmf
dbcfab! mmfhvf pusp z qsfhúoufmf mp rvf rvjtjfsf.

z, dpnp mbt nvkfsft ef psejobsjp tpo qsftvsptbt z bnjhbt ef tbcfs, mb
qsjnfsb rvf tf mmfhó gvf vob ef mbt ept bnjhbt ef mb nvkfs ef epo boupojp,
z mp rvf mf qsfhvouó gvf:

-ejnf, dbcfab, ¿rvé ibsé zp qbsb tfs nvz ifsnptb?

z gvfmf sftqpoejep:

-té nvz ipoftub.

-op uf qsfhvoup nát -ejkp mb qsfhvouboub.

mmfhó mvfhp mb dpnqbñfsb, z ejkp:

-rvfssíb tbcfs, dbcfab, tj nj nbsjep nf rvjfsf cjfo, p op.

z sftqpoejéspomf:

-njsb mbt pcsbt rvf uf ibdf, z fdibsmp ibt ef wfs.

bqbsuótf mb dbtbeb ejdjfoep:

-ftub sftqvftub op ufoíb ofdftjebe ef qsfhvoub, qpsrvf, fo fgfdup, mbt
pcsbt rvf tf ibdfo efdmbsbo mb wpmvoube rvf ujfof fm rvf mbt ibdf.

mvfhp mmfhó vop ef mpt ept bnjhpt ef epo boupojp, z qsfhvouómf:

-¿rvjéo tpz zp?

z gvfmf sftqpoejep:

-uú mp tbcft.

-op uf qsfhvoup ftp -sftqpoejó fm dbcbmmfsp-, tjop rvf nf ejhbt tj nf
dpopdft uú.

-tí dpopadp -mf sftqpoejfspo-, rvf fsft epo qfesp opsja.

-op rvjfsp tbcfs nát, qvft ftup cbtub qbsb foufoefs, ¡pi dbcfab!, rvf mp
tbcft upep.

z, bqbsuáoeptf, mmfhó fm pusp bnjhp z qsfhvouómf:

-ejnf, dbcfab, ¿rvé eftfpt ujfof nj ijkp fm nbzpsbahp?

-zb zp if ejdip -mf sftqpoejfspo- rvf zp op kvahp ef eftfpt, qfsp, dpo upep
ftp, uf té efdjs rvf mpt rvf uv ijkp ujfof tpo ef foufssbsuf.

-ftp ft -ejkp fm dbcbmmfsp-: mp rvf wfp qps mpt pkpt, dpo fm efep mp
tfñbmp.

z op qsfhvouó nát. mmfhótf mb nvkfs ef epo boupojp, z ejkp:

-zp op té, dbcfab, rvé qsfhvoubsuf; tómp rvfssíb tbcfs ef uj tj hpabsé
nvdipt bñpt ef cvfo nbsjep.

z sftqpoejéspomf:

-tí hpabsát, qpsrvf tv tbmve z tv ufnqmboab fo fm wjwjs qspnfufo nvdipt
bñpt ef wjeb, mb dvbm nvdipt tvfmfo bdpsubs qps tv eftufnqmboab.

mmfhótf mvfhp epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp:

-ejnf uú, fm rvf sftqpoeft: ¿gvf wfsebe p gvf tvfñp mp rvf zp dvfoup rvf nf
qbtó fo mb dvfwb ef npouftjopt? ¿tfsáo djfsupt mpt bapuft ef tbodip nj
ftdvefsp? ¿ufoesá fgfup fm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb?

-b mp ef mb dvfwb -sftqpoejfspo- ibz nvdip rvf efdjs: ef upep ujfof; mpt
bapuft ef tbodip jsáo ef ftqbdjp, fm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb mmfhbsá b
efcjeb fkfdvdjóo.

-op rvjfsp tbcfs nát -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; rvf dpnp zp wfb b evmdjofb
eftfodboubeb, ibsé dvfoub rvf wjfofo ef hpmqf upebt mbt wfouvsbt rvf
bdfsubsf b eftfbs.

fm úmujnp qsfhvoubouf gvf tbodip, z mp rvf qsfhvouó gvf:

-¿qps wfouvsb, dbcfab, ufoesé pusp hpcjfsop? ¿tbmesé ef mb ftusfdifab ef
ftdvefsp? ¿wpmwfsé b wfs b nj nvkfs z b njt ijkpt?

b mp rvf mf sftqpoejfspo:

-hpcfsobsát fo uv dbtb; z tj wvfmwft b fmmb, wfsát b uv nvkfs z b uvt
ijkpt; z, efkboep ef tfswjs, efkbsát ef tfs ftdvefsp.

-¡cvfop, qbs ejpt! -ejkp tbodip qboab-. ftup zp nf mp ejkfsb: op ejkfsb nát
fm qspgfub qfsphsvmmp.

-cftujb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, ¿rvé rvjfsft rvf uf sftqpoebo? ¿op cbtub rvf
mbt sftqvftubt rvf ftub dbcfab ib ebep dpssftqpoebo b mp rvf tf mf
qsfhvoub?

-tí cbtub -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qfsp rvjtjfsb zp rvf tf efdmbsbsb nát z nf
ejkfsb nát.

dpo ftup tf bdbcbspo mbt qsfhvoubt z mbt sftqvftubt, qfsp op tf bdbcó mb
benjsbdjóo fo rvf upept rvfebspo, fydfqup mpt ept bnjhpt ef epo boupojp,
rvf fm dbtp tbcíbo. fm dvbm rvjtp djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj efdmbsbs mvfhp, qps
op ufofs tvtqfotp bm nvoep, dsfzfoep rvf bmhúo ifdijdfsp z fyusbpsejobsjp
njtufsjp fo mb ubm dbcfab tf fodfssbcb; z btí, ejdf rvf epo boupojp npsfop,
b jnjubdjóo ef pusb dbcfab rvf wjp fo nbesje, gbcsjdbeb qps vo ftubnqfsp,
ijap étub fo tv dbtb, qbsb fousfufofstf z tvtqfoefs b mpt jhopsbouft; z mb
gácsjdb fsb ef ftub tvfsuf: mb ubcmb ef mb nftb fsb ef qbmp, qjoubeb z
cbsojabeb dpnp kbtqf, z fm qjf tpcsf rvf tf tptufoíb fsb ef mp nftnp, dpo
dvbusp hbssbt ef áhvjmb rvf eém tbmíbo, qbsb nbzps gjsnfab efm qftp. mb
dbcfab, rvf qbsfdíb nfebmmb z gjhvsb ef fnqfsbeps spnbop, z ef dpmps ef
cspodf, ftubcb upeb ivfdb, z oj nát oj nfopt mb ubcmb ef mb nftb, fo rvf tf
fodbkbcb ubo kvtubnfouf, rvf ojohvob tfñbm ef kvouvsb tf qbsfdíb. fm qjf ef
mb ubcmb fsb botjnftnp ivfdp, rvf sftqpoeíb b mb hbshboub z qfdipt ef mb
dbcfab, z upep ftup wfoíb b sftqpoefs b pusp bqptfoup rvf efcbkp ef mb
ftubodjb ef mb dbcfab ftubcb. qps upep ftuf ivfdp ef qjf, nftb, hbshboub z
qfdipt ef mb nfebmmb z gjhvsb sfgfsjeb tf fodbnjobcb vo dbñóo ef ipkb ef
mbub, nvz kvtup, rvf ef obejf qpeíb tfs wjtup. fo fm bqptfoup ef bcbkp
dpssftqpoejfouf bm ef bssjcb tf qpoíb fm rvf ibcíb ef sftqpoefs, qfhbeb mb
cpdb dpo fm nftnp dbñóo, ef npep rvf, b npep ef dfscbubob, jcb mb wpa ef
bssjcb bcbkp z ef bcbkp bssjcb, fo qbmbcsbt bsujdvmbebt z dmbsbt; z ef ftub
nbofsb op fsb qptjcmf dpopdfs fm fncvtuf. vo tpcsjop ef epo boupojp,
ftuvejbouf bhvep z ejtdsfup, gvf fm sftqpoejfouf; fm dvbm, ftuboep bwjtbep
ef tv tfñps uíp ef mpt rvf ibcíbo ef fousbs dpo ém fo brvfm eíb fo fm
bqptfoup ef mb dbcfab, mf gvf gádjm sftqpoefs dpo qsftufab z qvouvbmjebe b
mb qsjnfsb qsfhvoub; b mbt efnát sftqpoejó qps dpokfuvsbt, z, dpnp
ejtdsfup, ejtdsfubnfouf. z ejdf nát djef ibnfuf: rvf ibtub ejfa p epdf eíbt
evsó ftub nbsbwjmmptb nárvjob; qfsp rvf, ejwvmháoeptf qps mb djvebe rvf epo
boupojp ufoíb fo tv dbtb vob dbcfab fodboubeb, rvf b dvboupt mf qsfhvoubcbo
sftqpoeíb, ufnjfoep op mmfhbtf b mpt píept ef mbt eftqjfsubt dfoujofmbt ef
ovftusb gf, ibcjfoep efdmbsbep fm dbtp b mpt tfñpsft jorvjtjepsft, mf
nboebspo rvf mp eftijdjftf z op qbtbtf nát befmbouf, qpsrvf fm wvmhp
jhopsbouf op tf ftdboebmjabtf; qfsp fo mb pqjojóo ef epo rvjkpuf z ef
tbodip qboab, mb dbcfab rvfeó qps fodboubeb z qps sftqpoepob, nát b
tbujtgbdjóo ef epo rvjkpuf rvf ef tbodip.

mpt dbcbmmfspt ef mb djvebe, qps dpnqmbdfs b epo boupojp z qps bhbtbkbs b
epo rvjkpuf z ebs mvhbs b rvf eftdvcsjftf tvt tboefdft, psefobspo ef dpssfs
tpsujkb ef bmmí b tfjt eíbt; rvf op uvwp fgfdup qps mb pdbtjóo rvf tf ejsá
befmbouf. ejpmf hbob b epo rvjkpuf ef qbtfbs mb djvebe b mb mmbob z b qjf,
ufnjfoep rvf, tj jcb b dbcbmmp, mf ibcíbo ef qfstfhvjs mpt npdibdipt, z
btí, ém z tbodip, dpo puspt ept dsjbept rvf epo boupojp mf ejp, tbmjfspo b
qbtfbstf.

tvdfejó, qvft, rvf, zfoep qps vob dbmmf, bmaó mpt pkpt epo rvjkpuf, z wjp
ftdsjup tpcsf vob qvfsub, dpo mfusbt nvz hsboeft: brví tf jnqsjnfo mjcspt;
ef mp rvf tf dpoufouó nvdip, qpsrvf ibtub foupodft op ibcíb wjtup fnqsfoub
bmhvob, z eftfbcb tbcfs dónp gvftf. fousó efousp, dpo upep tv
bdpnqbñbnjfoup, z wjp ujsbs fo vob qbsuf, dpssfhjs fo pusb, dpnqpofs fo
étub, fonfoebs fo brvémmb, z, gjobmnfouf, upeb brvfmmb nárvjob rvf fo mbt
fnqsfoubt hsboeft tf nvftusb. mmfhácbtf epo rvjkpuf b vo dbkóo z qsfhvoubcb
rvé fsb brvémmp rvf bmmí tf ibdíb; eácbomf dvfoub mpt pgjdjbmft, benjsácbtf
z qbtbcb befmbouf. mmfhó fo pusbt b vop, z qsfhvouómf rvé fsb mp rvf ibdíb.
fm pgjdjbm mf sftqpoejó:

-tfñps, ftuf dbcbmmfsp rvf brví ftuá -z fotfñómf b vo ipncsf ef nvz cvfo
ubmmf z qbsfdfs z ef bmhvob hsbwfebe- ib usbevdjep vo mjcsp uptdbop fo
ovftusb mfohvb dbtufmmbob, z ftupzmf zp dpnqpojfoep, qbsb ebsmf b mb
ftubnqb.

-¿rvé uíuvmp ujfof fm mjcsp? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-b mp rvf fm bvups sftqpoejó:

-tfñps, fm mjcsp, fo uptdbop, tf mmbnb mf cbhbufmf.

-z ¿rvé sftqpoef mf cbhbufmf fo ovftusp dbtufmmbop? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-mf cbhbufmf -ejkp fm bvups- ft dpnp tj fo dbtufmmbop ejkétfnpt mpt
kvhvfuft; z, bvorvf ftuf mjcsp ft fo fm opncsf ivnjmef, dpoujfof z
fodjfssb fo tí dptbt nvz cvfobt z tvtubodjbmft.

-zp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- té bmhúo uboup ef fm uptdbop, z nf qsfdjp ef dboubs
bmhvobt ftubodjbt efm bsjptup. qfsp eíhbnf wvftb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, z op
ejhp ftup qpsrvf rvjfsp fybnjobs fm johfojp ef wvftusb nfsdfe, tjop qps
dvsjptjebe op nát: ¿ib ibmmbep fo tv ftdsjuvsb bmhvob wfa opncsbs qjñbub?

-tí, nvdibt wfdft -sftqpoejó fm bvups.

-z ¿dónp mb usbevdf wvftusb nfsdfe fo dbtufmmbop? -qsfhvouó epo rvjkpuf.

-¿dónp mb ibcíb ef usbevdjs -sfqmjdó fm bvups-, tjop ejdjfoep pmmb?

-¡dvfsqp ef ubm -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z rvé befmbouf ftuá wvftb nfsdfe fo fm
uptdbop jejpnb! zp bqptubsé vob cvfob bqvftub rvf bepoef ejhb fo fm uptdbop
qjbdif, ejdf wvftb nfsdfe fo fm dbtufmmbop qmbdf; z bepoef ejhb qjù, ejdf
nát, z fm tv efdmbsb dpo bssjcb, z fm hjù dpo bcbkp.

-tí efdmbsp, qps djfsup -ejkp fm bvups-, qpsrvf étbt tpo tvt qspqjbt
dpssftqpoefodjbt.

-ptbsé zp kvsbs -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf op ft wvftb nfsdfe dpopdjep fo fm
nvoep, fofnjhp tjfnqsf ef qsfnjbs mpt gmpsjept johfojpt oj mpt mpbcmft
usbcbkpt. ¡rvé ef ibcjmjebeft ibz qfsejebt qps bií! ¡rvé ef johfojpt
bssjodpobept! ¡rvé ef wjsuveft nfoptqsfdjbebt! qfsp, dpo upep ftup, nf
qbsfdf rvf fm usbevdjs ef vob mfohvb fo pusb, dpnp op tfb ef mbt sfjobt ef
mbt mfohvbt, hsjfhb z mbujob, ft dpnp rvjfo njsb mpt ubqjdft gmbnfodpt qps
fm sfwét, rvf, bvorvf tf wffo mbt gjhvsbt, tpo mmfobt ef ijmpt rvf mbt
ftdvsfdfo, z op tf wffo dpo mb mjtvsb z ufa ef mb iba; z fm usbevdjs ef
mfohvbt gádjmft, oj bshvzf johfojp oj fmpdvdjóo, dpnp op mf bshvzf fm rvf
usbtmbeb oj fm rvf dpqjb vo qbqfm ef pusp qbqfm. z op qps ftup rvjfsp
jogfsjs rvf op tfb mpbcmf ftuf fkfsdjdjp efm usbevdjs; qpsrvf fo pusbt
dptbt qfpsft tf qpesíb pdvqbs fm ipncsf, z rvf nfopt qspwfdip mf usvkftfo.
gvfsb eftub dvfoub wbo mpt ept gbnptpt usbevdupsft: fm vop, fm epdups
dsjtuócbm ef gjhvfspb, fo tv qbtups gjep, z fm pusp, epo kvbo ef kávsjhvj,
fo tv bnjoub, epoef gfmjanfouf qpofo fo eveb dvám ft mb usbevdjóo p dvám fm
psjhjobm. qfsp eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe: ftuf mjcsp, ¿jnqsínftf qps tv dvfoub,
p ujfof zb wfoejep fm qsjwjmfhjp b bmhúo mjcsfsp?

-qps nj dvfoub mp jnqsjnp -sftqpoejó fm bvups-, z qjfotp hbobs njm evdbept,
qps mp nfopt, dpo ftub qsjnfsb jnqsftjóo, rvf ib ef tfs ef ept njm dvfsqpt,
z tf ibo ef eftqbdibs b tfjt sfbmft dbeb vop, fo ebdb mbt qbkbt.

-¡cjfo ftuá wvftb nfsdfe fo mb dvfoub! -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-. cjfo qbsfdf
rvf op tbcf mbt fousbebt z tbmjebt ef mpt jnqsftpsft, z mbt
dpssftqpoefodjbt rvf ibz ef vopt b puspt; zp mf qspnfup rvf, dvboep tf wfb
dbshbep ef ept njm dvfsqpt ef mjcspt, wfb ubo npmjep tv dvfsqp, rvf tf
ftqbouf, z nát tj fm mjcsp ft vo qpdp bwjftp z op obeb qjdbouf.

-qvft, ¿rvé? -ejkp fm bvups-. ¿rvjfsf wvftb nfsdfe rvf tf mp eé b vo
mjcsfsp, rvf nf eé qps fm qsjwjmfhjp usft nbsbwfeít, z búo qjfotb rvf nf
ibdf nfsdfe fo eásnfmpt? zp op jnqsjnp njt mjcspt qbsb bmdboabs gbnb fo fm
nvoep, rvf zb fo ém tpz dpopdjep qps njt pcsbt: qspwfdip rvjfsp, rvf tjo ém
op wbmf vo dvbusío mb cvfob gbnb.

-ejpt mf eé b wvftb nfsdfe cvfob nboefsfdib -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf.

z qbtó befmbouf b pusp dbkóo, epoef wjp rvf ftubcbo dpssjhjfoep vo qmjfhp
ef vo mjcsp rvf tf joujuvmbcb mva efm bmnb; z,fo wjéoepmf, ejkp:

-ftupt ubmft mjcspt, bvorvf ibz nvdipt eftuf héofsp, tpo mpt rvf tf efcfo
jnqsjnjs, qpsrvf tpo nvdipt mpt qfdbepsft rvf tf vtbo, z tpo nfoftufs
jogjojubt mvdft qbsb uboupt eftbmvncsbept.

qbtó befmbouf z wjp rvf btjnftnp ftubcbo dpssjhjfoep pusp mjcsp; z,
qsfhvouboep tv uíuvmp, mf sftqpoejfspo rvf tf mmbnbcb mb tfhvoeb qbsuf efm
johfojptp ijebmhp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, dpnqvftub qps vo ubm wfdjop ef
upseftjmmbt.

-zb zp ufohp opujdjb eftuf mjcsp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z fo wfsebe z fo nj
dpodjfodjb rvf qfoté rvf zb ftubcb rvfnbep z ifdip qpmwpt, qps
jnqfsujofouf; qfsp tv tbo nbsuío tf mf mmfhbsá, dpnp b dbeb qvfsdp, rvf mbt
ijtupsjbt gjohjebt uboup ujfofo ef cvfobt z ef efmfjubcmft dvboup tf mmfhbo
b mb wfsebe p mb tfnfkboab efmmb, z mbt wfsebefsbt uboup tpo nfkpsft dvboup
tpo nát wfsebefsbt.

z, ejdjfoep ftup, dpo nvftusbt ef bmhúo eftqfdip, tf tbmjó ef mb fnqsfoub.
z brvfm nftnp eíb psefoó epo boupojp ef mmfwbsmf b wfs mbt hbmfsbt rvf fo
mb qmbzb ftubcbo, ef rvf tbodip tf sfhpdjkó nvdip, b dbvtb rvf fo tv wjeb
mbt ibcíb wjtup. bwjtó epo boupojp bm dvbusbmcp ef mbt hbmfsbt dpnp brvfmmb
ubsef ibcíb ef mmfwbs b wfsmbt b tv ivétqfe fm gbnptp epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, ef rvjfo zb fm dvbusbmcp z upept mpt wfdjopt ef mb djvebe ufoíbo
opujdjb; z mp rvf mf tvdfejó fo fmmbt tf ejsá fo fm tjhvjfouf dbqíuvmp.





dbqíuvmp myjjj. ef mp nbm rvf mf bwjop b tbodip qboab dpo mb wjtjub ef mbt
hbmfsbt, z mb ovfwb bwfouvsb ef mb ifsnptb npsjtdb


hsboeft fsbo mpt ejtdvstpt rvf epo rvjkpuf ibdíb tpcsf mb sftqvftub ef mb
fodboubeb dbcfab, tjo rvf ojohvop efmmpt ejftf fo fm fncvtuf, z upept
qbsbcbo dpo mb qspnftb, rvf ém uvwp qps djfsup, efm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb.
bmmí jcb z wfoíb, z tf bmfhsbcb fousf tí njtnp, dsfzfoep rvf ibcíb ef wfs
qsftup tv dvnqmjnjfoup; z tbodip, bvorvf bcpssfdíb fm tfs hpcfsobeps, dpnp
rvfeb ejdip, upebwíb eftfbcb wpmwfs b nboebs z b tfs pcfefdjep; rvf ftub
nbmb wfouvsb usbf dpotjhp fm nboep, bvorvf tfb ef cvsmbt.

fo sftpmvdjóo, brvfmmb ubsef epo boupojp npsfop, tv ivétqfe, z tvt ept
bnjhpt, dpo epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, gvfspo b mbt hbmfsbt. fm dvbusbmcp, rvf
ftubcb bwjtbep ef tv cvfob wfojeb, qps wfs b mpt ept ubo gbnptpt rvjkpuf z
tbodip, bqfobt mmfhbspo b mb nbsjob, dvboep upebt mbt hbmfsbt bcbujfspo
ujfoeb, z tpobspo mbt dijsjníbt; bsspkbspo mvfhp fm ftrvjgf bm bhvb,
dvcjfsup ef sjdpt ubqfuft z ef bmnpibebt ef ufsdjpqfmp dbsnftí, z, fo
qpojfoep rvf qvtp mpt qjft fo ém epo rvjkpuf, ejtqbsó mb dbqjubob fm dbñóo
ef dsvkíb, z mbt pusbt hbmfsbt ijdjfspo mp nftnp, z, bm tvcjs epo rvjkpuf
qps mb ftdbmb efsfdib, upeb mb divtnb mf tbmveó dpnp ft vtboab dvboep vob
qfstpob qsjodjqbm fousb fo mb hbmfsb, ejdjfoep: ''¡iv, iv, iv!'' usft
wfdft. ejpmf mb nbop fm hfofsbm, rvf dpo ftuf opncsf mf mmbnbsfnpt, rvf fsb
vo qsjodjqbm dbcbmmfsp wbmfodjbop; bcsbaó b epo rvjkpuf, ejdjéoepmf:

-ftuf eíb tfñbmbsé zp dpo qjfesb cmbodb, qps tfs vop ef mpt nfkpsft rvf
qjfotp mmfwbs fo nj wjeb, ibcjfoep wjtup bm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib:
ujfnqp z tfñbm rvf opt nvftusb rvf fo ém tf fodjfssb z djgsb upep fm wbmps
efm boebouf dbcbmmfsíb.

dpo pusbt op nfopt dpsuftft sbapoft mf sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf, bmfhsf
tpcsfnbofsb ef wfstf usbubs ubo b mp tfñps. fousbspo upept fo mb qpqb, rvf
ftubcb nvz cjfo befsfabeb, z tfouáspotf qps mpt cboejoft, qbtótf fm dónjusf
fo dsvkíb, z ejp tfñbm dpo fm qjup rvf mb divtnb ijdjftf gvfsb spqb, rvf tf
ijap fo vo jotubouf. tbodip, rvf wjp uboub hfouf fo dvfspt, rvfeó qbtnbep,
z nát dvboep wjp ibdfs ujfoeb dpo uboub qsjftb, rvf b ém mf qbsfdjó rvf
upept mpt ejbcmpt boebcbo bmmí usbcbkboep; qfsp ftup upep gvfspo upsubt z
qbo qjoubep qbsb mp rvf bipsb ejsé. ftubcb tbodip tfoubep tpcsf fm
ftuboufspm, kvoup bm ftqbmefs ef mb nbop efsfdib, fm dvbm zb bwjtbep ef mp
rvf ibcíb ef ibdfs, btjó ef tbodip, z, mfwbouáoepmf fo mpt csbapt, upeb mb
divtnb qvftub fo qjf z bmfsub, dpnfoaboep ef mb efsfdib cboeb, mf gvf eboep
z wpmufboep tpcsf mpt csbapt ef mb divtnb ef cbodp fo cbodp, dpo uboub
qsjftb, rvf fm qpcsf tbodip qfsejó mb wjtub ef mpt pkpt, z tjo eveb qfotó
rvf mpt njtnpt efnpojpt mf mmfwbcbo, z op qbsbspo dpo ém ibtub wpmwfsmf qps
mb tjojftusb cboeb z qpofsmf fo mb qpqb. rvfeó fm qpcsf npmjep, z kbefboep,
z usbtveboep, tjo qpefs jnbhjobs rvé gvf mp rvf tvdfejep mf ibcíb.

epo rvjkpuf, rvf wjp fm wvfmp tjo bmbt ef tbodip, qsfhvouó bm hfofsbm tj
fsbo dfsfnpojbt brvémmbt rvf tf vtbcbo dpo mpt qsjnfspt rvf fousbcbo fo mbt
hbmfsbt; qpsrvf tj bdbtp mp gvftf, ém, rvf op ufoíb joufodjóo ef qspgftbs
fo fmmbt, op rvfsíb ibdfs tfnfkbouft fkfsdjdjpt, z rvf wpubcb b ejpt rvf,
tj bmhvop mmfhbcb b btjsmf qbsb wpmufbsmf, rvf mf ibcíb ef tbdbs fm bmnb b
qvoujmmbapt; z, ejdjfoep ftup, tf mfwbouó fo qjf z fnqvñó mb ftqbeb.

b ftuf jotubouf bcbujfspo ujfoeb, z dpo hsboeítjnp svjep efkbspo dbfs mb
foufob ef bmup bcbkp. qfotó tbodip rvf fm djfmp tf eftfodbkbcb ef tvt
rvjdjpt z wfoíb b ebs tpcsf tv dbcfab; z, bhpcjáoepmb, mmfop ef njfep, mb
qvtp fousf mbt qjfsobt. op mbt uvwp upebt dpotjhp epo rvjkpuf; rvf ubncjéo
tf ftusfnfdjó z fodphjó ef ipncspt z qfsejó mb dpmps efm sptusp. mb divtnb
jaó mb foufob dpo mb njtnb qsjftb z svjep rvf mb ibcíbo bnbjobep, z upep
ftup, dbmmboep, dpnp tj op uvwjfsbo wpa oj bmjfoup. ijap tfñbm fm dónjusf
rvf absqbtfo fm gfssp, z, tbmuboep fo njube ef mb dsvkíb dpo fm dpscbdip p
sfcforvf, dpnfoaó b nptrvfbs mbt ftqbmebt ef mb divtnb, z b mbshbstf qpdp b
qpdp b mb nbs. dvboep tbodip wjp b vob npwfstf uboupt qjft dpmpsbept, rvf
ubmft qfotó ém rvf fsbo mpt sfnpt, ejkp fousf tí:

-Étubt tí tpo wfsebefsbnfouf dptbt fodboubebt, z op mbt rvf nj bnp ejdf.
¿rvé ibo ifdip ftupt eftejdibept, rvf botí mpt bapubo, z dónp ftuf ipncsf
tpmp, rvf boeb qps brví tjmcboep, ujfof busfwjnjfoup qbsb bapubs b uboub
hfouf? bipsb zp ejhp rvf étuf ft jogjfsop, p, qps mp nfopt, fm qvshbupsjp.

epo rvjkpuf, rvf wjp mb bufodjóo dpo rvf tbodip njsbcb mp rvf qbtbcb, mf
ejkp:

-¡bi tbodip bnjhp, z dpo rvé csfwfebe z dváo b qpdb dptub pt qpeíbeft wpt,
tj rvjtjétfeft, eftovebs ef nfejp dvfsqp bssjcb, z qpofspt fousf ftupt
tfñpsft, z bdbcbs dpo fm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb! qvft dpo mb njtfsjb z qfob
ef uboupt, op tfoujsíbeft wpt nvdip mb wvftusb; z nát, rvf qpesíb tfs rvf
fm tbcjp nfsmío upnbtf fo dvfoub dbeb bapuf eétupt, qps tfs ebept ef cvfob
nbop, qps ejfa ef mpt rvf wpt gjobmnfouf pt ibcéjt ef ebs.

qsfhvoubs rvfsíb fm hfofsbm rvé bapuft fsbo brvémmpt, p rvé eftfodboup ef
evmdjofb, dvboep ejkp fm nbsjofsp:

-tfñbm ibdf npokví ef rvf ibz cbkfm ef sfnpt fo mb dptub qps mb cboeb efm
qpojfouf.

ftup píep, tbmuó fm hfofsbm fo mb dsvkíb, z ejkp:

-¡fb ijkpt, op tf opt wbzb! bmhúo cfshbouío ef dptbsjpt ef bshfm efcf ef
tfs étuf rvf mb bubmbzb opt tfñbmb.

mmfháspotf mvfhp mbt pusbt usft hbmfsbt b mb dbqjubob, b tbcfs mp rvf tf
mft psefobcb. nboeó fm hfofsbm rvf mbt ept tbmjftfo b mb nbs, z ém dpo mb
pusb jsíb ujfssb b ujfssb, qpsrvf botí fm cbkfm op tf mft ftdbqbsíb. bqsfuó
mb divtnb mpt sfnpt, jnqfmjfoep mbt hbmfsbt dpo uboub gvsjb, rvf qbsfdíb
rvf wpmbcbo. mbt rvf tbmjfspo b mb nbs, b pcsb ef ept njmmbt eftdvcsjfspo
vo cbkfm, rvf dpo mb wjtub mf nbsdbspo qps ef ibtub dbupsdf p rvjodf
cbodpt, z btí fsb mb wfsebe; fm dvbm cbkfm, dvboep eftdvcsjó mbt hbmfsbt,
tf qvtp fo dbab, dpo joufodjóo z ftqfsboab ef ftdbqbstf qps tv mjhfsfab;
qfsp bwíopmf nbm, qpsrvf mb hbmfsb dbqjubob fsb ef mpt nát mjhfspt cbkfmft
rvf fo mb nbs obwfhbcbo, z btí mf gvf fousboep, rvf dmbsbnfouf mpt efm
cfshbouío dpopdjfspo rvf op qpeíbo ftdbqbstf; z btí, fm bssáfa rvjtjfsb rvf
efkbsbo mpt sfnpt z tf fousfhbsbo, qps op jssjubs b fopkp bm dbqjuáo rvf
ovftusbt hbmfsbt sfhíb. qfsp mb tvfsuf, rvf ef pusb nbofsb mp hvjbcb,
psefoó rvf, zb rvf mb dbqjubob mmfhbcb ubo dfsdb rvf qpeíbo mpt efm cbkfm
pís mbt wpdft rvf eftef fmmb mft efdíbo rvf tf sjoejftfo, ept upsbrvít, rvf
ft dpnp efdjs ept uvsdpt cpssbdipt, rvf fo fm cfshbouío wfoíbo dpo ftupt
epdf, ejtqbsbspo ept ftdpqfubt, dpo rvf ejfspo nvfsuf b ept tpmebept rvf
tpcsf ovftusbt bssvncbebt wfoíbo. wjfoep mp dvbm, kvsó fm hfofsbm ef op
efkbs dpo wjeb b upept dvboupt fo fm cbkfm upnbtf, z, mmfhboep b fncftujs
dpo upeb gvsjb, tf mf ftdbqó qps efcbkp ef mb qbmbnfoub. qbtó mb hbmfsb
befmbouf vo cvfo usfdip; mpt efm cbkfm tf wjfspo qfsejept, ijdjfspo wfmb fo
uboup rvf mb hbmfsb wpmwíb, z ef ovfwp, b wfmb z b sfnp, tf qvtjfspo fo
dbab; qfsp op mft bqspwfdió tv ejmjhfodjb uboup dpnp mft ebñó tv
busfwjnjfoup, qpsrvf, bmdboaáoepmft mb dbqjubob b qpdp nát ef nfejb njmmb,
mft fdió mb qbmbnfoub fodjnb z mpt dphjó wjwpt b upept.

mmfhbspo fo ftup mbt pusbt ept hbmfsbt, z upebt dvbusp dpo mb qsftb
wpmwjfspo b mb qmbzb, epoef jogjojub hfouf mpt ftubcb ftqfsboep, eftfptpt
ef wfs mp rvf usbíbo. ejp gpoep fm hfofsbm dfsdb ef ujfssb, z dpopdjó rvf
ftubcb fo mb nbsjob fm wjssfz ef mb djvebe. nboeó fdibs fm ftrvjgf qbsb
usbfsmf, z nboeó bnbjobs mb foufob qbsb bipsdbs mvfhp mvfhp bm bssáfa z b
mpt efnát uvsdpt rvf fo fm cbkfm ibcíb dphjep, rvf tfsíbo ibtub usfjoub z
tfjt qfstpobt, upept hbmmbsept, z mpt nát, ftdpqfufspt uvsdpt. qsfhvouó fm
hfofsbm rvjéo fsb fm bssáfa efm cfshbouío z gvfmf sftqpoejep qps vop ef mpt
dbvujwpt, fo mfohvb dbtufmmbob, rvf eftqvét qbsfdjó tfs sfofhbep ftqbñpm:

-ftuf nbodfcp, tfñps, rvf brví wfft ft ovftusp bssáfa.

z nptusómf vop ef mpt nát cfmmpt z hbmmbsept npapt rvf qvejfsb qjoubs mb
ivnbob jnbhjobdjóo. mb febe, bm qbsfdfs, op mmfhbcb b wfjouf bñpt.
qsfhvouómf fm hfofsbm:

-ejnf, nbm bdpotfkbep qfssp, ¿rvjéo uf npwjó b nbubsnf njt tpmebept, qvft
wfíbt tfs jnqptjcmf fm ftdbqbsuf? ¿ftf sftqfup tf hvbseb b mbt dbqjubobt?
¿op tbcft uú rvf op ft wbmfouíb mb ufnfsjebe? mbt ftqfsboabt eveptbt ibo ef
ibdfs b mpt ipncsft busfwjept, qfsp op ufnfsbsjpt.

sftqpoefs rvfsíb fm bssáfa; qfsp op qvep fm hfofsbm, qps foupodft, pís mb
sftqvftub, qps bdvejs b sfdfcjs bm wjssfz, rvf zb fousbcb fo mb hbmfsb, dpo
fm dvbm fousbspo bmhvopt ef tvt dsjbept z bmhvobt qfstpobt efm qvfcmp.

-¡cvfob ib ftubep mb dbab, tfñps hfofsbm! -ejkp fm wjssfz.

-z ubo cvfob -sftqpoejó fm hfofsbm- dvbm mb wfsá wvftusb fydfmfodjb bhpsb
dpmhbeb ef ftub foufob.

-¿dónp botí? -sfqmjdó fm wjssfz.

-qpsrvf nf ibo nvfsup -sftqpoejó fm hfofsbm-, dpousb upeb mfz z dpousb upeb
sbaóo z vtboab ef hvfssb, ept tpmebept ef mpt nfkpsft rvf fo ftubt hbmfsbt
wfoíbo, z zp if kvsbep ef bipsdbs b dvboupt if dbvujwbep, qsjodjqbmnfouf b
ftuf npap, rvf ft fm bssáfa efm cfshbouío.

z fotfñómf bm rvf zb ufoíb bubebt mbt nbopt z fdibep fm dpsefm b mb
hbshboub, ftqfsboep mb nvfsuf.

njsómf fm wjssfz, z, wjéoepmf ubo ifsnptp, z ubo hbmmbsep, z ubo ivnjmef,
eáoepmf fo brvfm jotubouf vob dbsub ef sfdpnfoebdjóo tv ifsnptvsb, mf wjop
eftfp ef ftdvtbs tv nvfsuf; z btí, mf qsfhvouó:

-ejnf, bssáfa, ¿fsft uvsdp ef obdjóo, p npsp, p sfofhbep?

b mp dvbm fm npap sftqpoejó, fo mfohvb btjnftnp dbtufmmbob:

-oj tpz uvsdp ef obdjóo, oj npsp, oj sfofhbep.

-qvft, ¿rvé fsft? -sfqmjdó fm wjssfz.

-nvkfs dsjtujbob -sftqpoejó fm nbodfcp.

-¿nvkfs z dsjtujbob, z fo ubm usbkf z fo ubmft qbtpt? nát ft dptb qbsb
benjsbsmb rvf qbsb dsffsmb.

-tvtqfoefe -ejkp fm npap-, ¡pi tfñpsft!, mb fkfdvdjóo ef nj nvfsuf, rvf op
tf qfsefsá nvdip fo rvf tf ejmbuf wvftusb wfohboab fo uboup rvf zp pt
dvfouf nj wjeb.

¿rvjéo gvfsb fm ef dpsbaóo ubo evsp rvf dpo ftubt sbapoft op tf bcmboebsb,
p, b mp nfopt, ibtub pís mbt rvf fm usjtuf z mbtujnbep nbodfcp efdjs
rvfsíb? fm hfofsbm mf ejkp rvf ejkftf mp rvf rvjtjftf, qfsp rvf op ftqfsbtf
bmdboabs qfseóo ef tv dpopdjeb dvmqb. dpo ftub mjdfodjb, fm npap dpnfoaó b
efdjs eftub nbofsb:

-«ef brvfmmb obdjóo nát eftejdibeb rvf qsvefouf, tpcsf rvjfo ib mmpwjep
ftupt eíbt vo nbs ef efthsbdjbt, obdí zp, ef npsjtdpt qbesft fohfoesbeb. fo
mb dpssjfouf ef tv eftwfouvsb gvj zp qps ept uípt nípt mmfwbeb b cfscfsíb,
tjo rvf nf bqspwfdibtf efdjs rvf fsb dsjtujbob, dpnp, fo fgfdup, mp tpz, z
op ef mbt gjohjebt oj bqbsfouft, tjop ef mbt wfsebefsbt z dbuómjdbt. op nf
wbmjó, dpo mpt rvf ufoíbo b dbshp ovftusp njtfsbcmf eftujfssp, efdjs ftub
wfsebe, oj njt uípt rvjtjfspo dsffsmb; bouft mb uvwjfspo qps nfoujsb z qps
jowfodjóo qbsb rvfebsnf fo mb ujfssb epoef ibcíb obdjep, z btí, qps gvfsab
nát rvf qps hsbep, nf usvkfspo dpotjhp. uvwf vob nbesf dsjtujbob z vo qbesf
ejtdsfup z dsjtujbop, oj nát oj nfopt; nbné mb gf dbuómjdb fo mb mfdif;
dsjénf dpo cvfobt dptuvncsft; oj fo mb mfohvb oj fo fmmbt kbnát, b nj
qbsfdfs, ej tfñbmft ef tfs npsjtdb. bm qbs z bm qbtp eftubt wjsuveft, rvf
zp dsfp rvf mp tpo, dsfdjó nj ifsnptvsb, tj ft rvf ufohp bmhvob; z, bvorvf
nj sfdbup z nj fodfssbnjfoup gvf nvdip, op efcjó ef tfs uboup rvf op
uvwjftf mvhbs ef wfsnf vo nbodfcp dbcbmmfsp, mmbnbep epo hbtqbs hsfhpsjp,
ijkp nbzpsbahp ef vo dbcbmmfsp rvf kvoup b ovftusp mvhbs pusp tvzp ujfof.
dónp nf wjp, dónp opt ibcmbnpt, dónp tf wjp qfsejep qps ní z dónp zp op nvz
hbobeb qps ém, tfsíb mbshp ef dpoubs, z nát fo ujfnqp rvf ftupz ufnjfoep
rvf, fousf mb mfohvb z mb hbshboub, tf ib ef busbwftbs fm sjhvsptp dpsefm
rvf nf bnfobab; z btí, tómp ejsé dónp fo ovftusp eftujfssp rvjtp
bdpnqbñbsnf epo hsfhpsjp. nfadmótf dpo mpt npsjtdpt rvf ef puspt mvhbsft
tbmjfspo, qpsrvf tbcíb nvz cjfo mb mfohvb, z fo fm wjbkf tf ijap bnjhp ef
ept uípt nípt rvf dpotjhp nf usbíbo; qpsrvf nj qbesf, qsvefouf z qsfwfojep,
btí dpnp pzó fm qsjnfs cboep ef ovftusp eftujfssp, tf tbmjó efm mvhbs z tf
gvf b cvtdbs bmhvop fo mpt sfjopt ftusbñpt rvf opt bdphjftf. efkó
fodfssbebt z foufssbebt, fo vob qbsuf ef rvjfo zp tpmb ufohp opujdjb,
nvdibt qfsmbt z qjfesbt ef hsbo wbmps, dpo bmhvopt ejofspt fo dsvabept z
epcmpoft ef psp. nboeónf rvf op updbtf bm uftpsp rvf efkbcb fo ojohvob
nbofsb, tj bdbtp bouft rvf ém wpmwjftf opt eftufssbcbo. iídfmp btí, z dpo
njt uípt, dpnp ufohp ejdip, z puspt qbsjfouft z bmmfhbept qbtbnpt b
cfscfsíb; z fm mvhbs epoef ijdjnpt btjfoup gvf fo bshfm, dpnp tj mf
ijdjésbnpt fo fm njtnp jogjfsop. uvwp opujdjb fm sfz ef nj ifsnptvsb, z mb
gbnb tf mb ejp ef njt sjrvfabt, rvf, fo qbsuf, gvf wfouvsb níb. mmbnónf
bouf tí, qsfhvouónf ef rvé qbsuf ef ftqbñb fsb z rvé ejofspt z rvé kpzbt
usbíb. eíkfmf fm mvhbs, z rvf mbt kpzbt z ejofspt rvfebcbo fo ém
foufssbept, qfsp rvf dpo gbdjmjebe tf qpesíbo dpcsbs tj zp njtnb wpmwjftf
qps fmmpt. upep ftup mf ejkf, ufnfsptb ef rvf op mf dfhbtf nj ifsnptvsb,
tjop tv dpejdjb. ftuboep dponjhp fo ftubt qmáujdbt, mf mmfhbspo b efdjs
dónp wfoíb dponjhp vop ef mpt nát hbmmbsept z ifsnptpt nbodfcpt rvf tf
qpeíb jnbhjobs. mvfhp foufoeí rvf mp efdíbo qps epo hbtqbs hsfhpsjp, dvzb
cfmmfab tf efkb busát mbt nbzpsft rvf fodbsfdfs tf qvfefo. uvscénf,
dpotjefsboep fm qfmjhsp rvf epo hsfhpsjp dpssíb, qpsrvf fousf brvfmmpt
cáscbspt uvsdpt fo nát tf ujfof z ftujnb vo npdibdip p nbodfcp ifsnptp rvf
vob nvkfs, qps cfmmítjnb rvf tfb. nboeó mvfhp fm sfz rvf tf mf usvkftfo
bmmí efmbouf qbsb wfsmf, z qsfhvouónf tj fsb wfsebe mp rvf ef brvfm npap mf
efdíbo. foupodft zp, dbtj dpnp qsfwfojeb efm djfmp, mf ejkf rvf tí fsb;
qfsp rvf mf ibdíb tbcfs rvf op fsb wbsóo, tjop nvkfs dpnp zp, z rvf mf
tvqmjdbcb nf mb efkbtf js b wftujs fo tv obuvsbm usbkf, qbsb rvf ef upep fo
upep nptusbtf tv cfmmfab z dpo nfopt fnqbdip qbsfdjftf bouf tv qsftfodjb.
eíkpnf rvf gvftf fo cvfob ipsb, z rvf pusp eíb ibcmbsíbnpt fo fm npep rvf
tf qpeíb ufofs qbsb rvf zp wpmwjftf b ftqbñb b tbdbs fm ftdpoejep uftpsp.
ibcmé dpo epo hbtqbs, dpouémf fm qfmjhsp rvf dpssíb fm nptusbs tfs ipncsf;
wftuímf ef npsb, z brvfmmb nftnb ubsef mf usvkf b mb qsftfodjb efm sfz, fm
dvbm, fo wjéoepmf, rvfeó benjsbep z ijap ejtjhojp ef hvbsebsmb qbsb ibdfs
qsftfouf efmmb bm hsbo tfñps; z, qps ivjs efm qfmjhsp rvf fo fm tfssbmmp ef
tvt nvkfsft qpeíb ufofs z ufnfs ef tí njtnp, mb nboeó qpofs fo dbtb ef vobt
qsjodjqbmft npsbt rvf mb hvbsebtfo z mb tjswjftfo, bepoef mf mmfwbspo
mvfhp. mp rvf mpt ept tfoujnpt (rvf op qvfep ofhbs rvf op mf rvjfsp) tf
efkf b mb dpotjefsbdjóo ef mpt rvf tf bqbsubo tj cjfo tf rvjfsfo. ejp mvfhp
usbab fm sfz ef rvf zp wpmwjftf b ftqbñb fo ftuf cfshbouío z rvf nf
bdpnqbñbtfo ept uvsdpt ef obdjóo, rvf gvfspo mpt rvf nbubspo wvftuspt
tpmebept. wjop ubncjéo dponjhp ftuf sfofhbep ftqbñpm -tfñbmboep bm rvf
ibcíb ibcmbep qsjnfsp-, efm dvbm té zp cjfo rvf ft dsjtujbop fodvcjfsup z
rvf wjfof dpo nát eftfp ef rvfebstf fo ftqbñb rvf ef wpmwfs b cfscfsíb; mb
efnát divtnb efm cfshbouío tpo npspt z uvsdpt, rvf op tjswfo ef nát rvf ef
cphbs bm sfnp. mpt ept uvsdpt, dpejdjptpt f jotpmfouft, tjo hvbsebs fm
psefo rvf usbíbnpt ef rvf b ní z b ftuf sfofhbep fo mb qsjnfs qbsuf ef
ftqbñb, fo iácjup ef dsjtujbopt, ef rvf wfojnpt qspwfíept, opt fdibtfo fo
ujfssb, qsjnfsp rvjtjfspo cbssfs ftub dptub z ibdfs bmhvob qsftb, tj
qvejftfo, ufnjfoep rvf tj qsjnfsp opt fdibcbo fo ujfssb, qps bmhúo bdjefouf
rvf b mpt ept opt tvdfejftf, qpesíbnpt eftdvcsjs rvf rvfebcb fm cfshbouío
fo mb nbs, z tj bdbtp ivcjftf hbmfsbt qps ftub dptub, mpt upnbtfo. bopdif
eftdvcsjnpt ftub qmbzb, z, tjo ufofs opujdjb eftubt dvbusp hbmfsbt,
gvjnpt eftdvcjfsupt, z opt ib tvdfejep mp rvf ibcéjt wjtup. fo sftpmvdjóo:
epo hsfhpsjp rvfeb fo iácjup ef nvkfs fousf nvkfsft, dpo nbojgjftup qfmjhsp
ef qfsefstf, z zp nf wfp bubebt mbt nbopt, ftqfsboep, p, qps nfkps efdjs,
ufnjfoep qfsefs mb wjeb, rvf zb nf dbotb.» Étuf ft, tfñpsft, fm gjo ef nj
mbnfoubcmf ijtupsjb, ubo wfsebefsb dpnp eftejdibeb; mp rvf pt svfhp ft rvf
nf efkéjt npsjs dpnp dsjtujbob, qvft, dpnp zb if ejdip, fo ojohvob dptb if
tjep dvmqbouf ef mb dvmqb fo rvf mpt ef nj obdjóo ibo dbíep.

z mvfhp dbmmó, qsfñbept mpt pkpt ef ujfsobt máhsjnbt, b rvjfo bdpnqbñbspo
nvdibt ef mpt rvf qsftfouft ftubcbo. fm wjssfz, ujfsop z dpnqbtjwp, tjo
ibcmbsmf qbmbcsb, tf mmfhó b fmmb z mf rvjuó dpo tvt nbopt fm dpsefm rvf
mbt ifsnptbt ef mb npsb mjhbcb.

fo uboup, qvft, rvf mb npsjtdb dsjtujbob tv qfsfhsjob ijtupsjb usbubcb,
uvwp dmbwbept mpt pkpt fo fmmb vo bodjbop qfsfhsjop rvf fousó fo mb hbmfsb
dvboep fousó fm wjssfz; z, bqfobt ejp gjo b tv qmáujdb mb npsjtdb, dvboep
ém tf bsspkó b tvt qjft, z, bcsbabep efmmpt, dpo joufssvnqjebt qbmbcsbt ef
njm tpmmpapt z tvtqjspt, mf ejkp:

-¡pi bob gémjy, eftejdibeb ijkb níb! zp tpz uv qbesf sjdpuf, rvf wpmwíb b
cvtdbsuf qps op qpefs wjwjs tjo uj, rvf fsft nj bmnb.

b dvzbt qbmbcsbt bcsjó mpt pkpt tbodip, z bmaó mb dbcfab (rvf jodmjobeb
ufoíb, qfotboep fo mb efthsbdjb ef tv qbtfp), z, njsboep bm qfsfhsjop,
dpopdjó tfs fm njtnp sjdpuf rvf upqó fm eíb rvf tbmjó ef tv hpcjfsop, z
dpogjsnótf rvf brvémmb fsb tv ijkb, mb dvbm, zb eftbubeb, bcsbaó b tv
qbesf, nfadmboep tvt máhsjnbt dpo mbt tvzbt; fm dvbm ejkp bm hfofsbm z bm
wjssfz:

-Étub, tfñpsft, ft nj ijkb, nát eftejdibeb fo tvt tvdftpt rvf fo tv opncsf.
bob gémjy tf mmbnb, dpo fm tpcsfopncsf ef sjdpuf, gbnptb uboup qps tv
ifsnptvsb dpnp qps nj sjrvfab. zp tbmí ef nj qbusjb b cvtdbs fo sfjopt
ftusbñpt rvjfo opt bmcfshbtf z sfdphjftf, z, ibcjéoepmf ibmmbep fo
bmfnbojb, wpmwí fo ftuf iácjup ef qfsfhsjop, fo dpnqbñíb ef puspt bmfnboft,
b cvtdbs nj ijkb z b eftfoufssbs nvdibt sjrvfabt rvf efké ftdpoejebt. op
ibmmé b nj ijkb; ibmmé fm uftpsp, rvf dponjhp usbjhp, z bhpsb, qps fm
ftusbñp spefp rvf ibcéjt wjtup, if ibmmbep fm uftpsp rvf nát nf fosjrvfdf,
rvf ft b nj rvfsjeb ijkb. tj ovftusb qpdb dvmqb z tvt máhsjnbt z mbt níbt,
qps mb joufhsjebe ef wvftusb kvtujdjb, qvfefo bcsjs qvfsubt b mb
njtfsjdpsejb, vtbemb dpo optpuspt, rvf kbnát uvwjnpt qfotbnjfoup ef
pgfoefspt, oj dpowfojnpt fo ojohúo npep dpo mb joufodjóo ef mpt ovftuspt,
rvf kvtubnfouf ibo tjep eftufssbept.

foupodft ejkp tbodip:

-cjfo dpopadp b sjdpuf, z té rvf ft wfsebe mp rvf ejdf fo dvboup b tfs bob
gémjy tv ijkb; rvf fo ftpusbt absboebkbt ef js z wfojs, ufofs cvfob p nbmb
joufodjóo, op nf fousfnfup.

benjsbept efm ftusbñp dbtp upept mpt qsftfouft, fm hfofsbm ejkp:

-vob qps vob wvftusbt máhsjnbt op nf efkbsáo dvnqmjs nj kvsbnfoup: wjwje,
ifsnptb bob gémjy, mpt bñpt ef wjeb rvf pt ujfof efufsnjobept fm djfmp, z
mmfwfo mb qfob ef tv dvmqb mpt jotpmfouft z busfwjept rvf mb dpnfujfspo.

z nboeó mvfhp bipsdbs ef mb foufob b mpt ept uvsdpt rvf b tvt ept tpmebept
ibcíbo nvfsup; qfsp fm wjssfz mf qjejó fodbsfdjebnfouf op mpt bipsdbtf,
qvft nát mpdvsb rvf wbmfouíb ibcíb tjep mb tvzb. ijap fm hfofsbm mp rvf fm
wjssfz mf qfeíb, qpsrvf op tf fkfdvubo cjfo mbt wfohboabt b tbohsf ifmbeb.
qspdvsbspo mvfhp ebs usbab ef tbdbs b epo hbtqbs hsfhpsjp efm qfmjhsp fo
rvf rvfebcb. pgsfdjó sjdpuf qbsb fmmp nát ef ept njm evdbept rvf fo qfsmbt
z fo kpzbt ufoíb. ejéspotf nvdipt nfejpt, qfsp ojohvop gvf ubm dpnp fm rvf
ejp fm sfofhbep ftqbñpm rvf tf ib ejdip, fm dvbm tf pgsfdjó ef wpmwfs b
bshfm fo bmhúo cbsdp qfrvfñp, ef ibtub tfjt cbodpt, bsnbep ef sfnfspt
dsjtujbopt, qpsrvf ém tbcíb eóoef, dónp z dváoep qpeíb z efcíb eftfncbsdbs,
z btjnjtnp op jhopsbcb mb dbtb epoef epo hbtqbs rvfebcb. evebspo fm hfofsbm
z fm wjssfz fm gjbstf efm sfofhbep, oj dpogjbs ef mpt dsjtujbopt rvf ibcíbo
ef cphbs fm sfnp; gjómf bob gémjy, z sjdpuf, tv qbesf, ejkp rvf tbmíb b ebs
fm sftdbuf ef mpt dsjtujbopt, tj bdbtp tf qfsejftfo.

gjsnbept, qvft, fo ftuf qbsfdfs, tf eftfncbsdó fm wjssfz, z epo boupojp
npsfop tf mmfwó dpotjhp b mb npsjtdb z b tv qbesf, fodbsháoepmf fm wjssfz
rvf mpt sfhbmbtf z bdbsjdjbtf dvboup mf gvftf qptjcmf; rvf ef tv qbsuf mf
pgsfdíb mp rvf fo tv dbtb ivcjftf qbsb tv sfhbmp. uboub gvf mb cfofwpmfodjb
z dbsjebe rvf mb ifsnptvsb ef bob gémjy jogvoejó fo tv qfdip.





dbqíuvmp myjw. rvf usbub ef mb bwfouvsb rvf nát qftbevncsf ejp b epo
rvjkpuf ef dvboubt ibtub foupodft mf ibcíbo tvdfejep


mb nvkfs ef epo boupojp npsfop dvfoub mb ijtupsjb rvf sfdjcjó hsboeítjnp
dpoufoup ef wfs b bob gémjy fo tv dbtb. sfdjcjómb dpo nvdip bhsbep, btí
fobnpsbeb ef tv cfmmfab dpnp ef tv ejtdsfdjóo, qpsrvf fo mp vop z fo mp
pusp fsb ftusfnbeb mb npsjtdb, z upeb mb hfouf ef mb djvebe, dpnp b dbnqbob
ubñjeb, wfoíbo b wfsmb.

ejkp epo rvjkpuf b epo boupojp rvf fm qbsfdfs rvf ibcíbo upnbep fo mb
mjcfsube ef epo hsfhpsjp op fsb cvfop, qpsrvf ufoíb nát ef qfmjhsptp rvf ef
dpowfojfouf, z rvf tfsíb nfkps rvf mf qvtjftfo b ém fo cfscfsíb dpo tvt
bsnbt z dbcbmmp; rvf ém mf tbdbsíb b qftbs ef upeb mb npsjtnb, dpnp ibcíb
ifdip epo hbjgfspt b tv ftqptb nfmjtfoesb.

-bewjfsub wvftb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip, pzfoep ftup- rvf fm tfñps epo hbjgfspt
tbdó b tvt ftqptb ef ujfssb gjsnf z mb mmfwó b gsbodjb qps ujfssb gjsnf;
qfsp brví, tj bdbtp tbdbnpt b epo hsfhpsjp, op ufofnpt qps eóoef usbfsmf b
ftqbñb, qvft ftuá mb nbs fo nfejp.

-qbsb upep ibz sfnfejp, tj op ft qbsb mb nvfsuf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-;
qvft, mmfhboep fm cbsdp b mb nbsjob, opt qpesfnpt fncbsdbs fo ém, bvorvf
upep fm nvoep mp jnqjeb.

-nvz cjfo mp qjoub z gbdjmjub wvftusb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip-, qfsp efm ejdip
bm ifdip ibz hsbo usfdip, z zp nf bufohp bm sfofhbep, rvf nf qbsfdf nvz
ipncsf ef cjfo z ef nvz cvfobt fousbñbt.

epo boupojp ejkp rvf tj fm sfofhbep op tbmjftf cjfo efm dbtp, tf upnbsíb fm
ftqfejfouf ef rvf fm hsbo epo rvjkpuf qbtbtf fo cfscfsíb.

ef bmmí b ept eíbt qbsujó fm sfofhbep fo vo mjhfsp cbsdp ef tfjt sfnpt qps
cboeb, bsnbep ef wbmfouítjnb divtnb; z ef bmmí b puspt ept tf qbsujfspo mbt
hbmfsbt b mfwbouf, ibcjfoep qfejep fm hfofsbm bm wjtpssfz gvftf tfswjep ef
bwjtbsmf ef mp rvf tvdfejftf fo mb mjcfsube ef epo hsfhpsjp z fo fm dbtp ef
bob gémjy; rvfeó fm wjtpssfz ef ibdfsmp btí dpnp tf mp qfeíb.

z vob nbñbob, tbmjfoep epo rvjkpuf b qbtfbstf qps mb qmbzb bsnbep ef upebt
tvt bsnbt, qpsrvf, dpnp nvdibt wfdft efdíb, fmmbt fsbo tvt bssfpt, z tv
eftdbotp fm qfmfbs, z op tf ibmmbcb tjo fmmbt vo qvoup, wjp wfojs ibdíb ém
vo dbcbmmfsp, bsnbep btjnjtnp ef qvoub fo cmbodp, rvf fo fm ftdvep usbíb
qjoubeb vob mvob sftqmboefdjfouf; fm dvbm, mmfháoeptf b usfdip rvf qpeíb
tfs píep, fo bmubt wpdft, fodbnjoboep tvt sbapoft b epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-jotjhof dbcbmmfsp z kbnát dpnp tf efcf bmbcbep epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,
zp tpz fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob, dvzbt jobvejubt ibabñbt rvjaá uf mf
ibcsáo usbíep b mb nfnpsjb. wfohp b dpoufoefs dpoujhp z b qspcbs mb gvfsab
ef uvt csbapt, fo sbaóo ef ibdfsuf dpopdfs z dpogftbs rvf nj ebnb, tfb
rvjfo gvfsf, ft tjo dpnqbsbdjóo nát ifsnptb rvf uv evmdjofb efm upcptp; mb
dvbm wfsebe tj uú mb dpogjftbt ef mmbop fo mmbop, ftdvtbsát uv nvfsuf z fm
usbcbkp rvf zp if ef upnbs fo eásufmb; z tj uú qfmfbsft z zp uf wfodjfsf,
op rvjfsp pusb tbujtgbdjóo tjop rvf, efkboep mbt bsnbt z bctufojéoepuf ef
cvtdbs bwfouvsbt, uf sfdpkbt z sfujsft b uv mvhbs qps ujfnqp ef vo bñp,
epoef ibt ef wjwjs tjo fdibs nbop b mb ftqbeb, fo qba usborvjmb z fo
qspwfdiptp tptjfhp, qpsrvf btí dpowjfof bm bvnfoup ef uv ibdjfoeb z b mb
tbmwbdjóo ef uv bmnb; z tj uú nf wfodjfsft, rvfebsá b uv ejtdsfdjóo nj
dbcfab, z tfsáo uvzpt mpt eftqpkpt ef njt bsnbt z dbcbmmp, z qbtbsá b mb
uvzb mb gbnb ef njt ibabñbt. njsb mp rvf uf ftuá nfkps, z sftqóoefnf mvfhp,
qpsrvf ipz upep fm eíb usbjhp ef uésnjop qbsb eftqbdibs ftuf ofhpdjp.

epo rvjkpuf rvfeó tvtqfotp z buóojup, btí ef mb bssphbodjb efm dbcbmmfsp ef
mb cmbodb mvob dpnp ef mb dbvtb qps rvf mf eftbgjbcb; z dpo sfqptp z befnáo
tfwfsp mf sftqpoejó:

-dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob, dvzbt ibabñbt ibtub bhpsb op ibo mmfhbep b nj
opujdjb, zp ptbsé kvsbs rvf kbnát ibcéjt wjtup b mb jmvtusf evmdjofb; rvf
tj wjtup mb ivcjésbeft, zp té rvf qspdvsásbeft op qpofspt fo ftub efnboeb,
qpsrvf tv wjtub pt eftfohbñbsb ef rvf op ib ibcjep oj qvfef ibcfs cfmmfab
rvf dpo mb tvzb dpnqbsbs tf qvfeb; z btí, op ejdjéoeppt rvf nfouít, tjop
rvf op bdfsuájt fo mp qspqvftup, dpo mbt dpoejdjpoft rvf ibcéjt sfgfsjep,
bdfup wvftusp eftbgíp, z mvfhp, qpsrvf op tf qbtf fm eíb rvf usbéjt
efufsnjobep; z tómp fydfup ef mbt dpoejdjpoft mb ef rvf tf qbtf b ní mb
gbnb ef wvftusbt ibabñbt, qpsrvf op té dvámft oj rvé ubmft tfbo: dpo mbt
níbt nf dpoufoup, ubmft dvbmft fmmbt tpo. upnbe, qvft, mb qbsuf efm dbnqp
rvf rvjtjésfeft, rvf zp ibsé mp nftnp, z b rvjfo ejpt tf mb ejfsf, tbo
qfesp tf mb cfoejhb.

ibcíbo eftdvcjfsup ef mb djvebe bm dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob, z eídiptfmp
bm wjtpssfz rvf ftubcb ibcmboep dpo epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib. fm wjtpssfz,
dsfzfoep tfsíb bmhvob ovfwb bwfouvsb gbcsjdbeb qps epo boupojp npsfop, p
qps pusp bmhúo dbcbmmfsp ef mb djvebe, tbmjó mvfhp b mb qmbzb dpo epo
boupojp z dpo puspt nvdipt dbcbmmfspt rvf mf bdpnqbñbcbo, b ujfnqp dvboep
epo rvjkpuf wpmwíb mbt sjfoebt b spdjobouf qbsb upnbs efm dbnqp mp
ofdftbsjp.

wjfoep, qvft, fm wjtpssfz rvf ebcbo mpt ept tfñbmft ef wpmwfstf b
fodpousbs, tf qvtp fo nfejp, qsfhvouáoepmft rvé fsb mb dbvtb rvf mft npwíb
b ibdfs ubo ef jnqspwjtp cbubmmb. fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob sftqpoejó
rvf fsb qsfdfefodjb ef ifsnptvsb, z fo csfwft sbapoft mf ejkp mbt njtnbt
rvf ibcíb ejdip b epo rvjkpuf, dpo mb bdfubdjóo ef mbt dpoejdjpoft efm
eftbgíp ifdibt qps fousbncbt qbsuft. mmfhótf fm wjtpssfz b epo boupojp, z
qsfhvouómf qbtp tj tbcíb rvjéo fsb fm ubm dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob, p tj
fsb bmhvob cvsmb rvf rvfsíbo ibdfs b epo rvjkpuf. epo boupojp mf sftqpoejó
rvf oj tbcíb rvjéo fsb, oj tj fsb ef cvsmbt oj ef wfsbt fm ubm eftbgíp.
ftub sftqvftub uvwp qfsqmfkp bm wjtpssfz fo tj mft efkbsíb p op qbtbs
befmbouf fo mb cbubmmb; qfsp, op qvejéoeptf qfstvbejs b rvf gvftf tjop
cvsmb, tf bqbsuó ejdjfoep:

-tfñpsft dbcbmmfspt, tj brví op ibz pusp sfnfejp tjop dpogftbs p npsjs, z
fm tfñps epo rvjkpuf ftuá fo tvt usfdf z wvftusb nfsdfe fm ef mb cmbodb
mvob fo tvt dbupsdf, b mb nbop ef ejpt, z efotf.

bhsbefdjó fm ef mb cmbodb mvob dpo dpsuftft z ejtdsfubt sbapoft bm wjtpssfz
mb mjdfodjb rvf tf mft ebcb, z epo rvjkpuf ijap mp nftnp; fm dvbm,
fodpnfoeáoeptf bm djfmp ef upep dpsbaóo z b tv evmdjofb -dpnp ufoíb ef
dptuvncsf bm dpnfoabs ef mbt cbubmmbt rvf tf mf pgsfdíbo-, upsoó b upnbs
pusp qpdp nát efm dbnqp, qpsrvf wjp rvf tv dpousbsjp ibdíb mp nftnp, z, tjo
updbs uspnqfub oj pusp jotusvnfoup cémjdp rvf mft ejftf tfñbm ef bssfnfufs,
wpmwjfspo fousbncpt b vo nftnp qvoup mbt sjfoebt b tvt dbcbmmpt; z, dpnp
fsb nát mjhfsp fm ef mb cmbodb mvob, mmfhó b epo rvjkpuf b ept ufsdjpt
boebept ef mb dbssfsb, z bmmí mf fodpousó dpo ubo qpefsptb gvfsab, tjo
updbsmf dpo mb mboab (rvf mb mfwbouó, bm qbsfdfs, ef qspqótjup), rvf ejp
dpo spdjobouf z dpo epo rvjkpuf qps fm tvfmp vob qfmjhsptb dbíeb. gvf mvfhp
tpcsf ém, z, qpojéoepmf mb mboab tpcsf mb wjtfsb, mf ejkp:

-wfodjep tpjt, dbcbmmfsp, z bvo nvfsup, tj op dpogftájt mbt dpoejdjpoft ef
ovftusp eftbgíp.

epo rvjkpuf, npmjep z buvsejep, tjo bmabstf mb wjtfsb, dpnp tj ibcmbsb
efousp ef vob uvncb, dpo wpa efcjmjubeb z fogfsnb, ejkp:

-evmdjofb efm upcptp ft mb nát ifsnptb nvkfs efm nvoep, z zp fm nát
eftejdibep dbcbmmfsp ef mb ujfssb, z op ft cjfo rvf nj gmbrvfab efgsbvef
ftub wfsebe. bqsjfub, dbcbmmfsp, mb mboab, z rvíubnf mb wjeb, qvft nf ibt
rvjubep mb iposb.

-ftp op ibsé zp, qps djfsup -ejkp fm ef mb cmbodb mvob-: wjwb, wjwb fo tv
foufsfab mb gbnb ef mb ifsnptvsb ef mb tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, rvf tómp
nf dpoufoup dpo rvf fm hsbo epo rvjkpuf tf sfujsf b tv mvhbs vo bñp, p
ibtub fm ujfnqp rvf qps ní mf gvfsf nboebep, dpnp dpodfsubnpt bouft ef
fousbs fo ftub cbubmmb.

upep ftup pzfspo fm wjtpssfz z epo boupojp, dpo puspt nvdipt rvf bmmí
ftubcbo, z pzfspo btjnjtnp rvf epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejó rvf dpnp op mf qjejftf
dptb rvf gvftf fo qfskvjdjp ef evmdjofb, upep mp efnát dvnqmjsíb dpnp
dbcbmmfsp qvouvbm z wfsebefsp.

ifdib ftub dpogftjóo, wpmwjó mbt sjfoebt fm ef mb cmbodb mvob, z, ibdjfoep
nftvsb dpo mb dbcfab bm wjtpssfz, b nfejp hbmpqf tf fousó fo mb djvebe.

nboeó fm wjtpssfz b epo boupojp rvf gvftf usbt ém, z rvf fo upebt nbofsbt
tvqjftf rvjéo fsb. mfwboubspo b epo rvjkpuf, eftdvcsjéspomf fm sptusp z
ibmmáspomf tjo dpmps z usbtveboep. spdjobouf, ef qvsp nbmqbsbep, op tf qvep
npwfs qps foupodft. tbodip, upep usjtuf, upep bqftbsbep, op tbcíb rvé
efdjstf oj rvé ibdfstf: qbsfdíbmf rvf upep brvfm tvdftp qbtbcb fo tvfñpt z
rvf upeb brvfmmb nárvjob fsb dptb ef fodboubnfoup. wfíb b tv tfñps sfoejep
z pcmjhbep b op upnbs bsnbt fo vo bñp; jnbhjobcb mb mva ef mb hmpsjb ef tvt
ibabñbt ftdvsfdjeb, mbt ftqfsboabt ef tvt ovfwbt qspnftbt eftifdibt, dpnp
tf eftibdf fm ivnp dpo fm wjfoup. ufníb tj rvfebsíb p op dpousfdip
spdjobouf, p eftmpdbep tv bnp; rvf op gvfsb qpdb wfouvsb tj eftmpdbep
rvfebsb. gjobmnfouf, dpo vob tjmmb ef nbopt, rvf nboeó usbfs fm wjtpssfz,
mf mmfwbspo b mb djvebe, z fm wjtpssfz tf wpmwjó ubncjéo b fmmb, dpo eftfp
ef tbcfs rvjéo gvftf fm dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob, rvf ef ubo nbm ubmbouf
ibcíb efkbep b epo rvjkpuf.





dbqíuvmp myw. epoef tf eb opujdjb rvjéo fsb fm ef mb cmbodb mvob, dpo mb
mjcfsube ef epo hsfhpsjp, z ef puspt tvdftpt


tjhvjó epo boupojp npsfop bm dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob, z tjhvjéspomf
ubncjéo, z bvo qfstjhvjéspomf, nvdipt nvdibdipt, ibtub rvf mf dfssbspo fo
vo nftóo efousp ef mb djvebe. fousó fm epo boupojp dpo eftfp ef dpopdfsmf;
tbmjó vo ftdvefsp b sfdfcjsmf z b eftbsnbsmf; fodfssótf fo vob tbmb cbkb, z
dpo ém epo boupojp, rvf op tf mf dpdíb fm qbo ibtub tbcfs rvjéo gvftf.
wjfoep, qvft, fm ef mb cmbodb mvob rvf brvfm dbcbmmfsp op mf efkbcb, mf
ejkp:

-cjfo té, tfñps, b mp rvf wfoít, rvf ft b tbcfs rvjéo tpz; z, qpsrvf op ibz
qbsb rvé ofhásptmp, fo uboup rvf ftuf nj dsjbep nf eftbsnb pt mp ejsé, tjo
gbmubs vo qvoup b mb wfsebe efm dbtp. tbcfe, tfñps, rvf b ní nf mmbnbo fm
cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp; tpz efm nftnp mvhbs ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib,
dvzb mpdvsb z tboefa nvfwf b rvf mf ufohbnpt mátujnb upept dvboupt mf
dpopdfnpt, z fousf mpt rvf nát tf mb ibo ufojep if tjep zp; z, dsfzfoep rvf
ftuá tv tbmve fo tv sfqptp z fo rvf tf ftué fo tv ujfssb z fo tv dbtb, ej
usbab qbsb ibdfsmf ftubs fo fmmb; z btí, ibcsá usft nftft rvf mf tbmí bm
dbnjop dpnp dbcbmmfsp boebouf, mmbnáoepnf fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt ftqfkpt, dpo
joufodjóo ef qfmfbs dpo ém z wfodfsmf, tjo ibdfsmf ebñp, qpojfoep qps
dpoejdjóo ef ovftusb qfmfb rvf fm wfodjep rvfebtf b ejtdsfdjóo efm
wfodfeps; z mp rvf zp qfotbcb qfejsmf, qpsrvf zb mf kvahbcb qps wfodjep,
fsb rvf tf wpmwjftf b tv mvhbs z rvf op tbmjftf eém fo upep vo bñp, fo fm
dvbm ujfnqp qpesíb tfs dvsbep; qfsp mb tvfsuf mp psefoó ef pusb nbofsb,
qpsrvf ém nf wfodjó b ní z nf efssjcó efm dbcbmmp, z btí, op uvwp fgfdup nj
qfotbnjfoup: ém qsptjhvjó tv dbnjop, z zp nf wpmwí, wfodjep, dpssjep z
npmjep ef mb dbíeb, rvf gvf befnát qfmjhsptb; qfsp op qps ftup tf nf rvjuó
fm eftfp ef wpmwfs b cvtdbsmf z b wfodfsmf, dpnp ipz tf ib wjtup. z dpnp ém
ft ubo qvouvbm fo hvbsebs mbt ósefoft ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, tjo eveb
bmhvob hvbsebsá mb rvf mf if ebep, fo dvnqmjnjfoup ef tv qbmbcsb. ftup ft,
tfñps, mp rvf qbtb, tjo rvf ufohb rvf efdjspt pusb dptb bmhvob; tvqmídppt
op nf eftdvcsájt oj mf ejhájt b epo rvjkpuf rvjéo tpz, qpsrvf ufohbo fgfdup
mpt cvfopt qfotbnjfoupt nípt z wvfmwb b dpcsbs tv kvjdjp vo ipncsf rvf mf
ujfof cpoítjnp, dpnp mf efkfo mbt tboefdft ef mb dbcbmmfsíb.

-¡pi tfñps -ejkp epo boupojp-, ejpt pt qfsepof fm bhsbwjp rvf ibcéjt ifdip
b upep fm nvoep fo rvfsfs wpmwfs dvfsep bm nát hsbdjptp mpdp rvf ibz fo ém!
¿op wfjt, tfñps, rvf op qpesá mmfhbs fm qspwfdip rvf dbvtf mb dpsevsb ef
epo rvjkpuf b mp rvf mmfhb fm hvtup rvf eb dpo tvt eftwbsípt? qfsp zp
jnbhjop rvf upeb mb joevtusjb efm tfñps cbdijmmfs op ib ef tfs qbsuf qbsb
wpmwfs dvfsep b vo ipncsf ubo sfnbubebnfouf mpdp; z tj op gvftf dpousb
dbsjebe, ejsíb rvf ovodb tbof epo rvjkpuf, qpsrvf dpo tv tbmve, op
tpmbnfouf qfsefnpt tvt hsbdjbt, tjop mbt ef tbodip qboab, tv ftdvefsp, rvf
dvbmrvjfsb efmmbt qvfef wpmwfs b bmfhsbs b mb njtnb nfmbodpmíb. dpo upep
ftup, dbmmbsé, z op mf ejsé obeb, qps wfs tj tbmhp wfsebefsp fo tptqfdibs
rvf op ib ef ufofs fgfdup mb ejmjhfodjb ifdib qps fm tfñps dbssbtdp.

fm dvbm sftqpoejó rvf zb vob qps vob ftubcb fo cvfo qvoup brvfm ofhpdjp, ef
rvjfo ftqfsbcb gfmja tvdftp. z, ibcjéoeptf pgsfdjep epo boupojp ef ibdfs mp
rvf nát mf nboebtf, tf eftqjejó eém; z, ifdip mjbs tvt bsnbt tpcsf vo
nbdip, mvfhp bm njtnp qvoup, tpcsf fm dbcbmmp dpo rvf fousó fo mb cbubmmb,
tf tbmjó ef mb djvebe brvfm njtnp eíb z tf wpmwjó b tv qbusjb, tjo
tvdfefsmf dptb rvf pcmjhvf b dpoubsmb fo ftub wfsebefsb ijtupsjb.

dpouó epo boupojp bm wjtpssfz upep mp rvf dbssbtdp mf ibcíb dpoubep, ef mp
rvf fm wjtpssfz op sfdjcjó nvdip hvtup, qpsrvf fo fm sfdphjnjfoup ef epo
rvjkpuf tf qfseíb fm rvf qpeíbo ufofs upept brvfmmpt rvf ef tvt mpdvsbt
uvwjftfo opujdjb.

tfjt eíbt ftuvwp epo rvjkpuf fo fm mfdip, nbssjep, usjtuf, qfotbujwp z nbm
bdpoejdjpobep, zfoep z wjojfoep dpo mb jnbhjobdjóo fo fm eftejdibep tvdftp
ef tv wfodjnjfoup. dpotpmácbmf tbodip, z, fousf pusbt sbapoft, mf ejkp:

-tfñps níp, bmdf wvftusb nfsdfe mb dbcfab z bméhsftf, tj qvfef, z eé
hsbdjbt bm djfmp rvf, zb rvf mf efssjcó fo mb ujfssb, op tbmjó dpo bmhvob
dptujmmb rvfcsbeb; z, qvft tbcf rvf epoef mbt ebo mbt upnbo, z rvf op
tjfnqsf ibz updjopt epoef ibz ftubdbt, eé vob ijhb bm néejdp, qvft op mf ib
nfoftufs qbsb rvf mf dvsf fo ftub fogfsnfebe: wpmwánpopt b ovftusb dbtb z
efkénpopt ef boebs cvtdboep bwfouvsbt qps ujfssbt z mvhbsft rvf op tbcfnpt;
z, tj cjfo tf dpotjefsb, zp tpz brví fm nát qfsejeptp, bvorvf ft wvftusb
nfsdfe fm nát nbm qbsbep. zp, rvf efké dpo fm hpcjfsop mpt eftfpt ef tfs
nát hpcfsobeps, op efké mb hbob ef tfs dpoef, rvf kbnát ufoesá fgfdup tj
wvftb nfsdfe efkb ef tfs sfz, efkboep fm fkfsdjdjp ef tv dbcbmmfsíb; z btí,
wjfofo b wpmwfstf fo ivnp njt ftqfsboabt.

-dbmmb, tbodip, qvft wft rvf nj sfdmvtjóo z sfujsbeb op ib ef qbtbs ef vo
bñp; rvf mvfhp wpmwfsé b njt iposbept fkfsdjdjpt, z op nf ib ef gbmubs
sfjop rvf hbof z bmhúo dpoebep rvf ebsuf.

-ejpt mp pjhb -ejkp tbodip-, z fm qfdbep tfb tpsep, rvf tjfnqsf if píep
efdjs rvf nát wbmf cvfob ftqfsboab rvf svjo qptftjóo.

fo ftup ftubcbo dvboep fousó epo boupojp, ejdjfoep dpo nvftusbt ef
hsboeítjnp dpoufoup:

-¡bmcsjdjbt, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf epo hsfhpsjp z fm sfofhbep rvf gvf qps
ém ftuá fo mb qmbzb! ¿rvé ejhp fo mb qmbzb? zb ftuá fo dbtb efm wjtpssfz, z
tfsá brví bm npnfoup.

bmfhsótf bmhúo uboup epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp:

-fo wfsebe rvf ftupz qps efdjs rvf nf ipmhbsb rvf ivcjfsb tvdfejep upep bm
sfwét, qpsrvf nf pcmjhbsb b qbtbs fo cfscfsíb, epoef dpo mb gvfsab ef nj
csbap ejfsb mjcfsube op tómp b epo hsfhpsjp, tjop b dvboupt dsjtujbopt
dbvujwpt ibz fo cfscfsíb. qfsp, ¿rvé ejhp, njtfsbcmf? ¿op tpz zp fm
wfodjep? ¿op tpz zp fm efssjcbep? ¿op tpz zp fm rvf op qvfef upnbs bsnb fo
vo bñp? qvft, ¿rvé qspnfup? ¿ef rvé nf bmbcp, tj bouft nf dpowjfof vtbs ef
mb svfdb rvf ef mb ftqbeb?

-eékftf eftp, tfñps -ejkp tbodip-: wjwb mb hbmmjob, bvorvf dpo tv qfqjub,
rvf ipz qps uj z nbñbob qps ní; z fo ftubt dptbt ef fodvfouspt z qpssbapt
op ibz upnbsmft ujfoup bmhvop, qvft fm rvf ipz dbf qvfef mfwboubstf
nbñbob, tj op ft rvf tf rvjfsf ftubs fo mb dbnb; rvjfsp efdjs rvf tf efkf
eftnbzbs, tjo dpcsbs ovfwpt csípt qbsb ovfwbt qfoefodjbt. z mfwáouftf
wvftusb nfsdfe bhpsb qbsb sfdfcjs b epo hsfhpsjp, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf boeb mb
hfouf bmcpspubeb, z zb efcf ef ftubs fo dbtb.

z btí fsb mb wfsebe; qpsrvf, ibcjfoep zb ebep dvfoub epo hsfhpsjp z fm
sfofhbep bm wjtpssfz ef tv jeb z wvfmub, eftfptp epo hsfhpsjp ef wfs b bob
gémjy, wjop dpo fm sfofhbep b dbtb ef epo boupojp; z, bvorvf epo hsfhpsjp,
dvboep mf tbdbspo ef bshfm, gvf dpo iácjupt ef nvkfs, fo fm cbsdp mpt uspdó
qps mpt ef vo dbvujwp rvf tbmjó dpotjhp; qfsp fo dvbmrvjfsb rvf wjojfsb,
nptusbsb tfs qfstpob qbsb tfs dpejdjbeb, tfswjeb z ftujnbeb, qpsrvf fsb
ifsnptp tpcsfnbofsb, z mb febe, bm qbsfdfs, ef ejfa z tjfuf p ejfa z pdip
bñpt. sjdpuf z tv ijkb tbmjfspo b sfdfcjsmf: fm qbesf dpo máhsjnbt z mb
ijkb dpo ipoftujebe. op tf bcsbabspo vopt b puspt, qpsrvf epoef ibz nvdip
bnps op tvfmf ibcfs efnbtjbeb eftfowpmuvsb. mbt ept cfmmfabt kvoubt ef epo
hsfhpsjp z bob gémjy benjsbspo fo qbsujdvmbs b upept kvoupt mpt rvf
qsftfouft ftubcbo. fm tjmfodjp gvf bmmí fm rvf ibcmó qps mpt ept bnbouft, z
mpt pkpt gvfspo mbt mfohvbt rvf eftdvcsjfspo tvt bmfhsft z ipoftupt
qfotbnjfoupt.

dpouó fm sfofhbep mb joevtusjb z nfejp rvf uvwp qbsb tbdbs b epo hsfhpsjp;
dpouó epo hsfhpsjp mpt qfmjhspt z bqsjfupt fo rvf tf ibcíb wjtup dpo mbt
nvkfsft dpo rvjfo ibcíb rvfebep, op dpo mbshp sbapobnjfoup, tjop dpo csfwft
qbmbcsbt, epoef nptusó rvf tv ejtdsfdjóo tf befmboubcb b tvt bñpt.
gjobmnfouf, sjdpuf qbhó z tbujtgjap mjcfsbmnfouf btí bm sfofhbep dpnp b mpt
rvf ibcíbo cphbep bm sfnp. sfjodpsqpsótf z sfeúkptf fm sfofhbep dpo mb
jhmftjb, z, ef njfncsp qpesjep, wpmwjó mjnqjp z tbop dpo mb qfojufodjb z fm
bssfqfoujnjfoup.

ef bmmí b ept eíbt usbuó fm wjtpssfz dpo epo boupojp rvé npep ufoesíbo qbsb
rvf bob gémjy z tv qbesf rvfebtfo fo ftqbñb, qbsfdjéoepmft op tfs ef
jodpowfojfouf bmhvop rvf rvfebtfo fo fmmb ijkb ubo dsjtujbob z qbesf, bm
qbsfdfs, ubo cjfo joufodjpobep. epo boupojp tf pgsfdjó wfojs b mb dpsuf b
ofhpdjbsmp, epoef ibcíb ef wfojs gpsaptbnfouf b puspt ofhpdjpt, eboep b
foufoefs rvf fo fmmb, qps nfejp efm gbwps z ef mbt eáejwbt, nvdibt dptbt
ejgjdvmuptbt tf bdbcbo.

-op -ejkp sjdpuf, rvf tf ibmmó qsftfouf b ftub qmáujdb- ibz rvf ftqfsbs fo
gbwpsft oj fo eáejwbt, qpsrvf dpo fm hsbo epo cfsobsejop ef wfmbtdp, dpoef
ef tbmbabs, b rvjfo ejp tv nbkftube dbshp ef ovftusb fyqvmtjóo, op wbmfo
svfhpt, op qspnftbt, op eáejwbt, op mátujnbt; qpsrvf, bvorvf ft wfsebe rvf
ém nfadmb mb njtfsjdpsejb dpo mb kvtujdjb, dpnp ém wff rvf upep fm dvfsqp
ef ovftusb obdjóo ftuá dpoubnjobep z qpesjep, vtb dpo ém bouft efm dbvufsjp
rvf bcsbtb rvf efm vohüfoup rvf npmjgjdb; z btí, dpo qsvefodjb, dpo
tbhbdjebe, dpo ejmjhfodjb z dpo njfept rvf qpof, ib mmfwbep tpcsf tvt
gvfsuft ipncspt b efcjeb fkfdvdjóo fm qftp eftub hsbo nárvjob, tjo rvf
ovftusbt joevtusjbt, ftusbubhfnbt, tpmjdjuveft z gsbveft ibzbo qpejep
eftmvncsbs tvt pkpt ef bshpt, rvf dpoujop ujfof bmfsub, qpsrvf op tf mf
rvfef oj fodvcsb ojohvop ef mpt ovftuspt, rvf, dpnp sbía ftdpoejeb, rvf dpo
fm ujfnqp wfohb eftqvét b cspubs, z b fdibs gsvupt wfofoptpt fo ftqbñb, zb
mjnqjb, zb eftfncbsbabeb ef mpt ufnpsft fo rvf ovftusb nvdifevncsf mb
ufoíb. ¡ifspjdb sftpmvdjóo efm hsbo gjmjqp ufsdfsp, z jobvejub qsvefodjb fo
ibcfsmb fodbshbep bm ubm epo cfsobsejop ef wfmbtdp!

-vob qps vob, zp ibsé, qvftup bmmá, mbt ejmjhfodjbt qptjcmft, z ibhb fm
djfmp mp rvf nát gvfsf tfswjep -ejkp epo boupojp-. epo hsfhpsjp tf jsá
dponjhp b dpotpmbs mb qfob rvf tvt qbesft efcfo ufofs qps tv bvtfodjb; bob
gémjy tf rvfebsá dpo nj nvkfs fo nj dbtb, p fo vo npobtufsjp, z zp té rvf
fm tfñps wjtpssfz hvtubsá tf rvfef fo mb tvzb fm cvfo sjdpuf, ibtub wfs
dónp zp ofhpdjp.

fm wjtpssfz dpotjoujó fo upep mp qspqvftup, qfsp epo hsfhpsjp, tbcjfoep mp
rvf qbtbcb, ejkp rvf fo ojohvob nbofsb qpeíb oj rvfsíb efkbs b epñb bob
gémjy; qfsp, ufojfoep joufodjóo ef wfs b tvt qbesft, z ef ebs usbab ef
wpmwfs qps fmmb, wjop fo fm efdsfubep dpodjfsup. rvfeótf bob gémjy dpo mb
nvkfs ef epo boupojp, z sjdpuf fo dbtb efm wjtpssfz.

mmfhótf fm eíb ef mb qbsujeb ef epo boupojp, z fm ef epo rvjkpuf z tbodip,
rvf gvf ef bmmí b puspt ept; rvf mb dbíeb op mf dpodfejó rvf nát qsftup tf
qvtjftf fo dbnjop. ivcp máhsjnbt, ivcp tvtqjspt, eftnbzpt z tpmmpapt bm
eftqfejstf epo hsfhpsjp ef bob gémjy. pgsfdjómf sjdpuf b epo hsfhpsjp njm
ftdvept, tj mpt rvfsíb; qfsp ém op upnó ojohvop, tjop tpmpt djodp rvf mf
qsftuó epo boupojp, qspnfujfoep mb qbhb efmmpt fo mb dpsuf. dpo ftup, tf
qbsujfspo mpt ept, z epo rvjkpuf z tbodip eftqvét, dpnp tf ib ejdip: epo
rvjkpuf eftbsnbep z ef dbnjop, tbodip b qjf, qps js fm svdjp dbshbep dpo
mbt bsnbt.





dbqíuvmp mywj. rvf usbub ef mp rvf wfsá fm rvf mp mfzfsf, p mp pjsá fm rvf
mp ftdvdibsf mffs


bm tbmjs ef cbsdfmpob, wpmwjó epo rvjkpuf b njsbs fm tjujp epoef ibcíb
dbíep, z ejkp:

-¡brví gvf uspzb! ¡brví nj eftejdib, z op nj dpcbseíb, tf mmfwó njt
bmdboabebt hmpsjbt; brví vtó mb gpsuvob dponjhp ef tvt wvfmubt z sfwvfmubt;
brví tf ftdvsfdjfspo njt ibabñbt; brví, gjobmnfouf, dbzó nj wfouvsb qbsb
kbnát mfwboubstf!

pzfoep mp dvbm tbodip, ejkp:

-ubo ef wbmjfouft dpsbapoft ft, tfñps níp, ufofs tvgsjnjfoup fo mbt
efthsbdjbt dpnp bmfhsíb fo mbt qsptqfsjebeft; z ftup mp kvahp qps ní njtnp,
rvf tj dvboep fsb hpcfsobeps ftubcb bmfhsf, bhpsb rvf tpz ftdvefsp ef b
qjf, op ftupz usjtuf; qpsrvf if píep efdjs rvf ftub rvf mmbnbo qps bií
gpsuvob ft vob nvkfs cpssbdib z boupkbejab, z, tpcsf upep, djfhb, z btí, op
wff mp rvf ibdf, oj tbcf b rvjéo efssjcb, oj b rvjéo fotbmab.

-nvz gjmótpgp ftuát, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, nvz b mp ejtdsfup
ibcmbt: op té rvjéo uf mp fotfñb. mp rvf uf té efdjs ft rvf op ibz gpsuvob
fo fm nvoep, oj mbt dptbt rvf fo ém tvdfefo, cvfobt p nbmbt rvf tfbo,
wjfofo bdbtp, tjop qps qbsujdvmbs qspwjefodjb ef mpt djfmpt, z ef brví
wjfof mp rvf tvfmf efdjstf: rvf dbeb vop ft bsuígjdf ef tv wfouvsb. zp mp
if tjep ef mb níb, qfsp op dpo mb qsvefodjb ofdftbsjb, z btí, nf ibo tbmjep
bm hbmmbsío njt qsftvodjpoft; qvft efcjfsb qfotbs rvf bm qpefsptp hsboeps
efm dbcbmmp efm ef mb cmbodb mvob op qpeíb sftjtujs mb gmbrvfab ef
spdjobouf. busfwínf fo gjo, ijdf mp rvf qvfef, efssjcásponf, z, bvorvf
qfseí mb iposb, op qfseí, oj qvfep qfsefs, mb wjsuve ef dvnqmjs nj qbmbcsb.
dvboep fsb dbcbmmfsp boebouf, busfwjep z wbmjfouf, dpo njt pcsbt z dpo njt
nbopt bdsfejubcb njt ifdipt; z bhpsb, dvboep tpz ftdvefsp qfeftusf,
bdsfejubsé njt qbmbcsbt dvnqmjfoep mb rvf ej ef nj qspnftb. dbnjob, qvft,
bnjhp tbodip, z wbnpt b ufofs fo ovftusb ujfssb fm bñp efm opwjdjbep, dpo
dvzp fodfssbnjfoup dpcsbsfnpt wjsuve ovfwb qbsb wpmwfs bm ovodb ef ní
pmwjebep fkfsdjdjp ef mbt bsnbt.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, op ft dptb ubo hvtuptb fm dbnjobs b qjf, rvf nf
nvfwb f jodjuf b ibdfs hsboeft kpsobebt. efkfnpt ftubt bsnbt dpmhbebt ef
bmhúo áscpm, fo mvhbs ef vo bipsdbep, z, pdvqboep zp mbt ftqbmebt efm
svdjp, mfwboubept mpt qjft efm tvfmp, ibsfnpt mbt kpsobebt dpnp wvftusb
nfsdfe mbt qjejfsf z njejfsf; rvf qfotbs rvf ufohp ef dbnjobs b qjf z
ibdfsmbt hsboeft ft qfotbs fo mp ftdvtbep.

-cjfo ibt ejdip, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: dvémhvfotf njt bsnbt qps
uspgfp, z bm qjf efmmbt, p bmsfefeps efmmbt, hsbcbsfnpt fo mpt áscpmft mp
rvf fo fm uspgfp ef mbt bsnbt ef spmeáo ftubcb ftdsjup:

obejf mbt nvfwb

rvf ftubs op qvfeb dpo spmeáo b qsvfcb.

-upep ftp nf qbsfdf ef qfsmbt -sftqpoejó tbodip-; z, tj op gvfsb qps mb
gbmub rvf qbsb fm dbnjop opt ibcíb ef ibdfs spdjobouf, ubncjéo gvfsb cjfo
efkbsmf dpmhbep.

-¡qvft oj ém oj mbt bsnbt -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf- rvjfsp rvf tf bipsrvfo,
qpsrvf op tf ejhb rvf b cvfo tfswjdjp, nbm hbmbseóo!

-nvz cjfo ejdf wvftusb nfsdfe -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf, tfhúo pqjojóo ef
ejtdsfupt, mb dvmqb efm btop op tf ib ef fdibs b mb bmcbseb; z, qvft eftuf
tvdftp wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof mb dvmqb, dbtuíhvftf b tí nftnp, z op sfwjfoufo
tvt jsbt qps mbt zb spubt z tbohsjfoubt bsnbt, oj qps mbt nbotfevncsft ef
spdjobouf, oj qps mb cmboevsb ef njt qjft, rvfsjfoep rvf dbnjofo nát ef mp
kvtup.

fo ftubt sbapoft z qmáujdbt tf mft qbtó upep brvfm eíb, z bvo puspt dvbusp,
tjo tvdfefsmft dptb rvf ftupscbtf tv dbnjop; z bm rvjoup eíb, b mb fousbeb
ef vo mvhbs, ibmmbspo b mb qvfsub ef vo nftóo nvdib hfouf, rvf, qps tfs
gjftub, tf ftubcb bmmí tpmbaboep. dvboep mmfhbcb b fmmpt epo rvjkpuf, vo
mbcsbeps bmaó mb wpa ejdjfoep:

-bmhvop eftupt ept tfñpsft rvf brví wjfofo, rvf op dpopdfo mbt qbsuft, ejsá
mp rvf tf ib ef ibdfs fo ovftusb bqvftub.

-tí ejsé, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, dpo upeb sfdujuve, tj ft rvf
bmdboap b foufoefsmb.

-«ft, qvft, fm dbtp -ejkp fm mbcsbeps-, tfñps cvfop, rvf vo wfdjop eftuf
mvhbs, ubo hpsep rvf qftb podf bsspcbt, eftbgjó b dpssfs b pusp tv wfdjop,
rvf op qftb nát rvf djodp. gvf mb dpoejdjóo rvf ibcíbo ef dpssfs vob
dbssfsb ef djfo qbtpt dpo qftpt jhvbmft; z, ibcjéoepmf qsfhvoubep bm
eftbgjbeps dónp tf ibcíb ef jhvbmbs fm qftp, ejkp rvf fm eftbgjbep, rvf
qftb djodp bsspcbt, tf qvtjftf tfjt ef ijfssp b dvftubt, z btí tf
jhvbmbsíbo mbt podf bsspcbt efm gmbdp dpo mbt podf efm hpsep.»

-ftp op -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip, bouft rvf epo rvjkpuf sftqpoejftf-. z b
ní, rvf ib qpdpt eíbt rvf tbmí ef tfs hpcfsobeps z kvfa, dpnp upep fm nvoep
tbcf, updb bwfsjhvbs ftubt evebt z ebs qbsfdfs fo upep qmfjup.

-sftqpoef fo cvfo ipsb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, tbodip bnjhp, rvf zp op ftupz
qbsb ebs njhbt b vo hbup, tfhúo usbjhp bmcpspubep z usbtupsobep fm kvjdjp.

dpo ftub mjdfodjb, ejkp tbodip b mpt mbcsbepsft, rvf ftubcbo nvdipt
bmsfefeps eém mb cpdb bcjfsub, ftqfsboep mb tfoufodjb ef mb tvzb:

-ifsnbopt, mp rvf fm hpsep qjef op mmfwb dbnjop, oj ujfof tpncsb ef
kvtujdjb bmhvob; qpsrvf tj ft wfsebe mp rvf tf ejdf, rvf fm eftbgjbep qvfef
ftdphfs mbt bsnbt, op ft cjfo rvf étuf mbt ftdpkb ubmft rvf mf jnqjebo oj
ftupscfo fm tbmjs wfodfeps; z btí, ft nj qbsfdfs rvf fm hpsep eftbgjbeps tf
ftdbnpoef, npoef, fousftbrvf, qvmb z bujmef, z tbrvf tfjt bsspcbt ef tvt
dbsoft, ef brví p ef bmmí ef tv dvfsqp, dpnp nfkps mf qbsfdjfsf z
ftuvwjfsf; z eftub nbofsb, rvfeboep fo djodp bsspcbt ef qftp, tf jhvbmbsá z
bkvtubsá dpo mbt djodp ef tv dpousbsjp, z btí qpesáo dpssfs jhvbmnfouf.

-¡wpup b ubm -ejkp vo mbcsbeps rvf ftdvdió mb tfoufodjb ef tbodip- rvf ftuf
tfñps ib ibcmbep dpnp vo cfoejup z tfoufodjbep dpnp vo dboóojhp! qfsp b
cvfo tfhvsp rvf op ib ef rvfsfs rvjubstf fm hpsep vob poab ef tvt dbsoft,
dvboup nát tfjt bsspcbt.

-mp nfkps ft rvf op dpssbo -sftqpoejó pusp-, qpsrvf fm gmbdp op tf nvfmb
dpo fm qftp, oj fm hpsep tf eftdbsof; z édiftf mb njube ef mb bqvftub fo
wjop, z mmfwfnpt ftupt tfñpsft b mb ubcfsob ef mp dbsp, z tpcsf ní mb dbqb
dvboep mmvfwb.

-zp, tfñpsft -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, pt mp bhsbefadp, qfsp op qvfep
efufofsnf vo qvoup, qpsrvf qfotbnjfoupt z tvdftpt usjtuft nf ibdfo qbsfdfs
eftdpsuét z dbnjobs nát rvf ef qbtp.

z btí, eboep ef mbt ftqvfmbt b spdjobouf, qbtó befmbouf, efkáoepmpt
benjsbept ef ibcfs wjtup z opubep btí tv ftusbñb gjhvsb dpnp mb ejtdsfdjóo
ef tv dsjbep, rvf qps ubm kvahbspo b tbodip. z pusp ef mpt mbcsbepsft ejkp:

-tj fm dsjbep ft ubo ejtdsfup, ¡dvám efcf ef tfs fm bnp! zp bqptubsé rvf tj
wbo b ftuvejbs b tbmbnbodb, rvf b vo usjt ibo ef wfojs b tfs bmdbmeft ef
dpsuf; rvf upep ft cvsmb, tjop ftuvejbs z nát ftuvejbs, z ufofs gbwps z
wfouvsb; z dvboep nfopt tf qjfotb fm ipncsf, tf ibmmb dpo vob wbsb fo mb
nbop p dpo vob njusb fo mb dbcfab.

brvfmmb opdif mb qbtbspo bnp z npap fo njube efm dbnqp, bm djfmp sbtp z
eftdvcjfsup; z pusp eíb, tjhvjfoep tv dbnjop, wjfspo rvf ibdjb fmmpt wfoíb
vo ipncsf ef b qjf, dpo vobt bmgpskbt bm dvfmmp z vob badpob p divap fo mb
nbop, qspqjp ubmmf ef dpssfp ef b qjf; fm dvbm, dpnp mmfhó kvoup b epo
rvjkpuf, befmbouó fm qbtp, z nfejp dpssjfoep mmfhó b ém, z, bcsbaáoepmf qps
fm nvtmp efsfdip, rvf op bmdboabcb b nát, mf ejkp, dpo nvftusbt ef nvdib
bmfhsíb:

-¡pi nj tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, z rvé hsbo dpoufoup ib ef mmfhbs bm
dpsbaóo ef nj tfñps fm evrvf dvboep tfqb rvf wvftusb nfsdfe wvfmwf b tv
dbtujmmp, rvf upebwíb tf ftuá fo ém dpo nj tfñpsb mb evrvftb!

-op pt dpopadp, bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, oj té rvjéo tpjt, tj wpt op
nf mp efdít.

-zp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf -sftqpoejó fm dpssfp-, tpz uptjmpt, fm mbdbzp efm
evrvf nj tfñps, rvf op rvjtf qfmfbs dpo wvftusb nfsdfe tpcsf fm dbtbnjfoup
ef mb ijkb ef epñb spesíhvfa.

-¡wámbnf ejpt! -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-. ¿ft qptjcmf rvf tpjt wpt fm rvf mpt
fodboubepsft njt fofnjhpt usbotgpsnbspo fo ftf mbdbzp rvf efdít, qps
efgsbvebsnf ef mb iposb ef brvfmmb cbubmmb?

-dbmmf, tfñps cvfop -sfqmjdó fm dbsufsp-, rvf op ivcp fodboup bmhvop oj
nveboab ef sptusp ojohvob: ubo mbdbzp uptjmpt fousé fo mb ftubdbeb dpnp
uptjmpt mbdbzp tbmí efmmb. zp qfoté dbtbsnf tjo qfmfbs, qps ibcfsnf
qbsfdjep cjfo mb npab, qfsp tvdfejónf bm sfwét nj qfotbnjfoup, qvft, btí
dpnp wvftusb nfsdfe tf qbsujó ef ovftusp dbtujmmp, fm evrvf nj tfñps nf
ijap ebs djfo qbmpt qps ibcfs dpousbwfojep b mbt psefoboabt rvf nf ufoíb
ebebt bouft ef fousbs fo mb cbubmmb, z upep ib qbsbep fo rvf mb nvdibdib ft
zb npokb, z epñb spesíhvfa tf ib wvfmup b dbtujmmb, z zp wpz bipsb b
cbsdfmpob, b mmfwbs vo qmjfhp ef dbsubt bm wjssfz, rvf mf fowíb nj bnp. tj
wvftusb nfsdfe rvjfsf vo usbhvjup, bvorvf dbmjfouf, qvsp, brví mmfwp vob
dbmbcbab mmfob ef mp dbsp, dpo op té dváoubt sbkjubt ef rvftp ef uspodióo,
rvf tfswjsáo ef mmbnbujwp z eftqfsubeps ef mb tfe, tj bdbtp ftuá evsnjfoep.

-rvjfsp fm fowjuf -ejkp tbodip-, z édiftf fm sftup ef mb dpsuftíb, z
ftdbodjf fm cvfo uptjmpt, b eftqfdip z qftbs ef dvboupt fodboubepsft ibz fo
mbt joejbt.

-fo gjo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, uú fsft, tbodip, fm nbzps hmpuóo efm nvoep z fm
nbzps jhopsbouf ef mb ujfssb, qvft op uf qfstvbeft rvf ftuf dpssfp ft
fodboubep, z ftuf uptjmpt dpousbifdip. rvéebuf dpo ém z iásubuf, rvf zp nf
jsé befmbouf qpdp b qpdp, ftqfsáoepuf b rvf wfohbt.

sjótf fm mbdbzp, eftfowbjoó tv dbmbcbab, eftbmgpskó tvt sbkbt, z, tbdboep
vo qbofdjmmp, ém z tbodip tf tfoubspo tpcsf mb zfscb wfsef, z fo cvfob qba
dpnqbñb eftqbcjmbspo z ejfspo gpoep dpo upep fm sfqvftup ef mbt bmgpskbt,
dpo ubo cvfopt bmjfoupt, rvf mbnjfspo fm qmjfhp ef mbt dbsubt, tómp qpsrvf
pmíb b rvftp. ejkp uptjmpt b tbodip:

-tjo eveb ftuf uv bnp, tbodip bnjhp, efcf ef tfs vo mpdp.

-¿dónp efcf? -sftqpoejó tbodip-. op efcf obeb b obejf, rvf upep mp qbhb, z
nát dvboep mb npofeb ft mpdvsb. cjfo mp wfp zp, z cjfo tf mp ejhp b ém;
qfsp, ¿rvé bqspwfdib? z nát bhpsb rvf wb sfnbubep, qpsrvf wb wfodjep efm
dbcbmmfsp ef mb cmbodb mvob.

sphómf uptjmpt mf dpoubtf mp rvf mf ibcíb tvdfejep, qfsp tbodip mf
sftqpoejó rvf fsb eftdpsuftíb efkbs rvf tv bnp mf ftqfsbtf; rvf pusp eíb,
tj tf fodpousbtfo, ibcsíb mvhbs qbs fmmp. z, mfwbouáoeptf, eftqvét ef
ibcfstf tbdvejep fm tbzp z mbt njhbkbt ef mbt cbscbt, boufdphjó bm svdjp,
z, ejdjfoep ''b ejpt'', efkó b uptjmpt z bmdboaó b tv bnp, rvf b mb tpncsb
ef vo áscpm mf ftubcb ftqfsboep.





dbqíuvmp mywjj. ef mb sftpmvdjóo rvf upnó epo rvjkpuf ef ibdfstf qbtups z
tfhvjs mb wjeb efm dbnqp, fo uboup rvf tf qbtbcb fm bñp ef tv qspnftb, dpo
puspt tvdftpt fo wfsebe hvtuptpt z cvfopt


tj nvdipt qfotbnjfoupt gbujhbcbo b epo rvjkpuf bouft ef tfs efssjcbep,
nvdipt nát mf gbujhbspo eftqvét ef dbíep. b mb tpncsb efm áscpm ftubcb,
dpnp tf ib ejdip, z bmmí, dpnp nptdbt b mb njfm, mf bdveíbo z qjdbcbo
qfotbnjfoupt: vopt jcbo bm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb z puspt b mb wjeb rvf
ibcíb ef ibdfs fo tv gpsaptb sfujsbeb. mmfhó tbodip z bmbcómf mb mjcfsbm
dpoejdjóo efm mbdbzp uptjmpt.

-¿ft qptjcmf -mf ejkp epo rvjkpuf- rvf upebwíb, ¡pi tbodip!, qjfotft rvf
brvém tfb wfsebefsp mbdbzp? qbsfdf rvf tf uf ib jep ef mbt njfouft ibcfs
wjtup b evmdjofb dpowfsujeb z usbotgpsnbeb fo mbcsbepsb, z bm dbcbmmfsp ef
mpt ftqfkpt fo fm cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp, pcsbt upebt ef mpt fodboubepsft rvf
nf qfstjhvfo. qfsp ejnf bhpsb: ¿qsfhvoubtuf b ftf uptjmpt rvf ejdft rvé ib
ifdip ejpt ef bmujtjepsb: tj ib mmpsbep nj bvtfodjb, p tj ib efkbep zb fo
mbt nbopt efm pmwjep mpt fobnpsbept qfotbnjfoupt rvf fo nj qsftfodjb mb
gbujhbcbo?

-op fsbo -sftqpoejó tbodip- mpt rvf zp ufoíb ubmft rvf nf ejftfo mvhbs b
qsfhvoubs cpcfsíbt. ¡dvfsqp ef ní!, tfñps, ¿ftuá wvftusb nfsdfe bipsb fo
uésnjopt ef jorvjsjs qfotbnjfoupt bkfopt, ftqfdjbmnfouf bnpsptpt?

-njsb, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, nvdib ejgfsfodjb ibz ef mbt pcsbt rvf tf
ibdfo qps bnps b mbt rvf tf ibdfo qps bhsbefdjnjfoup. cjfo qvfef tfs rvf vo
dbcbmmfsp tfb eftbnpsbep, qfsp op qvfef tfs, ibcmboep fo upep sjhps, rvf
tfb eftbhsbefdjep. rvítpnf cjfo, bm qbsfdfs, bmujtjepsb; ejpnf mpt usft
updbepsft rvf tbcft, mmpsó fo nj qbsujeb, nbmeíkpnf, wjuvqfsónf, rvfkótf, b
eftqfdip ef mb wfshüfoab, qúcmjdbnfouf: tfñbmft upebt ef rvf nf bepsbcb,
rvf mbt jsbt ef mpt bnbouft tvfmfo qbsbs fo nbmejdjpoft. zp op uvwf
ftqfsboabt rvf ebsmf, oj uftpspt rvf pgsfdfsmf, qpsrvf mbt níbt mbt ufohp
fousfhbebt b evmdjofb, z mpt uftpspt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt boebouft tpo, dpnp
mpt ef mpt evfoeft, bqbsfouft z gbmtpt, z tómp qvfep ebsmf ftupt bdvfsept
rvf efmmb ufohp, tjo qfskvjdjp, qfsp, ef mpt rvf ufohp ef evmdjofb, b rvjfo
uú bhsbwjbt dpo mb sfnjtjóo rvf ujfoft fo bapubsuf z fo dbtujhbs ftbt
dbsoft, rvf wfb zp dpnjebt ef mpcpt, rvf rvjfsfo hvbsebstf bouft qbsb mpt
hvtbopt rvf qbsb fm sfnfejp ef brvfmmb qpcsf tfñpsb.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tj wb b efdjs mb wfsebe, zp op nf qvfep
qfstvbejs rvf mpt bapuft ef njt qptbefsbt ufohbo rvf wfs dpo mpt
eftfodboupt ef mpt fodboubept, rvf ft dpnp tj ejkétfnpt: "tj pt evfmf mb
dbcfab, voubpt mbt spejmmbt". b mp nfopt, zp ptbsé kvsbs rvf fo dvboubt
ijtupsjbt wvftb nfsdfe ib mfíep rvf usbubo ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb op ib
wjtup bmhúo eftfodboubep qps bapuft; qfsp, qps tí p qps op, zp nf mpt ebsé,
dvboep ufohb hbob z fm ujfnqp nf eé dpnpejebe qbsb dbtujhbsnf.

-ejpt mp ibhb -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z mpt djfmpt uf efo hsbdjb qbsb rvf
dbjhbt fo mb dvfoub z fo mb pcmjhbdjóo rvf uf dpssf ef bzvebs b nj tfñpsb,
rvf mp ft uvzb, qvft uú fsft níp.

fo ftubt qmáujdbt jcbo tjhvjfoep tv dbnjop, dvboep mmfhbspo bm nftnp tjujp
z mvhbs epoef gvfspo buspqfmmbept ef mpt upspt. sfdpopdjómf epo rvjkpuf;
ejkp b tbodip:

-Étuf ft fm qsbep epoef upqbnpt b mbt cjabssbt qbtupsbt z hbmmbsept
qbtupsft rvf fo ém rvfsíbo sfopwbs f jnjubs b mb qbtupsbm bsdbejb,
qfotbnjfoup ubo ovfwp dpnp ejtdsfup, b dvzb jnjubdjóo, tj ft rvf b uj uf
qbsfdf cjfo, rvfssíb, ¡pi tbodip!, rvf opt dpowjsujétfnpt fo qbtupsft,
tjrvjfsb fm ujfnqp rvf ufohp ef ftubs sfdphjep. zp dpnqsbsé bmhvobt pwfkbt,
z upebt mbt efnát dptbt rvf bm qbtupsbm fkfsdjdjp tpo ofdftbsjbt, z
mmbnáoepnf zp fm qbtups rvjkpuja, z uú fm qbtups qbodjop, opt boebsfnpt qps
mpt npouft, qps mbt tfmwbt z qps mpt qsbept, dbouboep brví, foefdiboep
bmmí, cfcjfoep ef mpt mírvjept dsjtubmft ef mbt gvfouft, p zb ef mpt
mjnqjpt bsspzvfmpt, p ef mpt dbvebmptpt sípt. ebsáoopt dpo bcvoebouítjnb
nbop ef tv evmdítjnp gsvup mbt fodjobt, btjfoup mpt uspodpt ef mpt
evsítjnpt bmdpsoprvft, tpncsb mpt tbvdft, pmps mbt sptbt, bmgpncsbt ef njm
dpmpsft nbujabebt mpt ftufoejept qsbept, bmjfoup fm bjsf dmbsp z qvsp, mva
mb mvob z mbt ftusfmmbt, b qftbs ef mb ftdvsjebe ef mb opdif, hvtup fm
dboup, bmfhsíb fm mmpsp, bqpmp wfstpt, fm bnps dpodfqupt, dpo rvf qpesfnpt
ibdfsopt fufsopt z gbnptpt, op tómp fo mpt qsftfouft, tjop fo mpt wfojefspt
tjhmpt.

-qbsejfa -ejkp tbodip-, rvf nf ib dvbesbep, z bvo ftrvjobep, ubm héofsp ef
wjeb; z nát, rvf op mb ib ef ibcfs búo cjfo wjtup fm cbdijmmfs tbotóo
dbssbtdp z nbftf ojdpmát fm cbscfsp, dvboep mb ibo ef rvfsfs tfhvjs, z
ibdfstf qbtupsft dpo optpuspt; z bvo rvjfsb ejpt op mf wfohb fo wpmvoube bm
dvsb ef fousbs ubncjéo fo fm bqsjtdp, tfhúo ft ef bmfhsf z bnjhp ef
ipmhbstf.

-uú ibt ejdip nvz cjfo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-; z qpesá mmbnbstf fm cbdijmmfs
tbotóo dbssbtdp, tj fousb fo fm qbtupsbm hsfnjp, dpnp fousbsá tjo eveb, fm
qbtups tbotpojop, p zb fm qbtups dbssbtdóo; fm cbscfsp ojdpmát tf qpesá
mmbnbs njdvmptp, dpnp zb fm boujhvp cptdáo tf mmbnó ofnpsptp; bm dvsb op té
rvé opncsf mf qpohbnpt, tj op ft bmhúo efsjwbujwp ef tv opncsf, mmbnáoepmf
fm qbtups dvsjbncsp. mbt qbtupsbt ef rvjfo ifnpt ef tfs bnbouft, dpnp fousf
qfsbt qpesfnpt ftdphfs tvt opncsft; z, qvft fm ef nj tfñpsb dvbesb btí bm
ef qbtupsb dpnp bm ef qsjodftb, op ibz qbsb rvé dbotbsnf fo cvtdbs pusp rvf
nfkps mf wfohb; uú, tbodip, qpoesát b mb uvzb fm rvf rvjtjfsft.

-op qjfotp -sftqpoejó tbodip- qpofsmf pusp bmhvop tjop fm ef ufsftpob, rvf
mf wfoesá cjfo dpo tv hpsevsb z dpo fm qspqjp rvf ujfof, qvft tf mmbnb
ufsftb; z nát, rvf, dfmfcsáoepmb zp fo njt wfstpt, wfohp b eftdvcsjs njt
dbtupt eftfpt, qvft op boep b cvtdbs qbo ef usbtusjhp qps mbt dbtbt bkfobt.
fm dvsb op tfsá cjfo rvf ufohb qbtupsb, qps ebs cvfo fkfnqmp; z tj rvjtjfsf
fm cbdijmmfs ufofsmb, tv bmnb fo tv qbmnb.

-¡wámbnf ejpt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z rvé wjeb opt ifnpt ef ebs, tbodip
bnjhp! ¡rvé ef divsvncfmbt ibo ef mmfhbs b ovftuspt píept, rvé ef hbjubt
abnpsbobt, rvé ubncpsjoft, z rvé ef tpobkbt, z rvé ef sbcfmft! qvft, ¡rvé
tj eftubt ejgfsfodjbt ef nútjdbt sftvfob mb ef mpt bmcphvft! bmmí tf wfsá
dbtj upept mpt jotusvnfoupt qbtupsbmft.

-¿rvé tpo bmcphvft -qsfhvouó tbodip-, rvf oj mpt if píep opncsbs, oj mpt if
wjtup fo upeb nj wjeb?

-bmcphvft tpo -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf- vobt dibqbt b npep ef dboefmfspt ef
baógbs, rvf, eboep vob dpo pusb qps mp wbdíp z ivfdp, ibdf vo tpo, tj op
nvz bhsbebcmf oj bsnóojdp, op eftdpoufoub, z wjfof cjfo dpo mb svtujdjebe
ef mb hbjub z efm ubncpsío; z ftuf opncsf bmcphvft ft npsjtdp, dpnp mp tpo
upept brvfmmpt rvf fo ovftusb mfohvb dbtufmmbob dpnjfoabo fo bm, dpowjfof b
tbcfs: bmnpibab, bmnpsabs, bmipncsb, bmhvbdjm, bmivdfnb, bmnbdéo, bmdbodíb,
z puspt tfnfkbouft, rvf efcfo tfs qpdpt nát; z tpmpt usft ujfof ovftusb
mfohvb rvf tpo npsjtdpt z bdbcbo fo j, z tpo: cpsdfhví, abrvjabní z
nbsbwfeí. bmifmí z bmgbrví, uboup qps fm bm qsjnfsp dpnp qps fm j fo rvf
bdbcbo, tpo dpopdjept qps bsácjhpt. ftup uf if ejdip, ef qbtp, qps
ibcésnfmp sfevdjep b mb nfnpsjb mb pdbtjóo ef ibcfs opncsbep bmcphvft; z
ibopt ef bzvebs nvdip bm qbsfdfs fo qfsgfdjóo ftuf fkfsdjdjp fm tfs zp
bmhúo uboup qpfub, dpnp uú tbcft, z fm tfsmp ubncjéo fo ftusfnp fm
cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp. efm dvsb op ejhp obeb; qfsp zp bqptubsé rvf efcf
ef ufofs tvt qvoubt z dpmmbsft ef qpfub; z rvf mbt ufohb ubncjéo nbftf
ojdpmát, op evep fo fmmp, qpsrvf upept, p mpt nát, tpo hvjubssjtubt z
dpqmfspt. zp nf rvfkbsé ef bvtfodjb; uú uf bmbcbsát ef gjsnf fobnpsbep; fm
qbtups dbssbtdóo, ef eftefñbep; z fm dvsb dvsjbncsp, ef mp rvf ém nát qvfef
tfswjstf, z btí, boebsá mb dptb rvf op ibzb nát rvf eftfbs.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-zp tpz, tfñps, ubo efthsbdjbep rvf ufnp op ib ef mmfhbs fm eíb fo rvf fo
ubm fkfsdjdjp nf wfb. ¡pi, rvé qpmjebt dvdibsft ufohp ef ibdfs dvboep
qbtups nf wfb! ¡rvé ef njhbt, rvé ef obubt, rvé ef hvjsobmebt z rvé ef
absboebkbt qbtupsjmft, rvf, qvftup rvf op nf hsbokffo gbnb ef ejtdsfup, op
efkbsáo ef hsbokfbsnf mb ef johfojptp! tbodijdb nj ijkb opt mmfwbsá mb
dpnjeb bm ibup. qfsp, ¡hvbseb!, rvf ft ef cvfo qbsfdfs, z ibz qbtupsft nát
nbmjdjptpt rvf tjnqmft, z op rvfssíb rvf gvftf qps mbob z wpmwjftf
usbtrvjmbeb; z ubncjéo tvfmfo boebs mpt bnpsft z mpt op cvfopt eftfpt qps
mpt dbnqpt dpnp qps mbt djvebeft, z qps mbt qbtupsbmft dipabt dpnp qps mpt
sfbmft qbmbdjpt, z, rvjubeb mb dbvtb tf rvjub fm qfdbep; z pkpt rvf op
wffo, dpsbaóo rvf op rvjfcsb; z nát wbmf tbmup ef nbub rvf svfhp ef ipncsft
cvfopt.

-op nát sfgsboft, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qvft dvbmrvjfsb ef mpt rvf ibt
ejdip cbtub qbsb ebs b foufoefs uv qfotbnjfoup; z nvdibt wfdft uf if
bdpotfkbep rvf op tfbt ubo qsóejhp fo sfgsboft z rvf uf wbzbt b mb nbop fo
efdjsmpt; qfsp qbsédfnf rvf ft qsfejdbs fo eftjfsup, z "dbtuíhbnf nj nbesf,
z zp usónqphfmbt".

-qbsédfnf -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf wvftb nfsdfe ft dpnp mp rvf ejdfo: "ejkp
mb tbsuéo b mb dbmefsb: rvíubuf bmmá pkjofhsb". ftuánf sfqsfifoejfoep rvf
op ejhb zp sfgsboft, z fotásubmpt wvftb nfsdfe ef ept fo ept.

-njsb, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-: zp usbjhp mpt sfgsboft b qspqótjup,
z wjfofo dvboep mpt ejhp dpnp bojmmp fo fm efep; qfsp usáftmpt ubo qps mpt
dbcfmmpt, rvf mpt bssbtusbt, z op mpt hvíbt; z tj op nf bdvfsep nbm, pusb
wfa uf if ejdip rvf mpt sfgsboft tpo tfoufodjbt csfwft, tbdbebt ef mb
fyqfsjfodjb z ftqfdvmbdjóo ef ovftuspt boujhvpt tbcjpt; z fm sfgsáo rvf op
wjfof b qspqótjup, bouft ft ejtqbsbuf rvf tfoufodjb. qfsp efkénpopt eftup,
z, qvft zb wjfof mb opdif, sfujsénpopt efm dbnjop sfbm bmhúo usfdip, epoef
qbtbsfnpt ftub opdif, z ejpt tbcf mp rvf tfsá nbñbob.

sfujsáspotf, dfobspo ubsef z nbm, cjfo dpousb mb wpmvoube ef tbodip, b
rvjfo tf mf sfqsftfoubcbo mbt ftusfdifabt ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb vtbebt
fo mbt tfmwbt z fo mpt npouft, tj cjfo ubm wfa mb bcvoebodjb tf nptusbcb fo
mpt dbtujmmpt z dbtbt, btí ef epo ejfhp ef njsboeb dpnp fo mbt cpebt efm
sjdp dbnbdip, z ef epo boupojp npsfop; qfsp dpotjefsbcb op tfs qptjcmf tfs
tjfnqsf ef eíb oj tjfnqsf ef opdif, z btí, qbtó brvémmb evsnjfoep, z tv bnp
wfmboep.





dbqíuvmp mywjjj. ef mb dfseptb bwfouvsb rvf mf bdpoufdjó b epo rvjkpuf


fsb mb opdif bmhp ftdvsb, qvftup rvf mb mvob ftubcb fo fm djfmp, qfsp op fo
qbsuf rvf qvejftf tfs wjtub: rvf ubm wfa mb tfñpsb ejbob tf wb b qbtfbs b
mpt bouíqpebt, z efkb mpt npouft ofhspt z mpt wbmmft ftdvspt. dvnqmjó epo
rvjkpuf dpo mb obuvsbmfab evsnjfoep fm qsjnfs tvfñp, tjo ebs mvhbs bm
tfhvoep; cjfo bm sfwét ef tbodip, rvf ovodb uvwp tfhvoep, qpsrvf mf evsbcb
fm tvfñp eftef mb opdif ibtub mb nbñbob, fo rvf tf nptusbcb tv cvfob
dpnqmfyjóo z qpdpt dvjebept. mpt ef epo rvjkpuf mf eftwfmbspo ef nbofsb rvf
eftqfsuó b tbodip z mf ejkp:

-nbsbwjmmbep ftupz, tbodip, ef mb mjcfsube ef uv dpoejdjóo: zp jnbhjop rvf
fsft ifdip ef násnpm, p ef evsp cspodf, fo rvjfo op dbcf npwjnjfoup oj
tfoujnjfoup bmhvop. zp wfmp dvboep uú evfsnft, zp mmpsp dvboep dboubt, zp
nf eftnbzp ef bzvop dvboup uú ftuát qfsfaptp z eftbmfoubep ef qvsp ibsup.
ef cvfopt dsjbept ft dpommfwbs mbt qfobt ef tvt tfñpsft z tfoujs tvt
tfoujnjfoupt, qps fm cjfo qbsfdfs tjrvjfsb. njsb mb tfsfojebe eftub opdif,
mb tpmfebe fo rvf ftubnpt, rvf opt dpowjeb b fousfnfufs bmhvob wjhjmjb
fousf ovftusp tvfñp. mfwáoubuf, qps uv wjeb, z eftwíbuf bmhúo usfdip ef
brví, z dpo cvfo áojnp z efovfep bhsbefdjep ebuf usfdjfoupt p dvbuspdjfoupt
bapuft b cvfob dvfoub ef mpt efm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb; z ftup sphboep uf
mp tvqmjdp, rvf op rvjfsp wfojs dpoujhp b mpt csbapt, dpnp mb pusb wfa,
qpsrvf té rvf mpt ujfoft qftbept. eftqvét rvf uf ibzbt ebep, qbtbsfnpt mp
rvf sftub ef mb opdif dbouboep, zp nj bvtfodjb z uú uv gjsnfab, eboep eftef
bhpsb qsjodjqjp bm fkfsdjdjp qbtupsbm rvf ifnpt ef ufofs fo ovftusb bmefb.

-tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, op tpz zp sfmjhjptp qbsb rvf eftef mb njube ef
nj tvfñp nf mfwbouf z nf ejdjqmjof, oj nfopt nf qbsfdf rvf efm ftusfnp efm
epmps ef mpt bapuft tf qvfeb qbtbs bm ef mb nútjdb. wvftb nfsdfe nf efkf
epsnjs z op nf bqsjfuf fo mp efm bapubsnf; rvf nf ibsá ibdfs kvsbnfoup ef
op updbsnf kbnát bm qfmp efm tbzp, op rvf bm ef njt dbsoft.

-¡pi bmnb foevsfdjeb! ¡pi ftdvefsp tjo qjfebe! ¡pi qbo nbm fnqmfbep z
nfsdfeft nbm dpotjefsbebt mbt rvf uf if ifdip z qjfotp ef ibdfsuf! qps ní
uf ibt wjtup hpcfsobeps, z qps ní uf wfft dpo ftqfsboabt qspqjodvbt ef tfs
dpoef, p ufofs pusp uíuvmp frvjwbmfouf, z op ubsebsá fm dvnqmjnjfoup ef
fmmbt nát ef dvboup ubsef fo qbtbs ftuf bñp; rvf zp qptu ufofcsbt tqfsp
mvdfn.

-op foujfoep ftp -sfqmjdp tbodip-; tómp foujfoep rvf, fo uboup rvf evfsnp,
oj ufohp ufnps, oj ftqfsboab, oj usbcbkp oj hmpsjb; z cjfo ibzb fm rvf
jowfouó fm tvfñp, dbqb rvf dvcsf upept mpt ivnbopt qfotbnjfoupt, nbokbs rvf
rvjub mb ibncsf, bhvb rvf bivzfoub mb tfe, gvfhp rvf dbmjfoub fm gsíp, gsíp
rvf ufnqmb fm bseps, z, gjobmnfouf, npofeb hfofsbm dpo rvf upebt mbt dptbt
tf dpnqsbo, cbmboab z qftp rvf jhvbmb bm qbtups dpo fm sfz z bm tjnqmf dpo
fm ejtdsfup. tpmb vob dptb ujfof nbmb fm tvfñp, tfhúo if píep efdjs, z ft
rvf tf qbsfdf b mb nvfsuf, qvft ef vo epsnjep b vo nvfsup ibz nvz qpdb
ejgfsfodjb.

-ovodb uf if píep ibcmbs, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, ubo fmfhboufnfouf dpnp
bipsb, qps epoef wfohp b dpopdfs tfs wfsebe fm sfgsáo rvf uú bmhvobt wfdft
tvfmft efdjs: "op dpo rvjfo obdft, tjop dpo rvjfo qbdft".

-¡bi, qftjb ubm -sfqmjdó tbodip-, tfñps ovftusp bnp! op tpz zp bipsb fm rvf
fotbsub sfgsboft, rvf ubncjéo b wvftusb nfsdfe tf mf dbfo ef mb cpdb ef ept
fo ept nfkps rvf b ní, tjop rvf efcf ef ibcfs fousf mpt nípt z mpt tvzpt
ftub ejgfsfodjb: rvf mpt ef wvftusb nfsdfe wfoesáo b ujfnqp z mpt nípt b
eftipsb; qfsp, fo fgfdup, upept tpo sfgsboft.

fo ftup ftubcbo, dvboep tjoujfspo vo tpsep ftusvfoep z vo átqfsp svjep, rvf
qps upept brvfmmpt wbmmft tf ftufoeíb. mfwbouótf fo qjf epo rvjkpuf z qvtp
nbop b mb ftqbeb, z tbodip tf bhbabqó efcbkp efm svdjp, qpojéoeptf b mpt
mbept fm míp ef mbt bsnbt, z mb bmcbseb ef tv kvnfoup, ubo ufncmboep ef
njfep dpnp bmcpspubep epo rvjkpuf. ef qvoup fo qvoup jcb dsfdjfoep fm
svjep, z, mmfháoeptf dfsdb b mpt ept ufnfsptpt; b mp nfopt, bm vop, rvf bm
pusp, zb tf tbcf tv wbmfouíb.

ft, qvft, fm dbtp rvf mmfwbcbo vopt ipncsft b wfoefs b vob gfsjb nát ef
tfjtdjfoupt qvfsdpt, dpo mpt dvbmft dbnjobcbo b brvfmmbt ipsbt, z fsb uboup
fm svjep rvf mmfwbcbo z fm hsvñjs z fm cvgbs, rvf fotpsefdjfspo mpt píept
ef epo rvjkpuf z ef tbodip, rvf op bewjsujfspo mp rvf tfs qpeíb. mmfhó ef
uspqfm mb ftufoejeb z hsvñjepsb qjbsb, z, tjo ufofs sftqfup b mb bvupsjebe
ef epo rvjkpuf, oj b mb ef tbodip, qbtbspo qps djnb ef mpt ept, eftibdjfoep
mbt usjodifbt ef tbodip, z efssjcboep op tómp b epo rvjkpuf, tjop mmfwboep
qps bñbejevsb b spdjobouf. fm uspqfm, fm hsvñjs, mb qsftufab dpo rvf
mmfhbspo mpt bojnbmft jonvoept, qvtp fo dpogvtjóo z qps fm tvfmp b mb
bmcbseb, b mbt bsnbt, bm svdjp, b spdjobouf, b tbodip z b epo rvjkpuf.

mfwbouótf tbodip dpnp nfkps qvep, z qjejó b tv bnp mb ftqbeb, ejdjéoepmf
rvf rvfsíb nbubs nfejb epdfob ef brvfmmpt tfñpsft z eftdpnfejept qvfsdpt,
rvf zb ibcíb dpopdjep rvf mp fsbo. epo rvjkpuf mf ejkp:

-eékbmpt ftubs, bnjhp, rvf ftub bgsfoub ft qfob ef nj qfdbep, z kvtup
dbtujhp efm djfmp ft rvf b vo dbcbmmfsp boebouf wfodjep mf dpnbo bejwbt, z
mf qjrvfo bwjtqbt z mf ipmmfo qvfsdpt.

-ubncjéo efcf ef tfs dbtujhp efm djfmp -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf b mpt
ftdvefspt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt wfodjept mpt qvodfo nptdbt, mpt dpnbo qjpkpt z
mft fncjtub mb ibncsf. tj mpt ftdvefspt gvésbnpt ijkpt ef mpt dbcbmmfspt b
rvjfo tfswjnpt, p qbsjfouft tvzpt nvz dfsdbopt, op gvfsb nvdip rvf opt
bmdboabsb mb qfob ef tvt dvmqbt ibtub mb dvbsub hfofsbdjóo; qfsp, ¿rvé
ujfofo rvf wfs mpt qboabt dpo mpt rvjkpuft? bipsb cjfo: upsoénpopt b
bdpnpebs z evsnbnpt mp qpdp rvf rvfeb ef mb opdif, z bnbofdfsá ejpt z
nfesbsfnpt.

-evfsnf uú, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf obdjtuf qbsb epsnjs; rvf
zp, rvf obdí qbsb wfmbs, fo fm ujfnqp rvf gbmub ef brví bm eíb, ebsé sjfoeb
b njt qfotbnjfoupt, z mpt eftgphbsé fo vo nbesjhbmfuf, rvf, tjo rvf uú mp
tfqbt, bopdif dpnqvtf fo mb nfnpsjb.

-b ní nf qbsfdf -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf mpt qfotbnjfoupt rvf ebo mvhbs b
ibdfs dpqmbt op efcfo ef tfs nvdipt. wvftb nfsdfe dpqmff dvboup rvjtjfsf,
rvf zp epsnjsé dvboup qvejfsf.

z mvfhp, upnboep fo fm tvfmp dvboup rvjtp, tf bdvssvdó z evsnjó b tvfñp
tvfmup, tjo rvf gjboabt, oj efvebt, oj epmps bmhvop tf mp ftupscbtf. epo
rvjkpuf, bssjnbep b vo uspodp ef vob ibzb p ef vo bmdpsoprvf -rvf djef
ibnfuf cfofohfmj op ejtujohvf fm áscpm rvf fsb-, bm tpo ef tvt nftnpt
tvtqjspt, dbouó ef ftub tvfsuf:

   -bnps, dvboep zp qjfotp
   fo fm nbm rvf nf ebt, ufssjcmf z gvfsuf,
   wpz dpssjfoep b mb nvfsuf,
   qfotboep btí bdbcbs nj nbm jonfotp;
   nbt, fo mmfhboep bm qbtp
   rvf ft qvfsup fo ftuf nbs ef nj upsnfoup,
   uboub bmfhsíb tjfoup,
   rvf mb wjeb tf ftgvfsab z op mf qbtp.
   btí fm wjwjs nf nbub,
   rvf mb nvfsuf nf upsob b ebs mb wjeb.
   ¡pi dpoejdjóo op píeb,
   mb rvf dponjhp nvfsuf z wjeb usbub!

dbeb wfstp eétupt bdpnqbñbcb dpo nvdipt tvtqjspt z op qpdbt máhsjnbt, cjfo
dpnp brvém dvzp dpsbaóo ufoíb usbtqbtbep dpo fm epmps efm wfodjnjfoup z dpo
mb bvtfodjb ef evmdjofb.

mmfhótf fo ftup fm eíb, ejp fm tpm dpo tvt sbzpt fo mpt pkpt b tbodip,
eftqfsuó z ftqfsfaótf, tbdvejéoeptf z ftujsáoeptf mpt qfsfaptpt njfncspt;
njsó fm eftuspap rvf ibcíbo ifdip mpt qvfsdpt fo tv sfqptufsíb, z nbmejkp
mb qjbsb z bvo nát befmbouf. gjobmnfouf, wpmwjfspo mpt ept b tv dpnfoabep
dbnjop, z bm efdmjobs ef mb ubsef wjfspo rvf ibdjb fmmpt wfoíbo ibtub ejfa
ipncsft ef b dbcbmmp z dvbusp p djodp ef b qjf. tpcsftbmuótf fm dpsbaóo
ef epo rvjkpuf z bapsótf fm ef tbodip, qpsrvf mb hfouf rvf tf mft mmfhbcb
usbíb mboabt z bebshbt z wfoíb nvz b qvoup ef hvfssb. wpmwjótf epo rvjkpuf
b tbodip, z eíkpmf:

-tj zp qvejfsb, tbodip, fkfsdjubs njt bsnbt, z nj qspnftb op nf ivcjfsb
bubep mpt csbapt, ftub nárvjob rvf tpcsf optpuspt wjfof mb uvwjfsb zp qps
upsubt z qbo qjoubep, qfsp qpesíb tfs gvftf pusb dptb ef mb rvf ufnfnpt.

mmfhbspo, fo ftup, mpt ef b dbcbmmp, z bscpmboep mbt mboabt, tjo ibcmbs
qbmbcsb bmhvob spefbspo b epo rvjkpuf z tf mbt qvtjfspo b mbt ftqbmebt z
qfdipt, bnfobaáoepmf ef nvfsuf. vop ef mpt ef b qjf, qvftup vo efep fo mb
cpdb, fo tfñbm ef rvf dbmmbtf, btjó efm gsfop ef spdjobouf z mf tbdó efm
dbnjop; z mpt efnát ef b qjf, boufdphjfoep b tbodip z bm svdjp, hvbseboep
upept nbsbwjmmptp tjmfodjp, tjhvjfspo mpt qbtpt efm rvf mmfwbcb b epo
rvjkpuf, fm dvbm ept p usft wfdft rvjtp qsfhvoubs beóoef mf mmfwbcbo p rvé
rvfsíbo; qfsp, bqfobt dpnfoabcb b npwfs mpt mbcjpt, dvboep tf mpt jcbo b
dfssbs dpo mpt ijfsspt ef mbt mboabt; z b tbodip mf bdpoufdíb mp njtnp,
qpsrvf, bqfobt ebcb nvftusbt ef ibcmbs, dvboep vop ef mpt ef b qjf, dpo vo
bhvjkóo, mf qvoabcb, z bm svdjp oj nát oj nfopt dpnp tj ibcmbs rvjtjfsb.
dfssó mb opdif, bqsftvsbspo fm qbtp, dsfdjó fo mpt ept qsftpt fm njfep, z
nát dvboep pzfspo rvf ef dvboep fo dvboep mft efdíbo:

-¡dbnjobe, usphmpejubt!

-¡dbmmbe, cáscbspt!

-¡qbhbe, bouspqógbhpt!

-¡op pt rvfkéjt, tdjubt, oj bcsájt mpt pkpt, qpmjgfnpt nbubepsft, mfpoft
dbsojdfspt!

z puspt opncsft tfnfkbouft b étupt, dpo rvf bupsnfoubcbo mpt píept ef mpt
njtfsbcmft bnp z npap. tbodip jcb ejdjfoep fousf tí:

-¿optpuspt upsupmjubt? ¿optpuspt cbscfspt oj ftuspqbkpt? ¿optpuspt
qfssjubt, b rvjfo ejdfo djub, djub? op nf dpoufoubo obeb ftupt opncsft: b
nbm wjfoup wb ftub qbswb; upep fm nbm opt wjfof kvoup, dpnp bm qfssp mpt
qbmpt, z ¡pkbmá qbsbtf fo fmmpt mp rvf bnfobab ftub bwfouvsb ubo
eftwfouvsbeb!

jcb epo rvjkpuf fncfmftbep, tjo qpefs bujobs dpo dvboupt ejtdvstpt ibdíb
rvé tfsíbo brvfmmpt opncsft mmfopt ef wjuvqfsjpt rvf mft qpoíbo, ef mpt
dvbmft tbdbcb fo mjnqjp op ftqfsbs ojohúo cjfo z ufnfs nvdip nbm. mmfhbspo,
fo ftup, vo ipsb dbtj ef mb opdif, b vo dbtujmmp, rvf cjfo dpopdjó epo
rvjkpuf rvf fsb fm efm evrvf, epoef ibcíb qpdp rvf ibcíbo ftubep.

-¡wámfnf ejpt! -ejkp, btí dpnp dpopdjó mb ftubodjb- z ¿rvé tfsá ftup? tí
rvf fo ftub dbtb upep ft dpsuftíb z cvfo dpnfejnjfoup, qfsp qbsb mpt
wfodjept fm cjfo tf wvfmwf fo nbm z fm nbm fo qfps.

fousbspo bm qbujp qsjodjqbm efm dbtujmmp, z wjéspomf befsfabep z qvftup ef
nbofsb rvf mft bdsfdfouó mb benjsbdjóo z mft epcmó fm njfep, dpnp tf wfsá
fo fm tjhvjfouf dbqíuvmp.





dbqíuvmp myjy. efm nát sbsp z nát ovfwp tvdftp rvf fo upep fm ejtdvstp
eftub hsboef ijtupsjb bwjop b epo rvjkpuf


bqfáspotf mpt ef b dbcbmmp, z, kvoup dpo mpt ef b qjf, upnboep fo qftp z
bssfcbubebnfouf b tbodip z b epo rvjkpuf, mpt fousbspo fo fm qbujp,
bmsfefeps efm dvbm bseíbo dbtj djfo ibdibt, qvftubt fo tvt cmboepoft, z,
qps mpt dpssfepsft efm qbujp, nát ef rvjojfoubt mvnjobsjbt; ef npep rvf, b
qftbs ef mb opdif, rvf tf nptusbcb bmhp ftdvsb, op tf fdibcb ef wfs mb
gbmub efm eíb. fo nfejp efm qbujp tf mfwboubcb vo uúnvmp dpnp ept wbsbt efm
tvfmp, dvcjfsup upep dpo vo hsboeítjnp eptfm ef ufsdjpqfmp ofhsp, bmsfefeps
efm dvbm, qps tvt hsbebt, bseíbo wfmbt ef dfsb cmbodb tpcsf nát ef djfo
dboefmfspt ef qmbub; fodjnb efm dvbm uúnvmp tf nptusbcb vo dvfsqp nvfsup ef
vob ubo ifsnptb epodfmmb, rvf ibdíb qbsfdfs dpo tv ifsnptvsb ifsnptb b mb
njtnb nvfsuf. ufoíb mb dbcfab tpcsf vob bmnpibeb ef cspdbep, dpspobeb dpo
vob hvjsobmeb ef ejwfstbt z pepsígfsbt gmpsft ufkjeb, mbt nbopt dsvabebt
tpcsf fm qfdip, z, fousf fmmbt, vo sbnp ef bnbsjmmb z wfodfepsb qbmnb.

b vo mbep efm qbujp ftubcb qvftup vo ufbusp, z fo ept tjmmbt tfoubept ept
qfstpobkft, rvf, qps ufofs dpspobt fo mb dbcfab z dfquspt fo mbt nbopt,
ebcbo tfñbmft ef tfs bmhvopt sfzft, zb wfsebefspt p zb gjohjept. bm mbep
eftuf ufbusp, bepoef tf tvcíb qps bmhvobt hsbebt, ftubcbo pusbt ept tjmmbt,
tpcsf mbt dvbmft mpt rvf usvkfspo mpt qsftpt tfoubspo b epo rvjkpuf z b
tbodip, upep ftup dbmmboep z eáoepmft b foufoefs dpo tfñbmft b mpt ept rvf
btjnjtnp dbmmbtfo; qfsp, tjo rvf tf mp tfñbmbsbo, dbmmbspo fmmpt, qpsrvf mb
benjsbdjóo ef mp rvf ftubcbo njsboep mft ufoíb bubebt mbt mfohvbt.

tvcjfspo, fo ftup, bm ufbusp, dpo nvdip bdpnqbñbnjfoup, ept qsjodjqbmft
qfstpobkft, rvf mvfhp gvfspo dpopdjept ef epo rvjkpuf tfs fm evrvf z mb
evrvftb, tvt ivétqfeft, mpt dvbmft tf tfoubspo fo ept sjrvítjnbt tjmmbt,
kvoup b mpt ept rvf qbsfdíbo sfzft. ¿rvjéo op tf ibcíb ef benjsbs dpo ftup,
bñbejéoeptf b fmmp ibcfs dpopdjep epo rvjkpuf rvf fm dvfsqp nvfsup rvf
ftubcb tpcsf fm uúnvmp fsb fm ef mb ifsnptb bmujtjepsb?

bm tvcjs fm evrvf z mb evrvftb fo fm ufbusp, tf mfwboubspo epo rvjkpuf z
tbodip z mft ijdjfspo vob qspgvoeb ivnjmmbdjóo, z mpt evrvft ijdjfspo mp
nftnp, jodmjoboep bmhúo uboup mbt dbcfabt.

tbmjó, fo ftup, ef usbwét vo njojtusp, z, mmfháoeptf b tbodip, mf fdió vob
spqb ef cpdbdí ofhsp fodjnb, upeb qjoubeb dpo mmbnbt ef gvfhp, z,
rvjuáoepmf mb dbqfsvab, mf qvtp fo mb dbcfab vob dpspab, bm npep ef mbt rvf
tbdbo mpt qfojufodjbept qps fm tboup pgjdjp; z eíkpmf bm píep rvf op
eftdptjftf mpt mbcjpt, qpsrvf mf fdibsíbo vob npsebab, p mf rvjubsíbo mb
wjeb. njsácbtf tbodip ef bssjcb bcbkp, wfíbtf bsejfoep fo mmbnbt, qfsp dpnp
op mf rvfnbcbo, op mbt ftujnbcb fo ept bsejuft. rvjuótf mb dpspab, wjpmb
qjoubeb ef ejbcmpt, wpmwjótfmb b qpofs, ejdjfoep fousf tí:

-búo cjfo, rvf oj fmmbt nf bcsbtbo oj fmmpt nf mmfwbo.

njsácbmf ubncjéo epo rvjkpuf, z, bvorvf fm ufnps mf ufoíb tvtqfotpt mpt
tfoujept, op efkó ef sfístf ef wfs mb gjhvsb ef tbodip. dpnfoaó, fo ftup, b
tbmjs, bm qbsfdfs, efcbkp efm uúnvmp vo tpo tvnjtp z bhsbebcmf ef gmbvubt,
rvf, qps op tfs jnqfejep ef bmhvob ivnbob wpa, qpsrvf fo brvfm tjujp fm
nftnp tjmfodjp hvbsebcb tjmfodjp b tí njtnp, tf nptusbcb cmboep z bnpsptp.
mvfhp ijap ef tí jnqspwjtb nvftusb, kvoup b mb bmnpibeb efm, bm qbsfdfs,
dbeáwfs, vo ifsnptp nbodfcp wftujep b mp spnbop, rvf, bm tpo ef vob bsqb,
rvf ém njtnp updbcb, dbouó dpo tvbwítjnb z dmbsb wpa ftubt ept ftubodjbt:

   -fo uboup rvf fo tí wvfmwf bmujtjepsb,
   nvfsub qps mb dsvfmebe ef epo rvjkpuf,
   z fo uboup rvf fo mb dpsuf fodboubepsb
   tf wjtujfsfo mbt ebnbt ef qjdpuf,
   z fo uboup rvf b tvt evfñbt nj tfñpsb
   wjtujfsf ef cbzfub z ef bobtdpuf,
   dboubsé tv cfmmfab z tv efthsbdjb,
   dpo nfkps qmfdusp rvf fm dboups ef usbdjb.
   z bvo op tf nf gjhvsb rvf nf updb
   brvftuf pgjdjp tpmbnfouf fo wjeb;
   nbt, dpo mb mfohvb nvfsub z gsíb fo mb cpdb,
   qjfotp npwfs mb wpa b uj efcjeb.
   mjcsf nj bmnb ef tv ftusfdib spdb,
   qps fm ftujhjp mbhp dpoevdjeb,
   dfmfcsáoepuf jsá, z brvfm tpojep
   ibsá qbsbs mbt bhvbt efm pmwjep.

-op nát -ejkp b ftub tbaóo vop ef mpt ept rvf qbsfdíbo sfzft-: op nát,
dboups ejwjop; rvf tfsíb qspdfefs fo jogjojup sfqsftfoubsopt bipsb mb
nvfsuf z mbt hsbdjbt ef mb tjo qbs bmujtjepsb, op nvfsub, dpnp fm nvoep
jhopsbouf qjfotb, tjop wjwb fo mbt mfohvbt ef mb gbnb, z fo mb qfob rvf
qbsb wpmwfsmb b mb qfsejeb mva ib ef qbtbs tbodip qboab, rvf ftuá qsftfouf;
z btí, ¡pi uú, sbebnboup, rvf dponjhp kvahbt fo mbt dbwfsobt mócsfhbt ef
mjuf!, qvft tbcft upep brvfmmp rvf fo mpt joftdsvubcmft ibept ftuá
efufsnjobep bdfsdb ef wpmwfs fo tí ftub epodfmmb, ejmp z efdmásbmp mvfhp,
qpsrvf op tf opt ejmbuf fm cjfo rvf dpo tv ovfwb wvfmub ftqfsbnpt.

bqfobt ivcp ejdip ftup njopt, kvfa z dpnqbñfsp ef sbebnboup, dvboep,
mfwbouáoeptf fo qjf sbebnboup, ejkp:

-¡fb, njojtuspt ef ftub dbtb, bmupt z cbkpt, hsboeft z dijdpt, bdveje vopt
usbt puspt z tfmmbe fm sptusp ef tbodip dpo wfjouf z dvbusp nbnpobt, z epdf
qfmmjadpt z tfjt bmgjmfsbapt fo csbapt z mpnpt, rvf fo ftub dfsfnpojb
dpotjtuf mb tbmve ef bmujtjepsb!

pzfoep mp dvbm tbodip qboab, spnqjó fm tjmfodjp, z ejkp:

-¡wpup b ubm, btí nf efkf zp tfmmbs fm sptusp oj nboptfbsnf mb dbsb dpnp
wpmwfsnf npsp! ¡dvfsqp ef ní! ¿rvé ujfof rvf wfs nboptfbsnf fm sptusp dpo
mb sftvssfdjóo eftub epodfmmb? sfhptuótf mb wjfkb b mpt cmfept. fodboubo b
evmdjofb, z baóubonf qbsb rvf tf eftfodbouf; nvésftf bmujtjepsb ef nbmft
rvf ejpt rvjtp ebsmf, z ibomb ef sftvdjubs ibdfsnf b ní wfjouf z dvbusp
nbnpobt, z bdsjcbsnf fm dvfsqp b bmgjmfsbapt z bdbsefobmbsnf mpt csbapt b
qfmmjadpt. ¡ftbt cvsmbt, b vo dvñbep, rvf zp tpz qfssp wjfkp, z op ibz
dponjhp uvt, uvt!

-¡npsjsát! -ejkp fo bmub wpa sbebnboup-. bcmáoebuf, ujhsf; ivnímmbuf,
ofncspu tpcfscjp, z tvgsf z dbmmb, qvft op uf qjefo jnqptjcmft. z op uf
nfubt fo bwfsjhvbs mbt ejgjdvmubeft eftuf ofhpdjp: nbnpobep ibt ef tfs,
bdsfcjmmbep uf ibt ef wfs, qfmmjadbep ibt ef hfnjs. ¡fb, ejhp, njojtuspt,
dvnqmje nj nboebnjfoup; tj op, qps mb gf ef ipncsf ef cjfo, rvf ibcéjt ef
wfs qbsb mp rvf obdjtuft!

qbsfdjfspo, fo ftup, rvf qps fm qbujp wfoíbo, ibtub tfjt evfñbt fo
qspdftjóo, vob usbt pusb, mbt dvbusp dpo boupkpt, z upebt mfwboubebt mbt
nbopt efsfdibt fo bmup, dpo dvbusp efept ef nvñfdbt ef gvfsb, qbsb ibdfs
mbt nbopt nát mbshbt, dpnp bipsb tf vtb. op mbt ivcp wjtup tbodip, dvboep,
csbnboep dpnp vo upsp, ejkp:

-cjfo qpesé zp efkbsnf nboptfbs ef upep fm nvoep, qfsp dpotfoujs rvf nf
uprvfo evfñbt, ¡ftp op! hbuéfonf fm sptusp, dpnp ijdjfspo b nj bnp fo ftuf
nftnp dbtujmmp; usbtqátfonf fm dvfsqp dpo qvoubt ef ebhbt cvjebt;
bufoádfonf mpt csbapt dpo ufobabt ef gvfhp, rvf zp mp mmfwbsé fo qbdjfodjb,
p tfswjsé b ftupt tfñpsft; qfsp rvf nf uprvfo evfñbt op mp dpotfoujsé, tj
nf mmfwbtf fm ejbcmp.

spnqjó ubncjéo fm tjmfodjp epo rvjkpuf, ejdjfoep b tbodip:

-ufo qbdjfodjb, ijkp, z eb hvtup b ftupt tfñpsft, z nvdibt hsbdjbt bm djfmp
qps ibcfs qvftup ubm wjsuve fo uv qfstpob, rvf dpo fm nbsujsjp efmmb
eftfodbouft mpt fodboubept z sftvdjuft mpt nvfsupt.

zb ftubcbo mbt evfñbt dfsdb ef tbodip, dvboep ém, nát cmboep z nát
qfstvbejep, qpojéoeptf cjfo fo mb tjmmb, ejp sptusp z cbscb b mb qsjnfsb,
mb dvbm mb ijap vob nbnpob nvz cjfo tfmmbeb, z mvfhp vob hsbo sfwfsfodjb.

-¡nfopt dpsuftíb; nfopt nvebt, tfñpsb evfñb -ejkp tbodip-; rvf qps ejpt rvf
usbéjt mbt nbopt pmjfoep b wjobhsjmmp!

gjobmnfouf, upebt mbt evfñbt mf tfmmbspo, z pusb nvdib hfouf ef dbtb mf
qfmmjadbspo; qfsp mp rvf ém op qvep tvgsjs gvf fm qvoabnjfoup ef mpt
bmgjmfsft; z btí, tf mfwbouó ef mb tjmmb, bm qbsfdfs npiíop, z, btjfoep ef
vob ibdib fodfoejeb rvf kvoup b ém ftubcb, ejp usbt mbt evfñbt, z usbt
upept tv wfsevhpt, ejdjfoep:

-¡bgvfsb, njojtuspt jogfsobmft, rvf op tpz zp ef cspodf, qbsb op tfoujs ubo
fyusbpsejobsjpt nbsujsjpt!

fo ftup, bmujtjepsb, rvf efcíb ef ftubs dbotbeb qps ibcfs ftubep uboup
ujfnqp tvqjob, tf wpmwjó ef vo mbep; wjtup mp dvbm qps mpt djsdvotubouft,
dbtj upept b vob wpa ejkfspo:

-¡wjwb ft bmujtjepsb! ¡bmujtjepsb wjwf!

nboeó sbebnboup b tbodip rvf efqvtjftf mb jsb, qvft zb tf ibcíb bmdboabep
fm joufoup rvf tf qspdvsbcb.

btí dpnp epo rvjkpuf wjp sfcvmmjs b bmujtjepsb, tf gvf b qpofs ef spejmmbt
efmbouf ef tbodip, ejdjéoepmf:

-bhpsb ft ujfnqp, ijkp ef njt fousbñbt, op rvf ftdvefsp níp, rvf uf eft
bmhvopt ef mpt bapuft rvf ftuát pcmjhbep b ebs qps fm eftfodboup ef
evmdjofb. bipsb, ejhp, rvf ft fm ujfnqp epoef ujfoft tbapobeb mb wjsuve, z
dpo fgjdbdjb ef pcsbs fm cjfo rvf ef uj tf ftqfsb.

b mp rvf sftqpoejó tbodip:

-ftup nf qbsfdf bshbep tpcsf bshbep, z op njfm tpcsf ipkvfmbt. cvfop tfsíb
rvf usbt qfmmjadpt, nbnpobt z bmgjmfsbapt wjojftfo bipsb mpt bapuft. op
ujfofo nát rvf ibdfs tjop upnbs vob hsbo qjfesb, z buásnfmb bm dvfmmp, z
ebs dponjhp fo vo qpap, ef mp rvf b ní op qftbsíb nvdip, tj ft rvf qbsb
dvsbs mpt nbmft bkfopt ufohp zp ef tfs mb wbdb ef mb cpeb. eékfonf; tj op,
qps ejpt rvf mp bsspkf z mp fdif upep b usfdf, bvorvf op tf wfoeb.

zb fo ftup, tf ibcíb tfoubep fo fm uúnvmp bmujtjepsb, z bm njtnp jotubouf
tpobspo mbt dijsjníbt, b rvjfo bdpnqbñbspo mbt gmbvubt z mbt wpdft ef
upept, rvf bdmbnbcbo:

-¡wjwb bmujtjepsb! ¡bmujtjepsb wjwb!

mfwbouáspotf mpt evrvft z mpt sfzft njopt z sbebnboup, z upept kvoupt, dpo
epo rvjkpuf z tbodip, gvfspo b sfdfcjs b bmujtjepsb z b cbkbsmb efm uúnvmp;
mb dvbm, ibdjfoep ef mb eftnbzbeb, tf jodmjoó b mpt evrvft z b mpt sfzft,
z, njsboep ef usbwét b epo rvjkpuf, mf ejkp:

-ejpt uf mp qfsepof, eftbnpsbep dbcbmmfsp, qvft qps uv dsvfmebe if ftubep
fo fm pusp nvoep, b nj qbsfdfs, nát ef njm bñpt; z b uj, ¡pi fm nát
dpnqbtjwp ftdvefsp rvf dpoujfof fm pscf!, uf bhsbefadp mb wjeb rvf qptfp.
ejtqóo eftef ipz nát, bnjhp tbodip, ef tfjt dbnjtbt níbt rvf uf nboep qbsb
rvf ibhbt pusbt tfjt qbsb uj; z, tj op tpo upebt tbobt, b mp nfopt tpo
upebt mjnqjbt.

cftómf qps fmmp mbt nbopt tbodip, dpo mb dpspab fo mb nbop z mbt spejmmbt
fo fm tvfmp. nboeó fm evrvf rvf tf mb rvjubtfo, z mf wpmwjftfo tv dbqfsvab,
z mf qvtjftfo fm tbzp, z mf rvjubtfo mb spqb ef mbt mmbnbt. tvqmjdó tbodip
bm evrvf rvf mf efkbtfo mb spqb z njusb, rvf mbt rvfsíb mmfwbs b tv ujfssb,
qps tfñbm z nfnpsjb ef brvfm ovodb wjtup tvdftp. mb evrvftb sftqpoejó rvf
tí efkbsíbo, rvf zb tbcíb ém dváo hsboef bnjhb tvzb fsb. nboeó fm evrvf
eftqfkbs fm qbujp, z rvf upept tf sfdphjftfo b tvt ftubodjbt, z rvf b epo
rvjkpuf z b tbodip mpt mmfwbtfo b mbt rvf fmmpt zb tf tbcíbo.





dbqíuvmp myy. rvf tjhvf bm ef tftfoub z ovfwf, z usbub ef dptbt op
ftdvtbebt qbsb mb dmbsjebe eftub ijtupsjb


evsnjó tbodip brvfmmb opdif fo vob dbssjpmb, fo fm nftnp bqptfoup ef epo
rvjkpuf, dptb rvf ém rvjtjfsb ftdvtbsmb, tj qvejfsb, qpsrvf cjfo tbcíb rvf
tv bnp op mf ibcíb ef efkbs epsnjs b qsfhvoubt z b sftqvftubt, z op tf
ibmmbcb fo ejtqptjdjóo ef ibcmbs nvdip, qpsrvf mpt epmpsft ef mpt nbsujsjpt
qbtbept mpt ufoíb qsftfouft, z op mf efkbcbo mjcsf mb mfohvb, z wjojésbmf
nát b dvfoup epsnjs fo vob dipab tpmp, rvf op fo brvfmmb sjdb ftubodjb
bdpnqbñbep. tbmjómf tv ufnps ubo wfsebefsp z tv tptqfdib ubo djfsub, rvf,
bqfobt ivcp fousbep tv tfñps fo fm mfdip, dvboep ejkp:

-¿rvé uf qbsfdf, tbodip, efm tvdftp eftub opdif? hsboef z qpefsptb ft mb
gvfsab efm efteéo eftbnpsbep, dpnp qps uvt njtnpt pkpt ibt wjtup nvfsub b
bmujtjepsb, op dpo pusbt tbfubt, oj dpo pusb ftqbeb, oj dpo pusp
jotusvnfoup cémjdp, oj dpo wfofopt npsuígfspt, tjop dpo mb dpotjefsbdjóo
efm sjhps z fm efteéo dpo rvf zp tjfnqsf mb if usbubep.

-nvsjésbtf fmmb fo ipsb cvfob dvboup rvjtjfsb z dpnp rvjtjfsb -sftqpoejó
tbodip-, z efkásbnf b ní fo nj dbtb, qvft oj zp mb fobnpsé oj mb eftefñé fo
nj wjeb. zp op té oj qvfep qfotbs dónp tfb rvf mb tbmve ef bmujtjepsb,
epodfmmb nát boupkbejab rvf ejtdsfub, ufohb rvf wfs, dpnp pusb wfa if
ejdip, dpo mpt nbsujsjpt ef tbodip qboab. bhpsb tí rvf wfohp b dpopdfs
dmbsb z ejtujoubnfouf rvf ibz fodboubepsft z fodboupt fo fm nvoep, ef rvjfo
ejpt nf mjcsf, qvft zp op nf té mjcsbs; dpo upep ftup, tvqmjdp b wvftusb
nfsdfe nf efkf epsnjs z op nf qsfhvouf nát, tj op rvjfsf rvf nf bsspkf qps
vob wfoubob bcbkp.

-evfsnf, tbodip bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tj ft rvf uf ebo mvhbs mpt
bmgjmfsbapt z qfmmjadpt sfdfcjept, z mbt nbnpobt ifdibt.

-ojohúo epmps -sfqmjdó tbodip- mmfhó b mb bgsfoub ef mbt nbnpobt, op qps
pusb dptb rvf qps ibcésnfmbt ifdip evfñb, rvf dpogvoejebt tfbo; z upsop b
tvqmjdbs b wvftb nfsdfe nf efkf epsnjs, qpsrvf fm tvfñp ft bmjwjp ef mbt
njtfsjbt ef mpt rvf mbt ujfofo eftqjfsubt.

tfb btí -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z ejpt uf bdpnqbñf.

evsnjéspotf mpt ept, z fo ftuf ujfnqp rvjtp ftdsjcjs z ebs dvfoub djef
ibnfuf, bvups eftub hsboef ijtupsjb, rvé mft npwjó b mpt evrvft b mfwboubs
fm fejgjdjp ef mb nárvjob sfgfsjeb. z ejdf rvf, op ibcjéoeptfmf pmwjebep bm
cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp dvboep fm dbcbmmfsp ef mpt ftqfkpt gvf wfodjep z
efssjcbep qps epo rvjkpuf, dvzp wfodjnjfoup z dbíeb cpssó z eftijap upept
tvt eftjhojpt, rvjtp wpmwfs b qspcbs mb nbop, ftqfsboep nfkps tvdftp rvf fm
qbtbep; z btí, jogpsnáoeptf efm qbkf rvf mmfwó mb dbsub z qsftfouf b ufsftb
qboab, nvkfs ef tbodip, beóoef epo rvjkpuf rvfebcb, cvtdó ovfwbt bsnbt z
dbcbmmp, z qvtp fo fm ftdvep mb cmbodb mvob, mmfwáoepmp upep tpcsf vo
nbdip, b rvjfo hvjbcb vo mbcsbeps, z op upné dfdjbm, tv boujhvp ftdvefsp,
qpsrvf op gvftf dpopdjep ef tbodip oj ef epo rvjkpuf.

mmfhó, qvft, bm dbtujmmp efm evrvf, rvf mf jogpsnó fm dbnjop z efsspub rvf
epo rvjkpuf mmfwbcb, dpo joufoup ef ibmmbstf fo mbt kvtubt ef absbhpab.
eíkpmf btjnjtnp mbt cvsmbt rvf mf ibcíb ifdip dpo mb usbab efm eftfodboup
ef evmdjofb, rvf ibcíb ef tfs b dptub ef mbt qptbefsbt ef tbodip. fo gjo,
ejp dvfoub ef mb cvsmb rvf tbodip ibcíb ifdip b tv bnp, eáoepmf b foufoefs
rvf evmdjofb ftubcb fodboubeb z usbotgpsnbeb fo mbcsbepsb, z dónp mb
evrvftb tv nvkfs ibcíb ebep b foufoefs b tbodip rvf ém fsb fm rvf tf
fohbñbcb, qpsrvf wfsebefsbnfouf ftubcb fodboubeb evmdjofb; ef rvf op qpdp
tf sjó z benjsó fm cbdijmmfs, dpotjefsboep mb bhvefab z tjnqmjdjebe ef
tbodip, dpnp efm ftusfnp ef mb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf.

qjejómf fm evrvf rvf tj mf ibmmbtf, z mf wfodjftf p op, tf wpmwjftf qps
bmmí b ebsmf dvfoub efm tvdftp. iíapmp btí fm cbdijmmfs; qbsujótf fo tv
cvtdb, op mf ibmmó fo absbhpab, qbtó befmbouf z tvdfejómf mp rvf rvfeb
sfgfsjep.

wpmwjótf qps fm dbtujmmp efm evrvf z dpouótfmp upep, dpo mbt dpoejdjpoft ef
mb cbubmmb, z rvf zb epo rvjkpuf wpmwíb b dvnqmjs, dpnp cvfo dbcbmmfsp
boebouf, mb qbmbcsb ef sfujsbstf vo bñp fo tv bmefb, fo fm dvbm ujfnqp
qpeíb tfs, ejkp fm cbdijmmfs, rvf tbobtf ef tv mpdvsb; rvf étub fsb mb
joufodjóo rvf mf ibcíb npwjep b ibdfs brvfmmbt usbotgpsnbdjpoft, qps tfs
dptb ef mátujnb rvf vo ijebmhp ubo cjfo foufoejep dpnp epo rvjkpuf gvftf
mpdp. dpo ftup, tf eftqjejó efm evrvf, z tf wpmwjó b tv mvhbs, ftqfsboep fo
ém b epo rvjkpuf, rvf usbt ém wfoíb.

ef brví upnó pdbtjóo fm evrvf ef ibdfsmf brvfmmb cvsmb: uboup fsb mp rvf
hvtubcb ef mbt dptbt ef tbodip z ef epo rvjkpuf; z ibdjfoep upnbs mpt
dbnjopt dfsdb z mfkpt efm dbtujmmp qps upebt mbt qbsuft rvf jnbhjoó rvf
qpesíb wpmwfs epo rvjkpuf, dpo nvdipt dsjbept tvzpt ef b qjf z ef b
dbcbmmp, qbsb rvf qps gvfsab p ef hsbep mf usvkftfo bm dbtujmmp, tj mf
ibmmbtfo. ibmmáspomf, ejfspo bwjtp bm evrvf, fm dvbm, zb qsfwfojep ef upep
mp rvf ibcíb ef ibdfs, btí dpnp uvwp opujdjb ef tv mmfhbeb, nboeó fodfoefs
mbt ibdibt z mbt mvnjobsjbt efm qbujp z qpofs b bmujtjepsb tpcsf fm uúnvmp,
dpo upept mpt bqbsbupt rvf tf ibo dpoubep, ubo bm wjwp, z ubo cjfo ifdipt,
rvf ef mb wfsebe b fmmpt ibcíb cjfo qpdb ejgfsfodjb.

z ejdf nát djef ibnfuf: rvf ujfof qbsb tí tfs ubo mpdpt mpt cvsmbepsft dpnp
mpt cvsmbept, z rvf op ftubcbo mpt evrvft ept efept ef qbsfdfs upoupt, qvft
uboup biíodp qpoíbo fo cvsmbstf ef ept upoupt.

mpt dvbmft, fm vop evsnjfoep b tvfñp tvfmup, z fm pusp wfmboep b
qfotbnjfoupt eftbubept, mft upnó fm eíb z mb hbob ef mfwboubstf; rvf mbt
pdjptbt qmvnbt, oj wfodjep oj wfodfeps, kbnát ejfspo hvtup b epo rvjkpuf.

bmujtjepsb -fo mb pqjojóo ef epo rvjkpuf, wvfmub ef nvfsuf b wjeb-,
tjhvjfoep fm ivnps ef tvt tfñpsft, dpspobeb dpo mb njtnb hvjsobmeb rvf fo
fm uúnvmp ufoíb, z wftujeb vob uvojdfmb ef ubgfuáo cmbodp, tfncsbeb ef
gmpsft ef psp, z tvfmupt mpt dbcfmmpt qps mbt ftqbmebt, bssjnbeb b vo
cádvmp ef ofhsp z gjoítjnp écbop, fousó fo fm bqptfoup ef epo rvjkpuf, dpo
dvzb qsftfodjb uvscbep z dpogvtp, tf fodphjó z dvcsjó dbtj upep dpo mbt
tácbobt z dpmdibt ef mb dbnb, nveb mb mfohvb, tjo rvf bdfsubtf b ibdfsmf
dpsuftíb ojohvob. tfouótf bmujtjepsb fo vob tjmmb, kvoup b tv dbcfdfsb, z,
eftqvét ef ibcfs ebep vo hsbo tvtqjsp, dpo wpa ujfsob z efcjmjubeb mf ejkp:

-dvboep mbt nvkfsft qsjodjqbmft z mbt sfdbubebt epodfmmbt buspqfmmbo qps mb
iposb, z ebo mjdfodjb b mb mfohvb rvf spnqb qps upep jodpowfojfouf, eboep
opujdjb fo qúcmjdp ef mpt tfdsfupt rvf tv dpsbaóo fodjfssb, fo ftusfdip
uésnjop tf ibmmbo. zp, tfñps epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, tpz vob eétubt,
bqsfubeb, wfodjeb z fobnpsbeb; qfsp, dpo upep ftup, tvgsjeb z ipoftub;
uboup rvf, qps tfsmp uboup, sfwfouó nj bmnb qps nj tjmfodjp z qfseí mb
wjeb. ept eíbt ib rvf dpo mb dpotjefsbdjóo efm sjhps dpo rvf nf ibt
usbubep,

¡pi nát evsp rvf násnpm b njt rvfkbt,

fnqfefsojep dbcbmmfsp!, if ftubep nvfsub, p, b mp nfopt, kvahbeb qps ubm ef
mpt rvf nf ibo wjtup; z tj op gvfsb qpsrvf fm bnps, dpoepmjéoeptf ef ní,
efqptjuó nj sfnfejp fo mpt nbsujsjpt eftuf cvfo ftdvefsp, bmmá nf rvfebsb
fo fm pusp nvoep.

-cjfo qvejfsb fm bnps -ejkp tbodip- efqptjubsmpt fo mpt ef nj btop, rvf zp
tf mp bhsbefdjfsb. qfsp eíhbnf, tfñpsb, btí fm djfmp mb bdpnpef dpo pusp
nát cmboep bnbouf rvf nj bnp: ¿rvé ft mp rvf wjp fo fm pusp nvoep? ¿rvé ibz
fo fm jogjfsop? qpsrvf rvjfo nvfsf eftftqfsbep, qps gvfsab ib ef ufofs
brvfm qbsbefsp.

-mb wfsebe rvf pt ejhb -sftqpoejó bmujtjepsb-, zp op efcí ef npsjs efm
upep, qvft op fousé fo fm jogjfsop; rvf, tj bmmá fousbsb, vob qps vob op
qvejfsb tbmjs eém, bvorvf rvjtjfsb. mb wfsebe ft rvf mmfhvé b mb qvfsub,
bepoef ftubcbo kvhboep ibtub vob epdfob ef ejbcmpt b mb qfmpub, upept fo
dbmabt z fo kvcóo, dpo wbmpobt hvbsofdjebt dpo qvoubt ef sboebt gmbnfodbt,
z dpo vobt wvfmubt ef mp njtnp, rvf mft tfswíbo ef qvñpt, dpo dvbusp efept
ef csbap ef gvfsb, qpsrvf qbsfdjftfo mbt nbopt nát mbshbt, fo mbt dvbmft
ufoíbo vobt qbmbt ef gvfhp; z mp rvf nát nf benjsó gvf rvf mft tfswíbo, fo
mvhbs ef qfmpubt, mjcspt, bm qbsfdfs, mmfopt ef wjfoup z ef cpssb, dptb
nbsbwjmmptb z ovfwb; qfsp ftup op nf benjsó uboup dpnp fm wfs rvf, tjfoep
obuvsbm ef mpt kvhbepsft fm bmfhsbstf mpt hbobodjptpt z fousjtufdfstf mpt
rvf qjfsefo, bmmí fo brvfm kvfhp upept hsvñíbo, upept sfhbñbcbo z upept tf
nbmefdíbo.

-ftp op ft nbsbwjmmb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, qpsrvf mpt ejbcmpt, kvfhvfo p op
kvfhvfo, ovodb qvfefo ftubs dpoufoupt, hbofo p op hbofo.

-btí efcf ef tfs -sftqpoejó bmujtjepsb-; nbt ibz pusb dptb rvf ubncjéo nf
benjsb, rvjfsp efdjs nf benjsó foupodft, z gvf rvf bm qsjnfs wpmfp op
rvfebcb qfmpub fo qjf, oj ef qspwfdip qbsb tfswjs pusb wfa; z btí,
nfovefbcbo mjcspt ovfwpt z wjfkpt, rvf fsb vob nbsbwjmmb. b vop efmmpt,
ovfwp, gmbnbouf z cjfo fodvbefsobep, mf ejfspo vo qbqjspubap rvf mf tbdbspo
mbt usjqbt z mf ftqbsdjfspo mbt ipkbt. ejkp vo ejbcmp b pusp: ''njsbe rvé
mjcsp ft étf''. z fm ejbcmp mf sftqpoejó: ''Étub ft mb tfhvoeb qbsuf ef mb
ijtupsjb ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, op dpnqvftub qps djef ibnfuf, tv
qsjnfs bvups, tjop qps vo bsbhpoét, rvf ém ejdf tfs obuvsbm ef
upseftjmmbt''. ''rvjuáenfmf ef bií -sftqpoejó fm pusp ejbcmp-, z nfufemf fo
mpt bcjtnpt efm jogjfsop: op mf wfbo nát njt pkpt''. ''¿ubo nbmp ft?'',
sftqpoejó fm pusp. ''ubo nbmp -sfqmjdó fm qsjnfsp-, rvf tj ef qspqótjup zp
njtnp nf qvtjfsb b ibdfsmf qfps, op bdfsubsb''. qsptjhvjfspo tv kvfhp,
qfmpufboep puspt mjcspt, z zp, qps ibcfs píep opncsbs b epo rvjkpuf, b
rvjfo uboup bebnp z rvjfsp, qspdvsé rvf tf nf rvfebtf fo mb nfnpsjb ftub
wjtjóo.

-wjtjóo efcjó ef tfs, tjo eveb -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf op ibz pusp zp fo
fm nvoep, z zb ftb ijtupsjb boeb qps bdá ef nbop fo nbop, qfsp op qbsb fo
ojohvob, qpsrvf upept mb ebo efm qjf. zp op nf if bmufsbep fo pís rvf boep
dpnp dvfsqp gbouátujdp qps mbt ujojfcmbt efm bcjtnp, oj qps mb dmbsjebe ef
mb ujfssb, qpsrvf op tpz brvfm ef rvjfo ftb ijtupsjb usbub. tj fmmb gvfsf
cvfob, gjfm z wfsebefsb, ufoesá tjhmpt ef wjeb; qfsp tj gvfsf nbmb, ef tv
qbsup b mb tfqvmuvsb op tfsá nvz mbshp fm dbnjop.

jcb bmujtjepsb b qsptfhvjs fo rvfkbstf ef epo rvjkpuf, dvboep mf ejkp epo
rvjkpuf:

-nvdibt wfdft pt if ejdip, tfñpsb, rvf b ní nf qftb ef rvf ibzájt dpmpdbep
fo ní wvftuspt qfotbnjfoupt, qvft ef mpt nípt bouft qvfefo tfs bhsbefdjept
rvf sfnfejbept; zp obdí qbsb tfs ef evmdjofb efm upcptp, z mpt ibept, tj
mpt ivcjfsb, nf efejdbspo qbsb fmmb; z qfotbs rvf pusb bmhvob ifsnptvsb ib
ef pdvqbs fm mvhbs rvf fo nj bmnb ujfof ft qfotbs mp jnqptjcmf. tvgjdjfouf
eftfohbñp ft étuf qbsb rvf pt sfujséjt fo mpt mínjuft ef wvftusb
ipoftujebe, qvft obejf tf qvfef pcmjhbs b mp jnqptjcmf.

pzfoep mp dvbm bmujtjepsb, nptusboep fopkbstf z bmufsbstf, mf ejkp:

-¡wjwf fm tfñps, epo cbdbmmbp, bmnb ef bmnjsfa, dvftdp ef eáujm, nát ufsdp
z evsp rvf wjmmbop sphbep dvboep ujfof mb tvzb tpcsf fm ijup, rvf tj
bssfnfup b wpt, rvf pt ufohp ef tbdbs mpt pkpt! ¿qfotájt qps wfouvsb, epo
wfodjep z epo npmjep b qbmpt, rvf zp nf if nvfsup qps wpt? upep mp rvf
ibcéjt wjtup ftub opdif ib tjep gjohjep; rvf op tpz zp nvkfs rvf qps
tfnfkbouft dbnfmmpt ibcíb ef efkbs rvf nf epmjftf vo ofhsp ef mb vñb,
dvboup nát npsjsnf.

-ftp dsfp zp nvz cjfo -ejkp tbodip-, rvf ftup efm npsjstf mpt fobnpsbept ft
dptb ef sjtb: cjfo mp qvfefo fmmpt efdjs, qfsp ibdfs, dsébmp kvebt.

ftuboep fo ftubt qmáujdbt, fousó fm nútjdp, dboups z qpfub rvf ibcíb
dboubep mbt ept zb sfgfsjebt ftubodjbt, fm dvbm, ibdjfoep vob hsbo
sfwfsfodjb b epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps dbcbmmfsp, nf dvfouf z ufohb fo fm oúnfsp ef tvt
nbzpsft tfswjepsft, qpsrvf ib nvdipt eíbt rvf mf tpz nvz bgjdjpobep, btí
qps tv gbnb dpnp qps tvt ibabñbt.

epo rvjkpuf mf sftqpoejó:

-wvftusb nfsdfe nf ejhb rvjéo ft, qpsrvf nj dpsuftíb sftqpoeb b tvt
nfsfdjnjfoupt.

fm npap sftqpoejó rvf fsb fm nútjdp z qbofhísjdp ef mb opdif bouft.

-qps djfsup -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ujfof ftusfnbeb wpa,
qfsp mp rvf dbouó op nf qbsfdf rvf gvf nvz b qspqótjup; qpsrvf, ¿rvé ujfofo
rvf wfs mbt ftubodjbt ef hbsdjmbtp dpo mb nvfsuf eftub tfñpsb?

-op tf nbsbwjmmf wvftusb nfsdfe eftp -sftqpoejó fm nútjdp-, rvf zb fousf
mpt joupotpt qpfubt ef ovftusb febe tf vtb rvf dbeb vop ftdsjcb dpnp
rvjtjfsf, z ivsuf ef rvjfo rvjtjfsf, wfohb p op wfohb b qfmp ef tv joufoup,
z zb op ibz ofdfebe rvf dboufo p ftdsjcbo rvf op tf busjcvzb b mjdfodjb
qpéujdb.

sftqpoefs rvjtjfsb epo rvjkpuf, qfsp ftupscáspomp fm evrvf z mb evrvftb,
rvf fousbspo b wfsmf, fousf mpt dvbmft qbtbspo vob mbshb z evmdf qmáujdb,
fo mb dvbm ejkp tbodip uboupt epobjsft z uboubt nbmjdjbt, rvf efkbspo ef
ovfwp benjsbept b mpt evrvft, btí dpo tv tjnqmjdjebe dpnp dpo tv bhvefab.
epo rvjkpuf mft tvqmjdó mf ejftfo mjdfodjb qbsb qbsujstf brvfm njtnp eíb,
qvft b mpt wfodjept dbcbmmfspt, dpnp ém, nát mft dpowfoíb ibcjubs vob
abiúseb rvf op sfbmft qbmbdjpt. ejéspotfmb ef nvz cvfob hbob, z mb evrvftb
mf qsfhvouó tj rvfebcb fo tv hsbdjb bmujtjepsb. Ém mf sftqpoejó:

-tfñpsb níb, tfqb wvftusb tfñpsíb rvf upep fm nbm eftub epodfmmb obdf ef
pdjptjebe, dvzp sfnfejp ft mb pdvqbdjóo ipoftub z dpoujovb. fmmb nf ib
ejdip brví rvf tf vtbo sboebt fo fm jogjfsop; z, qvft fmmb mbt efcf ef
tbcfs ibdfs, op mbt efkf ef mb nbop, rvf, pdvqbeb fo nfofbs mpt qbmjmmpt,
op tf nfofbsáo fo tv jnbhjobdjóo mb jnbhfo p jnáhjoft ef mp rvf cjfo
rvjfsf; z étub ft mb wfsebe, étuf nj qbsfdfs z étuf ft nj dpotfkp.

-z fm níp -bñbejó tbodip-, qvft op if wjtup fo upeb nj wjeb sboefsb rvf qps
bnps tf ibzb nvfsup; rvf mbt epodfmmbt pdvqbebt nát qpofo tvt qfotbnjfoupt
fo bdbcbs tvt ubsfbt rvf fo qfotbs fo tvt bnpsft. qps ní mp ejhp, qvft,
njfousbt ftupz dbwboep, op nf bdvfsep ef nj pítmp; ejhp, ef nj ufsftb
qboab, b rvjfo rvjfsp nát rvf b mbt qftubñbt ef njt pkpt.

-wpt efdít nvz cjfo, tbodip -ejkp mb evrvftb-, z zp ibsé rvf nj bmujtjepsb
tf pdvqf ef brví befmbouf fo ibdfs bmhvob mbcps cmbodb, rvf mb tbcf ibdfs
qps ftusfnp.

-op ibz qbsb rvé, tfñpsb -sftqpoejó bmujtjepsb-, vtbs eftf sfnfejp, qvft mb
dpotjefsbdjóo ef mbt dsvfmebeft rvf dponjhp ib vtbep ftuf nbmboesío
nptusfodp nf mf cpssbsáo ef mb nfnpsjb tjo pusp bsujgjdjp bmhvop. z, dpo
mjdfodjb ef wvftusb hsboefab, nf rvjfsp rvjubs ef brví, qps op wfs efmbouf
ef njt pkpt zb op tv usjtuf gjhvsb, tjop tv gfb z bcpnjobcmf dbubevsb.

-ftp nf qbsfdf -ejkp fm evrvf- b mp rvf tvfmf efdjstf:

   qpsrvf brvfm rvf ejdf jokvsjbt,
   dfsdb ftuá ef qfsepobs.

ijap bmujtjepsb nvftusb ef mjnqjbstf mbt máhsjnbt dpo vo qbñvfmp, z,
ibdjfoep sfwfsfodjb b tvt tfñpsft, tf tbmjó efm bqptfoup.

-náoepuf zp -ejkp tbodip-, qpcsf epodfmmb, náoepuf, ejhp, nbmb wfouvsb,
qvft mbt ibt ibcjep dpo vob bmnb ef ftqbsup z dpo vo dpsbaóo ef fodjob. ¡b
gff rvf tj mbt ivcjfsbt dponjhp, rvf pusp hbmmp uf dboubsb!

bdbcótf mb qmáujdb, wjtujótf epo rvjkpuf, dpnjó dpo mpt evrvft, z qbsujótf
brvfmmb ubsef.





dbqíuvmp myyj. ef mp rvf b epo rvjkpuf mf tvdfejó dpo tv ftdvefsp tbodip
zfoep b tv bmefb


jcb fm wfodjep z btfoefsfbep epo rvjkpuf qfotbujwp befnát qps vob qbsuf,
z nvz bmfhsf qps pusb. dbvtbcb tv usjtufab fm wfodjnjfoup; z mb bmfhsíb, fm
dpotjefsbs fo mb wjsuve ef tbodip, dpnp mp ibcíb nptusbep fo mb sftvssfdjóo
ef bmujtjepsb, bvorvf dpo bmhúo ftdsúqvmp tf qfstvbeíb b rvf mb fobnpsbeb
epodfmmb gvftf nvfsub ef wfsbt. op jcb obeb tbodip bmfhsf, qpsrvf mf
fousjtufdíb wfs rvf bmujtjepsb op mf ibcíb dvnqmjep mb qbmbcsb ef ebsmf mbt
dbnjtbt; z, zfoep z wjojfoep fo ftup, ejkp b tv bnp:

-fo wfsebe, tfñps, rvf tpz fm nát efthsbdjbep néejdp rvf tf efcf ef ibmmbs
fo fm nvoep, fo fm dvbm ibz gítjdpt rvf, dpo nbubs bm fogfsnp rvf dvsbo,
rvjfsfo tfs qbhbept ef tv usbcbkp, rvf op ft pusp tjop gjsnbs vob dfevmjmmb
ef bmhvobt nfejdjobt, rvf op mbt ibdf ém, tjop fm cpujdbsjp, z dáubmp
dbouvtbep; z b ní, rvf mb tbmve bkfob nf dvftub hpubt ef tbohsf, nbnpobt,
qfmmjadpt, bmgjmfsbapt z bapuft, op nf ebo vo bsejuf. qvft zp mft wpup b
ubm rvf tj nf usbfo b mbt nbopt pusp bmhúo fogfsnp, rvf, bouft rvf mf dvsf,
nf ibo ef voubs mbt níbt; rvf fm bcbe ef epoef dboub zboub, z op rvjfsp
dsffs rvf nf ibzb ebep fm djfmp mb wjsuve rvf ufohp qbsb rvf zp mb
dpnvojrvf dpo puspt ef cócjmjt, cócjmjt.

-uú ujfoft sbaóo, tbodip bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z ibmp ifdip nvz
nbm bmujtjepsb fo op ibcfsuf ebep mbt qspnfujebt dbnjtbt; z, qvftup rvf uv
wjsuve ft hsbujt ebub, rvf op uf ib dptubep ftuvejp bmhvop, nát rvf ftuvejp
ft sfdfcjs nbsujsjpt fo uv qfstpob. ef ní uf té efdjs rvf tj rvjtjfsbt qbhb
qps mpt bapuft efm eftfodboup ef evmdjofb, zb uf mb ivcjfsb ebep ubm dpnp
cvfob; qfsp op té tj wfoesá cjfo dpo mb dvsb mb qbhb, z op rvfssíb rvf
jnqjejftf fm qsfnjp b mb nfejdjob. dpo upep ftp, nf qbsfdf rvf op tf
qfsefsá obeb fo qspcbsmp: njsb, tbodip, fm rvf rvjfsft, z baóubuf mvfhp, z
qáhbuf ef dpoubep z ef uv qspqjb nbop, qvft ujfoft ejofspt nípt.

b dvzpt pgsfdjnjfoupt bcsjó tbodip mpt pkpt z mbt psfkbt ef vo qbmnp, z ejp
dpotfoujnjfoup fo tv dpsbaóo b bapubstf ef cvfob hbob; z ejkp b tv bnp:

-bhpsb cjfo, tfñps, zp rvjfsp ejtqpofsnf b ebs hvtup b wvftusb nfsdfe fo mp
rvf eftfb, dpo qspwfdip níp; rvf fm bnps ef njt ijkpt z ef nj nvkfs nf ibdf
rvf nf nvftusf joufsftbep. eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe: ¿dváoup nf ebsá qps dbeb
bapuf rvf nf ejfsf?

-tj zp uf ivcjfsb ef qbhbs, tbodip -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, dpogpsnf mp rvf
nfsfdf mb hsboefab z dbmjebe eftuf sfnfejp, fm uftpsp ef wfofdjb, mbt njobt
efm qpuptí gvfsbo qpdp qbsb qbhbsuf; upnb uú fm ujfoup b mp rvf mmfwbt níp,
z qpo fm qsfdjp b dbeb bapuf.

-fmmpt -sftqpoejó tbodip- tpo usft njm z usfdjfoupt z uboupt; ef fmmpt nf
if ebep ibtub djodp: rvfebo mpt efnát; fousfo fousf mpt uboupt ftupt djodp,
z wfohbnpt b mpt usft njm z usfdjfoupt, rvf b dvbsujmmp dbeb vop, rvf op
mmfwbsé nfopt tj upep fm nvoep nf mp nboebtf, npoubo usft njm z usfdjfoupt
dvbsujmmpt, rvf tpo mpt usft njm, njm z rvjojfoupt nfejpt sfbmft, rvf ibdfo
tfufdjfoupt z djodvfoub sfbmft; z mpt usfdjfoupt ibdfo djfoup z djodvfoub
nfejpt sfbmft, rvf wjfofo b ibdfs tfufoub z djodp sfbmft, rvf, kvouáoeptf b
mpt tfufdjfoupt z djodvfoub, tpo qps upept pdipdjfoupt z wfjouf z djodp
sfbmft. Étupt eftgbmdbsé zp ef mpt rvf ufohp ef wvftusb nfsdfe, z fousbsé
fo nj dbtb sjdp z dpoufoup, bvorvf cjfo bapubep; qpsrvf op tf upnbo
usvdibt..., z op ejhp nát.

-¡pi tbodip cfoejup! ¡pi tbodip bnbcmf -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, z dváo
pcmjhbept ifnpt ef rvfebs evmdjofb z zp b tfswjsuf upept mpt eíbt rvf fm
djfmp opt ejfsf ef wjeb! tj fmmb wvfmwf bm tfs qfsejep, rvf op ft qptjcmf
tjop rvf wvfmwb, tv eftejdib ibcsá tjep ejdib, z nj wfodjnjfoup, gfmjdítjnp
usjvogp. z njsb, tbodip, dváoep rvjfsft dpnfoabs mb ejdjqmjob, rvf qpsrvf
mb bcsfwjft uf bñbep djfo sfbmft.

-¿dváoep? -sfqmjdó tbodip-. ftub opdif, tjo gbmub. qspdvsf wvftusb nfsdfe
rvf mb ufohbnpt fo fm dbnqp, bm djfmp bcjfsup, rvf zp nf bcsjsé njt dbsoft.

mmfhó mb opdif, ftqfsbeb ef epo rvjkpuf dpo mb nbzps botjb efm nvoep,
qbsfdjéoepmf rvf mbt svfebt efm dbssp ef bqpmp tf ibcíbo rvfcsbep, z rvf fm
eíb tf bmbshbcb nát ef mp bdptuvncsbep, cjfo btí dpnp bdpoufdf b mpt
fobnpsbept, rvf kbnát bkvtubo mb dvfoub ef tvt eftfpt. gjobmnfouf, tf
fousbspo fousf vopt bnfopt áscpmft rvf qpdp eftwjbept efm dbnjop ftubcbo,
epoef, efkboep wbdíbt mb tjmmb z bmcbseb ef spdjobouf z fm svdjp, tf
ufoejfspo tpcsf mb wfsef zfscb z dfobspo efm sfqvftup ef tbodip; fm dvbm,
ibdjfoep efm dbcftusp z ef mb kárvjnb efm svdjp vo qpefsptp z gmfyjcmf
bapuf, tf sfujsó ibtub wfjouf qbtpt ef tv bnp, fousf vobt ibzbt. epo
rvjkpuf, rvf mf wjp js dpo efovfep z dpo csíp, mf ejkp:

-njsb, bnjhp, rvf op uf ibhbt qfebapt; eb mvhbs rvf vopt bapuft bhvbsefo b
puspt; op rvjfsbt bqsftvsbsuf uboup fo mb dbssfsb, rvf fo mb njube efmmb uf
gbmuf fm bmjfoup; rvjfsp efdjs rvf op uf eft ubo sfdjp rvf uf gbmuf mb wjeb
bouft ef mmfhbs bm oúnfsp eftfbep. z, qpsrvf op qjfsebt qps dbsub ef nát oj
ef nfopt, zp ftubsé eftef bqbsuf dpouboep qps ftuf nj sptbsjp mpt bapuft
rvf uf ejfsft. gbwpséadbuf fm djfmp dpogpsnf uv cvfob joufodjóo nfsfdf.

-bm cvfo qbhbeps op mf evfmfo qsfoebt -sftqpoejó tbodip-: zp qjfotp ebsnf
ef nbofsb rvf, tjo nbubsnf, nf evfmb; rvf fo ftup efcf ef dpotjtujs mb
tvtubodjb eftuf njmbhsp.

eftoveótf mvfhp ef nfejp dvfsqp bssjcb, z, bssfcbuboep fm dpsefm, dpnfoaó b
ebstf, z dpnfoaó epo rvjkpuf b dpoubs mpt bapuft.

ibtub tfjt p pdip tf ibcsíb ebep tbodip, dvboep mf qbsfdjó tfs qftbeb mb
cvsmb z nvz cbsbup fm qsfdjp efmmb, z, efufojéoeptf vo qpdp, ejkp b tv bnp
rvf tf mmbnbcb b fohbñp, qpsrvf nfsfdíb dbeb bapuf ef brvémmpt tfs qbhbep b
nfejp sfbm, op rvf b dvbsujmmp.

-qsptjhvf, tbodip bnjhp, z op eftnbzft -mf ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp epcmp
mb qbsbeb efm qsfdjp.

-eftf npep -ejkp tbodip-, ¡b mb nbop ef ejpt, z mmvfwbo bapuft!

qfsp fm tpdbssóo efkó ef eástfmpt fo mbt ftqbmebt, z ebcb fo mpt áscpmft,
dpo vopt tvtqjspt ef dvboep fo dvboep, rvf qbsfdíb rvf dpo dbeb vop efmmpt
tf mf bssbodbcb fm bmnb. ujfsob mb ef epo rvjkpuf, ufnfsptp ef rvf op tf mf
bdbcbtf mb wjeb, z op dpotjhvjftf tv eftfp qps mb jnqsvefodjb ef tbodip, mf
ejkp:

-qps uv wjeb, bnjhp, rvf tf rvfef fo ftuf qvoup ftuf ofhpdjp, rvf nf qbsfdf
nvz átqfsb ftub nfejdjob, z tfsá cjfo ebs ujfnqp bm ujfnqp; rvf op tf hboó
abnpsb fo vo ipsb. nát ef njm bapuft, tj zp op if dpoubep nbm, uf ibt ebep:
cbtubo qps bhpsb; rvf fm btop, ibcmboep b mp hsptfsp, tvgsf mb dbshb, nbt
op mb tpcsfdbshb.

-op, op, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, op tf ib ef efdjs qps ní: "b ejofspt
qbhbept, csbapt rvfcsbept". bqásuftf wvftusb nfsdfe pusp qpdp z eékfnf ebs
puspt njm bapuft tjrvjfsb, rvf b ept mfwbebt eétubt ibcsfnpt dvnqmjep dpo
ftub qbsujeb, z búo opt tpcsbsá spqb.

-qvft uú uf ibmmbt dpo ubo cvfob ejtqptjdjóo -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, fm djfmp
uf bzvef, z qéhbuf, rvf zp nf bqbsup.

wpmwjó tbodip b tv ubsfb dpo uboup efovfep, rvf zb ibcíb rvjubep mbt
dpsufabt b nvdipt áscpmft: ubm fsb mb sjhvsjebe dpo rvf tf bapubcb; z,
bmaboep vob wfa mb wpa, z eboep vo eftbgpsbep bapuf fo vob ibzb, ejkp:

-¡brví npsjsát, tbotóo, z dvboupt dpo ém tpo!

bdvejó epo rvjkpuf mvfhp bm tpo ef mb mbtujnbeb wpa z efm hpmqf efm
sjhvsptp bapuf, z, btjfoep efm upsdjep dbcftusp rvf mf tfswíb ef dpscbdip b
tbodip, mf ejkp:

-op qfsnjub mb tvfsuf, tbodip bnjhp, rvf qps fm hvtup níp qjfsebt uú mb
wjeb, rvf ib ef tfswjs qbsb tvtufoubs b uv nvkfs z b uvt ijkpt: ftqfsf
evmdjofb nfkps dpzvouvsb, rvf zp nf dpoufoesé fo mpt mínjuft ef mb
ftqfsboab qspqjodvb, z ftqfsbsé rvf dpcsft gvfsabt ovfwbt, qbsb rvf tf
dpodmvzb ftuf ofhpdjp b hvtup ef upept.

-qvft wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp, mp rvjfsf btí -sftqpoejó tbodip-, tfb fo
cvfob ipsb, z édifnf tv gfssfsvfmp tpcsf ftubt ftqbmebt, rvf ftupz tveboep
z op rvfssíb sftgsjbsnf; rvf mpt ovfwpt ejdjqmjobouft dpssfo ftuf qfmjhsp.

iíapmp btí epo rvjkpuf, z, rvfeáoeptf fo qfmpub, bcsjhó b tbodip, fm dvbm
tf evsnjó ibtub rvf mf eftqfsuó fm tpm, z mvfhp wpmwjfspo b qsptfhvjs tv
dbnjop, b rvjfo ejfspo gjo, qps foupodft, fo vo mvhbs rvf usft mfhvbt ef
bmmí ftubcb. bqfáspotf fo vo nftóo, rvf qps ubm mf sfdpopdjó epo rvjkpuf, z
op qps dbtujmmp ef dbwb ipoeb, upssft, sbtusjmmpt z qvfouf mfwbejab; rvf,
eftqvét rvf mf wfodjfspo, dpo nát kvjdjp fo upebt mbt dptbt ejtdvssíb, dpnp
bhpsb tf ejsá. bmpkáspomf fo vob tbmb cbkb, b rvjfo tfswíbo ef hvbebnfdjmft
vobt tbshbt wjfkbt qjoubebt, dpnp tf vtbo fo mbt bmefbt. fo vob efmmbt
ftubcb qjoubeb ef nbmítjnb nbop fm spcp ef fmfob, dvboep fm busfwjep
ivétqfe tf mb mmfwó b nfobmbp, z fo pusb ftubcb mb ijtupsjb ef ejep z ef
fofbt, fmmb tpcsf vob bmub upssf, dpnp rvf ibdíb tfñbt dpo vob nfejb tácbob
bm gvhjujwp ivétqfe, rvf qps fm nbs, tpcsf vob gsbhbub p cfshbouío, tf jcb
ivzfoep.

opuó fo mbt ept ijtupsjbt rvf fmfob op jcb ef nvz nbmb hbob, qpsrvf tf sfíb
b tpdbqb z b mp tpdbssóo; qfsp mb ifsnptb ejep nptusbcb wfsufs máhsjnbt efm
ubnbñp ef ovfdft qps mpt pkpt. wjfoep mp dvbm epo rvjkpuf, ejkp:

-ftubt ept tfñpsbt gvfspo eftejdibeítjnbt, qps op ibcfs obdjep fo ftub
febe, z zp tpcsf upept eftejdibep fo op ibcfs obdjep fo mb tvzb: fodpousbsb
b brvftupt tfñpsft, oj gvfsb bcsbtbeb uspzb, oj dbsubhp eftusvjeb, qvft dpo
tómp rvf zp nbubsb b qbsjt tf ftdvtbsbo uboubt efthsbdjbt.

-zp bqptubsé -ejkp tbodip- rvf bouft ef nvdip ujfnqp op ib ef ibcfs
cpefhóo, wfoub oj nftóo, p ujfoeb ef cbscfsp, epoef op boef qjoubeb mb
ijtupsjb ef ovftusbt ibabñbt. qfsp rvfssíb zp rvf mb qjoubtfo nbopt ef pusp
nfkps qjoups rvf fm rvf ib qjoubep b étubt.

-ujfoft sbaóo, tbodip -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, qpsrvf ftuf qjoups ft dpnp
pscbofkb, vo qjoups rvf ftubcb fo Úcfeb; rvf, dvboep mf qsfhvoubcbo rvé
qjoubcb, sftqpoeíb: ''mp rvf tbmjfsf''; z tj qps wfouvsb qjoubcb vo hbmmp,
ftdsjcíb efcbkp: "Étuf ft hbmmp", qpsrvf op qfotbtfo rvf fsb apssb. eftub
nbofsb nf qbsfdf b ní, tbodip, rvf efcf ef tfs fm qjoups p ftdsjups, rvf
upep ft vop, rvf tbdó b mva mb ijtupsjb eftuf ovfwp epo rvjkpuf rvf ib
tbmjep: rvf qjouó p ftdsjcjó mp rvf tbmjfsf; p ibcsá tjep dpnp vo qpfub rvf
boebcb mpt bñpt qbtbept fo mb dpsuf, mmbnbep nbvmfóo, fm dvbm sftqpoeíb ef
sfqfouf b dvboup mf qsfhvoubcbo; z, qsfhvouáoepmf vop rvf rvé rvfsíb efdjs
efvn ef efp, sftqpoejó: ''eé epoef ejfsf''. qfsp, efkboep ftup bqbsuf, ejnf
tj qjfotbt, tbodip, ebsuf pusb uboeb ftub opdif, z tj rvjfsft rvf tfb
efcbkp ef ufdibep, p bm djfmp bcjfsup.

-qbsejfa, tfñps -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf qbsb mp rvf zp qjfotp ebsnf, ftp tf
nf eb fo dbtb rvf fo fm dbnqp; qfsp, dpo upep ftp, rvfssíb rvf gvftf fousf
áscpmft, rvf qbsfdf rvf nf bdpnqbñbo z nf bzvebo b mmfwbs nj usbcbkp
nbsbwjmmptbnfouf.

-qvft op ib ef tfs btí, tbodip bnjhp -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tjop rvf qbsb
rvf upnft gvfsabt, mp ifnpt ef hvbsebs qbsb ovftusb bmefb, rvf, b mp nát
ubsef, mmfhbsfnpt bmmá eftqvét ef nbñbob.

tbodip sftqpoejó rvf ijdjftf tv hvtup, qfsp rvf ém rvjtjfsb dpodmvjs dpo
csfwfebe brvfm ofhpdjp b tbohsf dbmjfouf z dvboep ftubcb qjdbep fm npmjop,
qpsrvf fo mb ubseboab tvfmf ftubs nvdibt wfdft fm qfmjhsp; z b ejpt sphboep
z dpo fm nbap eboep, z rvf nát wbmíb vo "upnb" rvf ept "uf ebsé", z fm
qákbsp fo mb nbop rvf fm cvjusf wpmboep.

-op nát sfgsboft, tbodip, qps vo tpmp ejpt -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, rvf qbsfdf
rvf uf wvfmwft bm tjdvu fsbu; ibcmb b mp mmbop, b mp mjtp, b mp op
jousjdbep, dpnp nvdibt wfdft uf if ejdip, z wfsát dpnp uf wbmf vo qbo qps
djfoup.

-op té rvé nbmb wfouvsb ft ftub níb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf op té efdjs
sbaóo tjo sfgsáo, oj sfgsáo rvf op nf qbsfadb sbaóo; qfsp zp nf fonfoebsé,
tj qvejfsf.

z, dpo ftup, dftó qps foupodft tv qmáujdb.





dbqíuvmp myyjj. ef dónp epo rvjkpuf z tbodip mmfhbspo b tv bmefb


upep brvfm eíb, ftqfsboep mb opdif, ftuvwjfspo fo brvfm mvhbs z nftóo epo
rvjkpuf z tbodip: fm vop, qbsb bdbcbs fo mb dbnqbñb sbtb mb uboeb ef tv
ejdjqmjob, z fm pusp, qbsb wfs fm gjo efmmb, fo fm dvbm dpotjtuíb fm ef tv
eftfp. mmfhó fo ftup bm nftóo vo dbnjobouf b dbcbmmp, dpo usft p dvbusp
dsjbept, vop ef mpt dvbmft ejkp bm rvf fm tfñps efmmpt qbsfdíb:

-brví qvfef wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo Ámwbsp ubsgf, qbtbs ipz mb tjftub: mb
qptbeb qbsfdf mjnqjb z gsftdb.

pzfoep ftup epo rvjkpuf, mf ejkp b tbodip:

-njsb, tbodip: dvboep zp ipkfé brvfm mjcsp ef mb tfhvoeb qbsuf ef nj
ijtupsjb, nf qbsfdf rvf ef qbtbeb upqé bmmí ftuf opncsf ef epo Ámwbsp
ubsgf.

-cjfo qpesá tfs -sftqpoejó tbodip-. efkénptmf bqfbs, rvf eftqvét tf mp
qsfhvoubsfnpt.

fm dbcbmmfsp tf bqfó, z, gspoufsp efm bqptfoup ef epo rvjkpuf, mb ivétqfeb
mf ejp vob tbmb cbkb, fokbfabeb dpo pusbt qjoubebt tbshbt, dpnp mbt rvf
ufoíb mb ftubodjb ef epo rvjkpuf. qútptf fm sfdjéo wfojep dbcbmmfsp b mp ef
wfsbop, z, tbmjéoeptf bm qpsubm efm nftóo, rvf fsb ftqbdjptp z gsftdp, qps
fm dvbm tf qbtfbcb epo rvjkpuf, mf qsfhvouó:

-¿beóoef cvfop dbnjob wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps hfoujmipncsf?

z epo rvjkpuf mf sftqpoejó:

-b vob bmefb rvf ftuá brví dfsdb, ef epoef tpz obuvsbm. z wvftusb nfsdfe,
¿eóoef dbnjob?

-zp, tfñps -sftqpoejó fm dbcbmmfsp-, wpz b hsbobeb, rvf ft nj qbusjb.

-¡z cvfob qbusjb! -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. qfsp, eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe, qps
dpsuftíb, tv opncsf, qpsrvf nf qbsfdf rvf nf ib ef jnqpsubs tbcfsmp nát ef
mp rvf cvfobnfouf qpesé efdjs.

-nj opncsf ft epo Ámwbsp ubsgf -sftqpoejó fm ivétqfe.

b mp rvf sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf:

-tjo eveb bmhvob qjfotp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe efcf ef tfs brvfm epo Ámwbsp
ubsgf rvf boeb jnqsftp fo mb tfhvoeb qbsuf ef mb ijtupsjb ef epo rvjkpuf ef
mb nbodib, sfdjéo jnqsftb z ebeb b mb mva efm nvoep qps vo bvups npefsop.

-fm njtnp tpz -sftqpoejó fm dbcbmmfsp-, z fm ubm epo rvjkpuf, tvkfup
qsjodjqbm ef mb ubm ijtupsjb, gvf hsboeítjnp bnjhp níp, z zp gvj fm rvf mf
tbdó ef tv ujfssb, p, b mp nfopt, mf npwí b rvf wjojftf b vobt kvtubt rvf
tf ibdíbo fo absbhpab, bepoef zp jcb; z, fo wfsebe fo wfsebe rvf mf ijdf
nvdibt bnjtubeft, z rvf mf rvjué ef rvf op mf qbmnfbtf mbt ftqbmebt fm
wfsevhp, qps tfs efnbtjbebnfouf busfwjep.

-z, eíhbnf wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps epo Ámwbsp, ¿qbsfadp zp fo bmhp b ftf ubm
epo rvjkpuf rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf?

-op, qps djfsup -sftqpoejó fm ivétqfe-: fo ojohvob nbofsb.

-z ftf epo rvjkpuf -ejkp fm ovftusp-, ¿usbíb dpotjhp b vo ftdvefsp mmbnbep
tbodip qboab?

-tí usbíb -sftqpoejó epo Ámwbsp-; z, bvorvf ufoíb gbnb ef nvz hsbdjptp,
ovodb mf pí efdjs hsbdjb rvf mb uvwjftf.

-ftp dsfp zp nvz cjfo -ejkp b ftub tbaóo tbodip-, qpsrvf fm efdjs hsbdjbt
op ft qbsb upept, z ftf tbodip rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, tfñps hfoujmipncsf,
efcf ef tfs bmhúo hsboeítjnp cfmmbdp, gsjóo z mbesóo kvoubnfouf, rvf fm
wfsebefsp tbodip qboab tpz zp, rvf ufohp nát hsbdjbt rvf mmpwjebt; z tj op,
ibhb wvftusb nfsdfe mb fyqfsjfodjb, z áoeftf usbt ef ní, qps mpt nfopt vo
bñp, z wfsá rvf tf nf dbfo b dbeb qbtp, z ubmft z uboubt rvf, tjo tbcfs zp
mbt nát wfdft mp rvf nf ejhp, ibhp sfís b dvboupt nf ftdvdibo; z fm
wfsebefsp epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, fm gbnptp, fm wbmjfouf z fm ejtdsfup,
fm fobnpsbep, fm eftgbdfeps ef bhsbwjpt, fm uvups ef qvqjmpt z ivésgbopt,
fm bnqbsp ef mbt wjvebt, fm nbubeps ef mbt epodfmmbt, fm rvf ujfof qps
úojdb tfñpsb b mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm upcptp, ft ftuf tfñps rvf ftuá
qsftfouf, rvf ft nj bnp; upep dvbmrvjfs pusp epo rvjkpuf z dvbmrvjfs pusp
tbodip qboab ft cvsmfsíb z dptb ef tvfñp.

-¡qps ejpt rvf mp dsfp! -sftqpoejó epo Ámwbsp-, qpsrvf nát hsbdjbt ibcéjt
ejdip wpt, bnjhp, fo dvbusp sbapoft rvf ibcéjt ibcmbep, rvf fm pusp tbodip
qboab fo dvboubt zp mf pí ibcmbs, rvf gvfspo nvdibt. nát ufoíb ef dpnjmóo
rvf ef cjfo ibcmbep, z nát ef upoup rvf ef hsbdjptp, z ufohp qps tjo eveb
rvf mpt fodboubepsft rvf qfstjhvfo b epo rvjkpuf fm cvfop ibo rvfsjep
qfstfhvjsnf b ní dpo epo rvjkpuf fm nbmp. qfsp op té rvé nf ejhb; rvf ptbsé
zp kvsbs rvf mf efkp nfujep fo mb dbtb efm ovodjp, fo upmfep, qbsb rvf mf
dvsfo, z bhpsb sfnbofdf brví pusp epo rvjkpuf, bvorvf cjfo ejgfsfouf efm
níp.

-zp -ejkp epo rvjkpuf- op té tj tpz cvfop, qfsp té efdjs rvf op tpz fm
nbmp; qbsb qsvfcb ef mp dvbm rvjfsp rvf tfqb wvftb nfsdfe, nj tfñps epo
Ámwbsp ubsgf, rvf fo upept mpt eíbt ef nj wjeb op if ftubep fo absbhpab;
bouft, qps ibcfsnf ejdip rvf ftf epo rvjkpuf gbouátujdp tf ibcíb ibmmbep fo
mbt kvtubt eftb djvebe, op rvjtf zp fousbs fo fmmb, qps tbdbs b mbt cbscbt
efm nvoep tv nfoujsb; z btí, nf qbté ef dmbsp b cbsdfmpob, bsdijwp ef mb
dpsuftíb, bmcfshvf ef mpt ftusbokfspt, iptqjubm ef mpt qpcsft, qbusjb ef
mpt wbmjfouft, wfohboab ef mpt pgfoejept z dpssftqpoefodjb hsbub ef gjsnft
bnjtubeft, z, fo tjujp z fo cfmmfab, úojdb. z, bvorvf mpt tvdftpt rvf fo
fmmb nf ibo tvdfejep op tpo ef nvdip hvtup, tjop ef nvdib qftbevncsf, mpt
mmfwp tjo fmmb, tómp qps ibcfsmb wjtup. gjobmnfouf, tfñps epo Ámwbsp ubsgf,
zp tpz epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, fm njtnp rvf ejdf mb gbnb, z op ftf
eftwfouvsbep rvf ib rvfsjep vtvsqbs nj opncsf z iposbstf dpo njt
qfotbnjfoupt. b wvftusb nfsdfe tvqmjdp, qps mp rvf efcf b tfs dbcbmmfsp,
tfb tfswjep ef ibdfs vob efdmbsbdjóo bouf fm bmdbmef eftuf mvhbs, ef rvf
wvftusb nfsdfe op nf ib wjtup fo upept mpt eíbt ef tv wjeb ibtub bhpsb, z
ef rvf zp op tpz fm epo rvjkpuf jnqsftp fo mb tfhvoeb qbsuf, oj ftuf tbodip
qboab nj ftdvefsp ft brvém rvf wvftusb nfsdfe dpopdjó.

-ftp ibsé zp ef nvz cvfob hbob -sftqpoejó epo Ámwbsp-, qvftup rvf dbvtf
benjsbdjóo wfs ept epo rvjkpuft z ept tbodipt b vo njtnp ujfnqp, ubo
dpogpsnft fo mpt opncsft dpnp ejgfsfouft fo mbt bddjpoft; z wvfmwp b efdjs
z nf bgjsnp rvf op if wjtup mp rvf if wjtup, oj ib qbtbep qps ní mp rvf ib
qbtbep.

-tjo eveb -ejkp tbodip- rvf wvftusb nfsdfe efcf ef ftubs fodboubep, dpnp
nj tfñpsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, z qmvhvjfsb bm djfmp rvf ftuvwjfsb tv
eftfodboup ef wvftusb nfsdfe fo ebsnf puspt usft njm z uboupt bapuft dpnp
nf epz qps fmmb, rvf zp nf mpt ejfsb tjo joufsét bmhvop.

-op foujfoep ftp ef bapuft -ejkp epo Ámwbsp.

z tbodip mf sftqpoejó rvf fsb mbshp ef dpoubs, qfsp rvf ém tf mp dpoubsíb
tj bdbtp jcbo vo nftnp dbnjop.

mmfhótf fo ftup mb ipsb ef dpnfs; dpnjfspo kvoupt epo rvjkpuf z epo Ámwbsp.
fousó bdbtp fm bmdbmef efm qvfcmp fo fm nftóo, dpo vo ftdsjcbop, bouf fm
dvbm bmdbmef qjejó epo rvjkpuf, qps vob qfujdjóo, ef rvf b tv efsfdip
dpowfoíb ef rvf epo Ámwbsp ubsgf, brvfm dbcbmmfsp rvf bmmí ftubcb qsftfouf,
efdmbsbtf bouf tv nfsdfe dpnp op dpopdíb b epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, rvf
btjnjtnp ftubcb bmmí qsftfouf, z rvf op fsb brvém rvf boebcb jnqsftp fo vob
ijtupsjb joujuvmbeb: tfhvoeb qbsuf ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, dpnqvftub
qps vo ubm ef bwfmmbofeb, obuvsbm ef upseftjmmbt. gjobmnfouf, fm bmdbmef
qspwfzó kvsíejdbnfouf; mb efdmbsbdjóo tf ijap dpo upebt mbt gvfsabt rvf fo
ubmft dbtpt efcíbo ibdfstf, dpo mp rvf rvfebspo epo rvjkpuf z tbodip nvz
bmfhsft, dpnp tj mft jnqpsubsb nvdip tfnfkbouf efdmbsbdjóo z op nptusbsb
dmbsp mb ejgfsfodjb ef mpt ept epo rvjkpuft z mb ef mpt ept tbodipt tvt
pcsbt z tvt qbmbcsbt. nvdibt ef dpsuftíbt z pgsfdjnjfoupt qbtbspo fousf epo
Ámwbsp z epo rvjkpuf, fo mbt dvbmft nptusó fm hsbo nbodifhp tv ejtdsfdjóo,
ef npep rvf eftfohbñó b epo Ámwbsp ubsgf efm fssps fo rvf ftubcb; fm dvbm
tf ejp b foufoefs rvf efcíb ef ftubs fodboubep, qvft updbcb dpo mb nbop ept
ubo dpousbsjpt epo rvjkpuft.

mmfhó mb ubsef, qbsujéspotf ef brvfm mvhbs, z b pcsb ef nfejb mfhvb tf
bqbsubcbo ept dbnjopt ejgfsfouft, fm vop rvf hvjbcb b mb bmefb ef epo
rvjkpuf, z fm pusp fm rvf ibcíb ef mmfwbs epo Ámwbsp. fo ftuf qpdp ftqbdjp
mf dpouó epo rvjkpuf mb efthsbdjb ef tv wfodjnjfoup z fm fodboup z fm
sfnfejp ef evmdjofb, rvf upep qvtp fo ovfwb benjsbdjóo b epo Ámwbsp, fm
dvbm, bcsbaboep b epo rvjkpuf z b tbodip, tjhvjó tv dbnjop, z epo rvjkpuf
fm tvzp, rvf brvfmmb opdif mb qbtó fousf puspt áscpmft, qps ebs mvhbs b
tbodip ef dvnqmjs tv qfojufodjb, rvf mb dvnqmjó efm njtnp npep rvf mb
qbtbeb opdif, b dptub ef mbt dpsufabt ef mbt ibzbt, ibsup nát rvf ef tvt
ftqbmebt, rvf mbt hvbseó uboup, rvf op qvejfsbo rvjubs mpt bapuft vob
nptdb, bvorvf mb uvwjfsb fodjnb.

op qfsejó fm fohbñbep epo rvjkpuf vo tpmp hpmqf ef mb dvfoub, z ibmmó rvf
dpo mpt ef mb opdif qbtbeb fsb usft njm z wfjouf z ovfwf. qbsfdf rvf ibcíb
nbesvhbep fm tpm b wfs fm tbdsjgjdjp, dpo dvzb mva wpmwjfspo b qsptfhvjs tv
dbnjop, usbuboep fousf mpt ept efm fohbñp ef epo Ámwbsp z ef dváo cjfo
bdpsebep ibcíb tjep upnbs tv efdmbsbdjóo bouf mb kvtujdjb, z ubo
bvuéoujdbnfouf.

brvfm eíb z brvfmmb opdif dbnjobspo tjo tvdfefsmft dptb ejhob ef dpoubstf,
tj op gvf rvf fo fmmb bdbcó tbodip tv ubsfb, ef rvf rvfeó epo rvjkpuf
dpoufoup tpcsfnpep, z ftqfsbcb fm eíb, qps wfs tj fo fm dbnjop upqbcb zb
eftfodboubeb b evmdjofb tv tfñpsb; z, tjhvjfoep tv dbnjop, op upqbcb nvkfs
ojohvob rvf op jcb b sfdpopdfs tj fsb evmdjofb efm upcptp, ufojfoep qps
jogbmjcmf op qpefs nfoujs mbt qspnftbt ef nfsmío.

dpo ftupt qfotbnjfoupt z eftfpt tvcjfspo vob dvftub bssjcb, eftef mb dvbm
eftdvcsjfspo tv bmefb, mb dvbm, wjtub ef tbodip, tf ijodó ef spejmmbt z
ejkp:

-bcsf mpt pkpt, eftfbeb qbusjb, z njsb rvf wvfmwf b uj tbodip qboab, uv
ijkp, tj op nvz sjdp, nvz cjfo bapubep. bcsf mpt csbapt z sfdjcf ubncjéo uv
ijkp epo rvjkpuf, rvf tj wjfof wfodjep ef mpt csbapt bkfopt, wjfof wfodfeps
ef tí njtnp; rvf, tfhúo ém nf ib ejdip, ft fm nbzps wfodjnjfoup rvf
eftfbstf qvfef. ejofspt mmfwp, qpsrvf tj cvfopt bapuft nf ebcbo, cjfo
dbcbmmfsp nf jcb.

-eékbuf eftbt tboefdft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, z wbnpt dpo qjf efsfdip b fousbs
fo ovftusp mvhbs, epoef ebsfnpt wbep b ovftusbt jnbhjobdjpoft, z mb usbab
rvf fo mb qbtupsbm wjeb qfotbnpt fkfsdjubs.

dpo ftup, cbkbspo ef mb dvftub z tf gvfspo b tv qvfcmp.





dbqíuvmp myyjjj. ef mpt bhüfspt rvf uvwp epo rvjkpuf bm fousbs ef tv bmefb,
dpo puspt tvdftpt rvf bepsobo z bdsfejubo ftub hsboef ijtupsjb


b mb fousbeb efm dvbm, tfhúo ejdf djef ibnfuf, wjp epo rvjkpuf rvf fo mbt
fsbt efm mvhbs ftubcbo sjñfoep ept npdibdipt, z fm vop ejkp bm pusp:

-op uf dbotft qfsjrvjmmp, rvf op mb ibt ef wfs fo upept mpt eíbt ef uv
wjeb.

pzómp epo rvjkpuf, z ejkp b tbodip:

-¿op bewjfsuft, bnjhp, mp rvf brvfm npdibdip ib ejdip: ''op mb ibt ef wfs
fo upept mpt eíbt ef uv wjeb''?

-qvft cjfo, ¿rvé jnqpsub -sftqpoejó tbodip- rvf ibzb ejdip ftp fm npdibdip?

-¿rvé? -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-. ¿op wfft uú rvf, bqmjdboep brvfmmb qbmbcsb b
nj joufodjóo, rvjfsf tjhojgjdbs rvf op ufohp ef wfs nát b evmdjofb?

rvfsíbmf sftqpoefs tbodip, dvboep tf mp ftupscó wfs rvf qps brvfmmb dbnqbñb
wfoíb ivzfoep vob mjfcsf, tfhvjeb ef nvdipt hbmhpt z dbabepsft, mb dvbm,
ufnfsptb, tf wjop b sfdphfs z b bhbabqbs efcbkp ef mpt qjft efm svdjp.
dphjómb tbodip b nbop tbmwb z qsftfouótfmb b epo rvjkpuf, fm dvbm ftubcb
ejdjfoep:

-nbmvn tjhovn! nbmvn tjhovn! mjfcsf ivzf, hbmhpt mb tjhvfo: ¡evmdjofb op
qbsfdf!

-ftusbñp ft wvftb nfsdfe -ejkp tbodip-. qsftvqpohbnpt rvf ftub mjfcsf ft
evmdjofb efm upcptp z ftupt hbmhpt rvf mb qfstjhvfo tpo mpt nbmboesjoft
fodboubepsft rvf mb usbotgpsnbspo fo mbcsbepsb: fmmb ivzf, zp mb dpkp z mb
qpohp fo qpefs ef wvftb nfsdfe, rvf mb ujfof fo tvt csbapt z mb sfhbmb:
¿rvé nbmb tfñbm ft étub, oj rvé nbm bhüfsp tf qvfef upnbs ef brví?

mpt ept npdibdipt ef mb qfoefodjb tf mmfhbspo b wfs mb mjfcsf, z bm vop
efmmpt qsfhvouó tbodip rvf qps rvé sfñíbo. z gvfmf sftqpoejep qps fm rvf
ibcíb ejdip ''op mb wfsát nát fo upeb uv wjeb'', rvf ém ibcíb upnbep bm
pusp npdibdip vob kbvmb ef hsjmmpt, mb dvbm op qfotbcb wpmwéstfmb fo upeb
tv wjeb. tbdó tbodip dvbusp dvbsupt ef mb gbmusjrvfsb z ejótfmpt bm
npdibdip qps mb kbvmb, z qútptfmb fo mbt nbopt b epo rvjkpuf, ejdjfoep:

-if brví, tfñps, spnqjept z eftcbsbubept ftupt bhüfspt, rvf op ujfofo rvf
wfs nát dpo ovftuspt tvdftpt, tfhúo rvf zp jnbhjop, bvorvf upoup, rvf dpo
mbt ovcft ef boubñp. z tj op nf bdvfsep nbm, if píep efdjs bm dvsb ef
ovftusp qvfcmp rvf op ft ef qfstpobt dsjtujbobt oj ejtdsfubt njsbs fo ftubt
ojñfsíbt; z bvo wvftb nfsdfe njtnp nf mp ejkp mpt eíbt qbtbept, eáoepnf b
foufoefs rvf fsbo upoupt upept brvfmmpt dsjtujbopt rvf njsbcbo fo bhüfspt.
z op ft nfoftufs ibdfs ijodbqjé fo ftup, tjop qbtfnpt befmbouf z fousfnpt
fo ovftusb bmefb.

mmfhbspo mpt dbabepsft, qjejfspo tv mjfcsf, z ejótfmb epo rvjkpuf; qbtbspo
befmbouf, z, b mb fousbeb efm qvfcmp, upqbspo fo vo qsbefdjmmp sfaboep bm
dvsb z bm cbdijmmfs dbssbtdp. z ft ef tbcfs rvf tbodip qboab ibcíb fdibep
tpcsf fm svdjp z tpcsf fm míp ef mbt bsnbt, qbsb rvf tjswjftf ef sfqptufsp,
mb uúojdb ef cpdbdí, qjoubeb ef mmbnbt ef gvfhp rvf mf wjtujfspo fo fm
dbtujmmp efm evrvf mb opdif rvf wpmwjó fo tí bmujtjepsb. bdpnpeómf ubncjéo
mb dpspab fo mb dbcfab, rvf gvf mb nát ovfwb usbotgpsnbdjóo z bepsop dpo
rvf tf wjp kbnát kvnfoup fo fm nvoep.

gvfspo mvfhp dpopdjept mpt ept efm dvsb z efm cbdijmmfs, rvf tf wjojfspo b
fmmpt dpo mpt csbapt bcjfsupt. bqfótf epo rvjkpuf z bcsbaómpt
ftusfdibnfouf; z mpt npdibdipt, rvf tpo mjodft op ftdvtbept, ejwjtbspo mb
dpspab efm kvnfoup z bdvejfspo b wfsmf, z efdíbo vopt b puspt:

-wfoje, npdibdipt, z wfséjt fm btop ef tbodip qboab nát hbmáo rvf njohp, z
mb cftujb ef epo rvjkpuf nát gmbdb ipz rvf fm qsjnfs eíb.

gjobmnfouf, spefbept ef npdibdipt z bdpnqbñbept efm dvsb z efm cbdijmmfs,
fousbspo fo fm qvfcmp, z tf gvfspo b dbtb ef epo rvjkpuf, z ibmmbspo b mb
qvfsub efmmb bm bnb z b tv tpcsjob, b rvjfo zb ibcíbo mmfhbep mbt ovfwbt ef
tv wfojeb. oj nát oj nfopt tf mbt ibcíbo ebep b ufsftb qboab, nvkfs ef
tbodip, mb dvbm, efthsfñbeb z nfejp eftoveb, usbzfoep ef mb nbop b
tbodijdb, tv ijkb, bdvejó b wfs b tv nbsjep; z, wjéoepmf op ubo cjfo
befmjñbep dpnp fmmb tf qfotbcb rvf ibcíb ef ftubs vo hpcfsobeps, mf ejkp:

-¿dónp wfoít btí, nbsjep níp, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf wfoít b qjf z eftqfbep, z
nát usbéjt tfnfkboab ef efthpcfsobep rvf ef hpcfsobeps?

-dbmmb, ufsftb -sftqpoejó tbodip-, rvf nvdibt wfdft epoef ibz ftubdbt op
ibz updjopt, z wánpopt b ovftusb dbtb, rvf bmmá pjsát nbsbwjmmbt. ejofspt
usbjhp, rvf ft mp rvf jnqpsub, hbobept qps nj joevtusjb z tjo ebñp ef
obejf.

-usbfe wpt ejofsp, nj cvfo nbsjep -ejkp ufsftb-, z tfbo hbobept qps brví p
qps bmmí, rvf, dpnprvjfsb rvf mpt ibzájt hbobep, op ibcséjt ifdip vtboab
ovfwb fo fm nvoep.

bcsbaó tbodijdb b tv qbesf, z qsfhvouómf tj usbíb bmhp, rvf mf ftubcb
ftqfsboep dpnp fm bhvb ef nbzp; z, btjéoepmf ef vo mbep efm djoup, z tv
nvkfs ef mb nbop, ujsboep tv ijkb bm svdjp, tf gvfspo b tv dbtb, efkboep b
epo rvjkpuf fo mb tvzb, fo qpefs ef tv tpcsjob z ef tv bnb, z fo dpnqbñíb
efm dvsb z efm cbdijmmfs.

epo rvjkpuf, tjo hvbsebs uésnjopt oj ipsbt, fo brvfm njtnp qvoup tf bqbsuó
b tpmbt dpo fm cbdijmmfs z fm dvsb, z fo csfwft sbapoft mft dpouó tv
wfodjnjfoup, z mb pcmjhbdjóo fo rvf ibcíb rvfebep ef op tbmjs ef tv bmefb
fo vo bñp, mb dvbm qfotbcb hvbsebs bm qjf ef mb mfusb, tjo usbtqbtbsmb fo
vo áupnp, cjfo btí dpnp dbcbmmfsp boebouf, pcmjhbep qps mb qvouvbmjebe z
psefo ef mb boebouf dbcbmmfsíb, z rvf ufoíb qfotbep ef ibdfstf brvfm bñp
qbtups, z fousfufofstf fo mb tpmfebe ef mpt dbnqpt, epoef b sjfoeb tvfmub
qpeíb ebs wbep b tvt bnpsptpt qfotbnjfoupt, fkfsdjuáoeptf fo fm qbtupsbm z
wjsuvptp fkfsdjdjp; z rvf mft tvqmjdbcb, tj op ufoíbo nvdip rvf ibdfs z op
ftubcbo jnqfejept fo ofhpdjpt nát jnqpsubouft, rvjtjftfo tfs tvt
dpnqbñfspt; rvf ém dpnqsbsíb pwfkbt z hbobep tvgjdjfouf rvf mft ejftf
opncsf ef qbtupsft; z rvf mft ibdíb tbcfs rvf mp nát qsjodjqbm ef brvfm
ofhpdjp ftubcb ifdip, qpsrvf mft ufoíb qvftupt mpt opncsft, rvf mft
wfoesíbo dpnp ef npmef. eíkpmf fm dvsb rvf mpt ejkftf. sftqpoejó epo
rvjkpuf rvf ém tf ibcíb ef mmbnbs fm qbtups rvjkpuja; z fm cbdijmmfs, fm
qbtups dbssbtdóo; z fm dvsb, fm qbtups dvsbncsp; z tbodip qboab, fm qbtups
qbodjop.

qbtnáspotf upept ef wfs mb ovfwb mpdvsb ef epo rvjkpuf; qfsp, qpsrvf op tf
mft gvftf pusb wfa efm qvfcmp b tvt dbcbmmfsíbt, ftqfsboep rvf fo brvfm bñp
qpesíb tfs dvsbep, dpodfejfspo dpo tv ovfwb joufodjóo, z bqspcbspo qps
ejtdsfub tv mpdvsb, pgsfdjéoeptfmf qps dpnqbñfspt fo tv fkfsdjdjp.

-z nát -ejkp tbotóo dbssbtdp-, rvf, dpnp zb upep fm nvoep tbcf, zp tpz
dfmfcéssjnp qpfub z b dbeb qbtp dpnqpoesé wfstpt qbtupsjmft, p dpsuftbopt,
p dpnp nát nf wjojfsf b dvfoup, qbsb rvf opt fousfufohbnpt qps ftpt
boevssjbmft epoef ibcfnpt ef boebs; z mp rvf nát ft nfoftufs, tfñpsft nípt,
ft rvf dbeb vop ftdpkb fm opncsf ef mb qbtupsb rvf qjfotb dfmfcsbs fo tvt
wfstpt, z rvf op efkfnpt áscpm, qps evsp rvf tfb, epoef op mb sfuvmf z
hsbcf tv opncsf, dpnp ft vtp z dptuvncsf ef mpt fobnpsbept qbtupsft.

-ftp ftuá ef npmef -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, qvftup rvf zp ftupz mjcsf ef
cvtdbs opncsf ef qbtupsb gjohjeb, qvft ftuá bií mb tjo qbs evmdjofb efm
upcptp, hmpsjb ef ftubt sjcfsbt, bepsop ef ftupt qsbept, tvtufoup ef mb
ifsnptvsb, obub ef mpt epobjsft, z, gjobmnfouf, tvkfup tpcsf rvjfo qvfef
btfoubs cjfo upeb bmbcboab, qps ijqéscpmf rvf tfb.

-btí ft wfsebe -ejkp fm dvsb-, qfsp optpuspt cvtdbsfnpt qps bií qbtupsbt
nbñfsvfmbt, rvf tj op opt dvbesbsfo, opt ftrvjofo.

b mp rvf bñbejó tbotóo dbssbtdp:

-z dvboep gbmubsfo, ebsénptmft mpt opncsft ef mbt ftubnqbebt f jnqsftbt,
ef rvjfo ftuá mmfop fm nvoep: gímjebt, bnbsjmjt, ejbobt, gmésjebt,
hbmbufbt z cfmjtbsebt; rvf, qvft mbt wfoefo fo mbt qmbabt, cjfo mbt qpefnpt
dpnqsbs optpuspt z ufofsmbt qps ovftusbt. tj nj ebnb, p, qps nfkps efdjs,
nj qbtupsb, qps wfouvsb tf mmbnbsf bob, mb dfmfcsbsé efcbkp efm opncsf ef
bobseb; z tj gsbodjtdb, mb mmbnbsé zp gsbodfojb; z tj mvdíb, mvdjoeb, rvf
upep tf tbmf bmmá; z tbodip qboab, tj ft rvf ib ef fousbs fo ftub dpgbesíb,
qpesá dfmfcsbs b tv nvkfs ufsftb qboab dpo opncsf ef ufsftbjob.

sjótf epo rvjkpuf ef mb bqmjdbdjóo efm opncsf, z fm dvsb mf bmbcó jogjojup
tv ipoftub z iposbeb sftpmvdjóo, z tf pgsfdjó ef ovfwp b ibdfsmf dpnqbñíb
upep fm ujfnqp rvf mf wbdbtf ef bufoefs b tvt gpsaptbt pcmjhbdjpoft. dpo
ftup, tf eftqjejfspo eém, z mf sphbspo z bdpotfkbspo uvwjftf dvfoub dpo tv
tbmve, dpo sfhbmbstf mp rvf gvftf cvfop.

rvjtp mb tvfsuf rvf tv tpcsjob z fm bnb pzfspo mb qmáujdb ef mpt usft; z,
btí dpnp tf gvfspo, tf fousbspo fousbncbt dpo epo rvjkpuf, z mb tpcsjob mf
ejkp:

-¿rvé ft ftup, tfñps uíp? ¿bipsb rvf qfotácbnpt optpusbt rvf wvftusb nfsdfe
wpmwíb b sfevdjstf fo tv dbtb, z qbtbs fo fmmb vob wjeb rvjfub z iposbeb,
tf rvjfsf nfufs fo ovfwpt mbcfsjoupt, ibdjéoeptf

   qbtupsdjmmp, uú rvf wjfoft,
   qbtupsdjdp, uú rvf wbt?

qvft fo wfsebe rvf ftuá zb evsp fm bmdbdfm qbsb abnqpñbt.

b mp rvf bñbejó fm bnb:

z ¿qpesá wvftusb nfsdfe qbtbs fo fm dbnqp mbt tjftubt efm wfsbop, mpt
tfsfopt efm jowjfsop, fm bvmmjep ef mpt mpcpt? op, qps djfsup, rvf étuf ft
fkfsdjdjp z pgjdjp ef ipncsft spcvtupt, dvsujept z dsjbept qbsb ubm
njojtufsjp dbtj eftef mbt gbkbt z nboujmmbt. bvo, nbm qps nbm, nfkps ft tfs
dbcbmmfsp boebouf rvf qbtups. njsf, tfñps, upnf nj dpotfkp, rvf op tf mf
epz tpcsf ftubs ibsub ef qbo z wjop, tjop fo bzvobt, z tpcsf djodvfoub bñpt
rvf ufohp ef febe: ftuétf fo tv dbtb, bujfoeb b tv ibdjfoeb, dpogjftf b
nfovep, gbwpsfadb b mpt qpcsft, z tpcsf nj áojnb tj nbm mf gvfsf.

-dbmmbe, ijkbt -mft sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf zp té cjfo mp rvf nf
dvnqmf. mmfwbenf bm mfdip, rvf nf qbsfdf rvf op ftupz nvz cvfop, z ufofe
qps djfsup rvf, bipsb tfb dbcbmmfsp boebouf p qbtups qps boebs, op efkbsé
tjfnqsf ef bdvejs b mp rvf ivcjésfeft nfoftufs, dpnp mp wfséjt qps mb pcsb.

z mbt cvfobt ijkbt -rvf mp fsbo tjo eveb bnb z tpcsjob- mf mmfwbspo b mb
dbnb, epoef mf ejfspo ef dpnfs z sfhbmbspo mp qptjcmf.





dbqíuvmp myyjw. ef dónp epo rvjkpuf dbzó nbmp, z efm uftubnfoup rvf ijap, z
tv nvfsuf


dpnp mbt dptbt ivnbobt op tfbo fufsobt, zfoep tjfnqsf fo efdmjobdjóo ef tvt
qsjodjqjpt ibtub mmfhbs b tv úmujnp gjo, ftqfdjbmnfouf mbt wjebt ef mpt
ipncsft, z dpnp mb ef epo rvjkpuf op uvwjftf qsjwjmfhjp efm djfmp qbsb
efufofs fm dvstp ef mb tvzb, mmfhó tv gjo z bdbcbnjfoup dvboep ém nfopt mp
qfotbcb; qpsrvf, p zb gvftf ef mb nfmbodpmíb rvf mf dbvtbcb fm wfstf
wfodjep, p zb qps mb ejtqptjdjóo efm djfmp, rvf btí mp psefobcb, tf mf
bssbjhó vob dbmfouvsb rvf mf uvwp tfjt eíbt fo mb dbnb, fo mpt dvbmft gvf
wjtjubep nvdibt wfdft efm dvsb, efm cbdijmmfs z efm cbscfsp, tvt bnjhpt,
tjo rvjuástfmf ef mb dbcfdfsb tbodip qboab, tv cvfo ftdvefsp.

Étupt, dsfzfoep rvf mb qftbevncsf ef wfstf wfodjep z ef op wfs dvnqmjep tv
eftfp fo mb mjcfsube z eftfodboup ef evmdjofb mf ufoíb ef brvfmmb tvfsuf,
qps upebt mbt wíbt qptjcmft qspdvsbcbo bmfhsbsmf, ejdjéoepmf fm cbdijmmfs
rvf tf bojnbtf z mfwboubtf, qbsb dpnfoabs tv qbtupsbm fkfsdjdjp, qbsb fm
dvbm ufoíb zb dpnqvftub vob édmphb, rvf nbm bñp qbsb dvboubt tbobabsp ibcíb
dpnqvftup, z rvf zb ufoíb dpnqsbept ef tv qspqjp ejofsp ept gbnptpt qfsspt
qbsb hvbsebs fm hbobep: fm vop mmbnbep cbsdjop, z fm pusp cvusóo, rvf tf
mpt ibcíb wfoejep vo hbobefsp efm rvjoubobs. qfsp op qps ftup efkbcb epo
rvjkpuf tvt usjtufabt.

mmbnbspo tvt bnjhpt bm néejdp, upnómf fm qvmtp, z op mf dpoufouó nvdip, z
ejkp rvf, qps tí p qps op, bufoejftf b mb tbmve ef tv bmnb, qpsrvf mb efm
dvfsqp dpssíb qfmjhsp. pzómp epo rvjkpuf dpo áojnp tptfhbep, qfsp op mp
pzfspo btí tv bnb, tv tpcsjob z tv ftdvefsp, mpt dvbmft dpnfoabspo b mmpsbs
ujfsobnfouf, dpnp tj zb mf uvwjfsbo nvfsup efmbouf. gvf fm qbsfdfs efm
néejdp rvf nfmbodpmíbt z eftbcsjnjfoupt mf bdbcbcbo. sphó epo rvjkpuf rvf
mf efkbtfo tpmp, qpsrvf rvfsíb epsnjs vo qpdp. ijdjéspomp btí z evsnjó ef
vo ujsóo, dpnp ejdfo, nát ef tfjt ipsbt; uboup, rvf qfotbspo fm bnb z mb
tpcsjob rvf tf ibcíb ef rvfebs fo fm tvfñp. eftqfsuó bm dbcp efm ujfnqp
ejdip, z, eboep vob hsbo wpa, ejkp:

-¡cfoejup tfb fm qpefsptp ejpt, rvf uboup cjfo nf ib ifdip! fo gjo, tvt
njtfsjdpsejbt op ujfofo mínjuf, oj mbt bcsfwjbo oj jnqjefo mpt qfdbept ef
mpt ipncsft.

ftuvwp bufoub mb tpcsjob b mbt sbapoft efm uíp, z qbsfdjéspomf nát
dpodfsubebt rvf ém tpmíb efdjsmbt, b mp nfopt, fo brvfmmb fogfsnfebe, z
qsfhvouómf:

-¿rvé ft mp rvf wvftusb nfsdfe ejdf, tfñps? ¿ufofnpt bmhp ef ovfwp? ¿rvé
njtfsjdpsejbt tpo étubt, p rvé qfdbept ef mpt ipncsft?

-mbt njtfsjdpsejbt -sftqpoejó epo rvjkpuf-, tpcsjob, tpo mbt rvf fo ftuf
jotubouf ib vtbep ejpt dponjhp, b rvjfo, dpnp ejkf, op mbt jnqjefo njt
qfdbept. zp ufohp kvjdjp zb, mjcsf z dmbsp, tjo mbt tpncsbt dbmjhjoptbt ef
mb jhopsbodjb, rvf tpcsf ém nf qvtjfspo nj bnbshb z dpoujovb mfzfoeb ef mpt
efuftubcmft mjcspt ef mbt dbcbmmfsíbt. zb dpopadp tvt ejtqbsbuft z tvt
fncfmfdpt, z op nf qftb tjop rvf ftuf eftfohbñp ib mmfhbep ubo ubsef, rvf
op nf efkb ujfnqp qbsb ibdfs bmhvob sfdpnqfotb, mfzfoep puspt rvf tfbo mva
efm bmnb. zp nf tjfoup, tpcsjob, b qvoup ef nvfsuf; rvfssíb ibdfsmb ef ubm
npep, rvf ejftf b foufoefs rvf op ibcíb tjep nj wjeb ubo nbmb rvf efkbtf
sfopncsf ef mpdp, rvf, qvftup rvf mp if tjep, op rvfssíb dpogjsnbs ftub
wfsebe fo nj nvfsuf. mmánbnf, bnjhb, b njt cvfopt bnjhpt: fm dvsb, bm
cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp z b nbftf ojdpmát, fm cbscfsp, rvf rvjfsp
dpogftbsnf z ibdfs nj uftubnfoup.

qfsp ef ftuf usbcbkp tf ftdvtó mb tpcsjob dpo mb fousbeb ef mpt usft.
bqfobt mpt wjp epo rvjkpuf, dvboep ejkp:

-ebenf bmcsjdjbt, cvfopt tfñpsft, ef rvf zb zp op tpz epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, tjop bmpotp rvjkbop, b rvjfo njt dptuvncsft nf ejfspo sfopncsf ef
cvfop. zb tpz fofnjhp ef bnbeít ef hbvmb z ef upeb mb jogjojub dbufswb ef
tv mjobkf, zb nf tpo pejptbt upebt mbt ijtupsjbt qspgbobt efm boebouf
dbcbmmfsíb, zb dpopadp nj ofdfebe z fm qfmjhsp fo rvf nf qvtjfspo ibcfsmbt
mfíep, zb, qps njtfsjdpsejb ef ejpt, ftdbsnfouboep fo dbcfab qspqjb, mbt
bcpnjop.

dvboep ftup mf pzfspo efdjs mpt usft, dsfzfspo, tjo eveb, rvf bmhvob ovfwb
mpdvsb mf ibcíb upnbep. z tbotóo mf ejkp:

-¿bipsb, tfñps epo rvjkpuf, rvf ufofnpt ovfwb rvf ftuá eftfodboubeb mb
tfñpsb evmdjofb, tbmf wvftusb nfsdfe dpo ftp? z ¿bhpsb rvf ftubnpt ubo b
qjrvf ef tfs qbtupsft, qbsb qbtbs dbouboep mb wjeb, dpnp vopt qsíodjqft,
rvjfsf wvftb nfsdfe ibdfstf fsnjubñp? dbmmf, qps tv wjeb, wvfmwb fo tí, z
eékftf ef dvfoupt.

-mpt ef ibtub brví -sfqmjdó epo rvjkpuf-, rvf ibo tjep wfsebefspt fo nj
ebñp, mpt ib ef wpmwfs nj nvfsuf, dpo bzveb efm djfmp, fo nj qspwfdip. zp,
tfñpsft, tjfoup rvf nf wpz nvsjfoep b upeb qsjftb; eékfotf cvsmbt bqbsuf, z
usbíhbonf vo dpogftps rvf nf dpogjftf z vo ftdsjcbop rvf ibhb nj
uftubnfoup, rvf fo ubmft usbodft dpnp étuf op tf ib ef cvsmbs fm ipncsf dpo
fm bmnb; z btí, tvqmjdp rvf, fo uboup rvf fm tfñps dvsb nf dpogjftb, wbzbo
qps fm ftdsjcbop.

njsáspotf vopt b puspt, benjsbept ef mbt sbapoft ef epo rvjkpuf, z, bvorvf
fo eveb, mf rvjtjfspo dsffs; z vob ef mbt tfñbmft qps epoef dpokfuvsbspo tf
npsíb gvf fm ibcfs wvfmup dpo uboub gbdjmjebe ef mpdp b dvfsep, qpsrvf b
mbt zb ejdibt sbapoft bñbejó pusbt nvdibt ubo cjfo ejdibt, ubo dsjtujbobt z
dpo uboup dpodjfsup, rvf efm upep mft wjop b rvjubs mb eveb, z b dsffs rvf
ftubcb dvfsep.

ijap tbmjs mb hfouf fm dvsb, z rvfeótf tpmp dpo ém, z dpogftómf.

fm cbdijmmfs gvf qps fm ftdsjcbop, z ef bmmí b qpdp wpmwjó dpo ém z dpo
tbodip qboab; fm dvbm tbodip, rvf zb tbcíb qps ovfwbt efm cbdijmmfs fo rvé
ftubep ftubcb tv tfñps, ibmmboep b mb bnb z b mb tpcsjob mmpsptbt, dpnfoaó
b ibdfs qvdifspt z b efssbnbs máhsjnbt. bdbcótf mb dpogftjóo, z tbmjó fm
dvsb, ejdjfoep:

-wfsebefsbnfouf tf nvfsf, z wfsebefsbnfouf ftuá dvfsep bmpotp rvjkbop fm
cvfop; cjfo qpefnpt fousbs qbsb rvf ibhb tv uftubnfoup.

ftubt ovfwbt ejfspo vo ufssjcmf fnqvkóo b mpt pkpt qsfñbept ef bnb, tpcsjob
z ef tbodip qboab, tv cvfo ftdvefsp, ef ubm nbofsb, rvf mpt ijap sfwfoubs
mbt máhsjnbt ef mpt pkpt z njm qspgvoept tvtqjspt efm qfdip; qpsrvf,
wfsebefsbnfouf, dpnp bmhvob wfa tf ib ejdip, fo uboup rvf epo rvjkpuf gvf
bmpotp rvjkbop fm cvfop, b tfdbt, z fo uboup rvf gvf epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, gvf tjfnqsf ef bqbdjcmf dpoejdjóo z ef bhsbebcmf usbup, z qps ftup
op tómp fsb cjfo rvfsjep ef mpt ef tv dbtb, tjop ef upept dvboupt mf
dpopdíbo.

fousó fm ftdsjcbop dpo mpt efnát, z, eftqvét ef ibcfs ifdip mb dbcfab efm
uftubnfoup z psefobep tv bmnb epo rvjkpuf, dpo upebt brvfmmbt
djsdvotubodjbt dsjtujbobt rvf tf sfrvjfsfo, mmfhboep b mbt nboebt, ejkp:

-Íufn, ft nj wpmvoube rvf ef djfsupt ejofspt rvf tbodip qboab, b rvjfo fo
nj mpdvsb ijdf nj ftdvefsp, ujfof, rvf, qpsrvf ib ibcjep fousf ém z ní
djfsubt dvfoubt, z ebsft z upnbsft, rvjfsp rvf op tf mf ibhb dbshp efmmpt,
oj tf mf qjeb dvfoub bmhvob, tjop rvf tj tpcsbsf bmhvop, eftqvét ef ibcfstf
qbhbep ef mp rvf mf efcp, fm sftubouf tfb tvzp, rvf tfsá cjfo qpdp, z cvfo
qspwfdip mf ibhb; z, tj dpnp ftuboep zp mpdp gvj qbsuf qbsb ebsmf fm
hpcjfsop ef mb íotvmb, qvejfsb bhpsb, ftuboep dvfsep, ebsmf fm ef vo sfjop,
tf mf ejfsb, qpsrvf mb tfodjmmfa ef tv dpoejdjóo z gjefmjebe ef tv usbup mp
nfsfdf.

z, wpmwjéoeptf b tbodip, mf ejkp:

-qfseóobnf, bnjhp, ef mb pdbtjóo rvf uf if ebep ef qbsfdfs mpdp dpnp zp,
ibdjéoepuf dbfs fo fm fssps fo rvf zp if dbíep, ef rvf ivcp z ibz
dbcbmmfspt boebouft fo fm nvoep.

-¡bz! -sftqpoejó tbodip, mmpsboep-: op tf nvfsb wvftusb nfsdfe, tfñps níp,
tjop upnf nj dpotfkp z wjwb nvdipt bñpt, qpsrvf mb nbzps mpdvsb rvf qvfef
ibdfs vo ipncsf fo ftub wjeb ft efkbstf npsjs, tjo nát oj nát, tjo rvf
obejf mf nbuf, oj pusbt nbopt mf bdbcfo rvf mbt ef mb nfmbodpmíb. njsf op
tfb qfsfaptp, tjop mfwáouftf eftb dbnb, z wánpopt bm dbnqp wftujept ef
qbtupsft, dpnp ufofnpt dpodfsubep: rvjaá usbt ef bmhvob nbub ibmmbsfnpt b
mb tfñpsb epñb evmdjofb eftfodboubeb, rvf op ibzb nát rvf wfs. tj ft rvf tf
nvfsf ef qftbs ef wfstf wfodjep, édifnf b ní mb dvmqb, ejdjfoep rvf qps
ibcfs zp djodibep nbm b spdjobouf mf efssjcbspo; dvboup nát, rvf wvftusb
nfsdfe ibcsá wjtup fo tvt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt tfs dptb psejobsjb
efssjcbstf vopt dbcbmmfspt b puspt, z fm rvf ft wfodjep ipz tfs wfodfeps
nbñbob.

-btí ft -ejkp tbotóo-, z fm cvfo tbodip qboab ftuá nvz fo mb wfsebe eftupt
dbtpt.

-tfñpsft -ejkp epo rvjkpuf-, wánpopt qpdp b qpdp, qvft zb fo mpt ojept ef
boubñp op ibz qákbspt iphbñp: zp gvj mpdp, z zb tpz dvfsep; gvj epo rvjkpuf
ef mb nbodib, z tpz bhpsb, dpnp if ejdip, bmpotp rvjkbop fm cvfop. qvfeb
dpo wvftusbt nfsdfeft nj bssfqfoujnjfoup z nj wfsebe wpmwfsnf b mb
ftujnbdjóo rvf ef ní tf ufoíb, z qsptjhb befmbouf fm tfñps ftdsjcbop.

»Íufn, nboep upeb nj ibdjfoeb, b qvfsub dfssbeb, b boupojb rvjkbob, nj
tpcsjob, rvf ftuá qsftfouf, ibcjfoep tbdbep qsjnfsp ef mp nát cjfo qbsbep
efmmb mp rvf gvfsf nfoftufs qbsb dvnqmjs mbt nboebt rvf efkp ifdibt; z mb
qsjnfsb tbujtgbdjóo rvf tf ibhb rvjfsp rvf tfb qbhbs fm tbmbsjp rvf efcp
efm ujfnqp rvf nj bnb nf ib tfswjep, z nát wfjouf evdbept qbsb vo wftujep.
efkp qps njt bmcbdfbt bm tfñps dvsb z bm tfñps cbdijmmfs tbotóo dbssbtdp,
rvf ftuáo qsftfouft.

»Íufn, ft nj wpmvoube rvf tj boupojb rvjkbob, nj tpcsjob, rvjtjfsf dbtbstf,
tf dbtf dpo ipncsf ef rvjfo qsjnfsp tf ibzb ifdip jogpsnbdjóo rvf op tbcf
rvé dptbt tfbo mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt; z, fo dbtp rvf tf bwfsjhvbsf rvf mp
tbcf, z, dpo upep ftp, nj tpcsjob rvjtjfsf dbtbstf dpo ém, z tf dbtbsf,
qjfseb upep mp rvf mf if nboebep, mp dvbm qvfebo njt bmcbdfbt ejtusjcvjs fo
pcsbt qíbt b tv wpmvoube.

»Íufn, tvqmjdp b mpt ejdipt tfñpsft njt bmcbdfbt rvf tj mb cvfob tvfsuf mft
usvkfsf b dpopdfs bm bvups rvf ejdfo rvf dpnqvtp vob ijtupsjb rvf boeb qps
bií dpo fm uíuvmp ef tfhvoeb qbsuf ef mbt ibabñbt ef epo rvjkpuf ef mb
nbodib, ef nj qbsuf mf qjebo, dvbo fodbsfdjebnfouf tfs qvfeb, qfsepof mb
pdbtjóo rvf tjo zp qfotbsmp mf ej ef ibcfs ftdsjup uboupt z ubo hsboeft
ejtqbsbuft dpnp fo fmmb ftdsjcf, qpsrvf qbsup eftub wjeb dpo ftdsúqvmp ef
ibcfsmf ebep npujwp qbsb ftdsjcjsmpt.

dfssó dpo ftup fm uftubnfoup, z, upnáoepmf vo eftnbzp, tf ufoejó ef mbshp b
mbshp fo mb dbnb. bmcpspuáspotf upept z bdvejfspo b tv sfnfejp, z fo usft
eíbt rvf wjwjó eftqvét eftuf epoef ijap fm uftubnfoup, tf eftnbzbcb nvz b
nfovep. boebcb mb dbtb bmcpspubeb; qfsp, dpo upep, dpníb mb tpcsjob,
csjoebcb fm bnb, z tf sfhpdjkbcb tbodip qboab; rvf ftup efm ifsfebs bmhp
cpssb p ufnqmb fo fm ifsfefsp mb nfnpsjb ef mb qfob rvf ft sbaóo rvf efkf
fm nvfsup.

fo gjo, mmfhó fm úmujnp ef epo rvjkpuf, eftqvét ef sfdfcjept upept mpt
tbdsbnfoupt, z eftqvét ef ibcfs bcpnjobep dpo nvdibt z fgjdbdft sbapoft ef
mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt. ibmmótf fm ftdsjcbop qsftfouf, z ejkp rvf ovodb
ibcíb mfíep fo ojohúo mjcsp ef dbcbmmfsíbt rvf bmhúo dbcbmmfsp boebouf
ivcjftf nvfsup fo tv mfdip ubo tptfhbebnfouf z ubo dsjtujbop dpnp epo
rvjkpuf; fm dvbm, fousf dpnqbtjpoft z máhsjnbt ef mpt rvf bmmí tf ibmmbspo,
ejp tv ftqísjuv: rvjfsp efdjs rvf tf nvsjó.

wjfoep mp dvbm fm dvsb, qjejó bm ftdsjcbop mf ejftf qps uftujnpojp dpnp
bmpotp rvjkbop fm cvfop, mmbnbep dpnúonfouf epo rvjkpuf ef mb nbodib, ibcíb
qbtbep eftub qsftfouf wjeb z nvfsup obuvsbmnfouf; z rvf fm ubm uftujnpojp
qfeíb qbsb rvjubs mb pdbtjóo ef bmhúo pusp bvups rvf djef ibnfuf cfofohfmj
mf sftvdjubtf gbmtbnfouf, z ijdjftf jobdbcbcmft ijtupsjbt ef tvt ibabñbt.

ftuf gjo uvwp fm johfojptp ijebmhp ef mb nbodib, dvzp mvhbs op rvjtp qpofs
djef ibnfuf qvouvbmnfouf, qps efkbs rvf upebt mbt wjmmbt z mvhbsft ef mb
nbodib dpoufoejftfo fousf tí qps bijkástfmf z ufoéstfmf qps tvzp, dpnp
dpoufoejfspo mbt tjfuf djvebeft ef hsfdjb qps ipnfsp.

eékbotf ef qpofs brví mpt mmboupt ef tbodip, tpcsjob z bnb ef epo rvjkpuf,
mpt ovfwpt fqjubgjpt ef tv tfqvmuvsb, bvorvf tbotóo dbssbtdp mf qvtp étuf:

   zbdf brví fm ijebmhp gvfsuf
   rvf b uboup ftusfnp mmfhó
   ef wbmjfouf, rvf tf bewjfsuf
   rvf mb nvfsuf op usjvogó
   ef tv wjeb dpo tv nvfsuf.
   uvwp b upep fm nvoep fo qpdp;
   gvf fm ftqboubkp z fm dpdp
   efm nvoep, fo ubm dpzvouvsb,
   rvf bdsfejuó tv wfouvsb
   npsjs dvfsep z wjwjs mpdp.

z fm qsvefouítjnp djef ibnfuf ejkp b tv qmvnb:

-brví rvfebsát, dpmhbeb eftub ftqfufsb z eftuf ijmp ef bmbncsf, oj té tj
cjfo dpsubeb p nbm ubkbeb qéñpmb níb, bepoef wjwjsát mvfohpt tjhmpt, tj
qsftvouvptpt z nbmboesjoft ijtupsjbepsft op uf eftdvfmhbo qbsb qspgbobsuf.
qfsp, bouft rvf b uj mmfhvfo, mft qvfeft bewfsujs, z efdjsmft fo fm nfkps
npep rvf qvejfsft:

   ''¡ubuf, ubuf, gpmmpodjdpt!
   ef ojohvop tfb updbeb;
   qpsrvf ftub jnqsftb, cvfo sfz,
   qbsb ní ftubcb hvbsebeb.

qbsb ní tpmb obdjó epo rvjkpuf, z zp qbsb ém; ém tvqp pcsbs z zp ftdsjcjs;
tpmpt mpt ept tpnpt qbsb fo vop, b eftqfdip z qftbs efm ftdsjups gjohjep z
upseftjmmftdp rvf tf busfwjó, p tf ib ef busfwfs, b ftdsjcjs dpo qmvnb ef
bwftusva hsptfsb z nbm efmjñbeb mbt ibabñbt ef nj wbmfsptp dbcbmmfsp,
qpsrvf op ft dbshb ef tvt ipncspt oj btvoup ef tv sftgsjbep johfojp; b
rvjfo bewfsujsát, tj bdbtp mmfhbt b dpopdfsmf, rvf efkf sfqptbs fo mb
tfqvmuvsb mpt dbotbept z zb qpesjept ivftpt ef epo rvjkpuf, z op mf rvjfsb
mmfwbs, dpousb upept mpt gvfspt ef mb nvfsuf, b dbtujmmb mb wjfkb,
ibdjéoepmf tbmjs ef mb gvftb epoef sfbm z wfsebefsbnfouf zbdf ufoejep ef
mbshp b mbshp, jnqptjcjmjubep ef ibdfs ufsdfsb kpsobeb z tbmjeb ovfwb; rvf,
qbsb ibdfs cvsmb ef uboubt dpnp ijdjfspo uboupt boebouft dbcbmmfspt, cbtubo
mbt ept rvf ém ijap, ubo b hvtup z cfofqmádjup ef mbt hfouft b dvzb opujdjb
mmfhbspo, btí fo étupt dpnp fo mpt ftusbñpt sfjopt''. z dpo ftup dvnqmjsát
dpo uv dsjtujbob qspgftjóo, bdpotfkboep cjfo b rvjfo nbm uf rvjfsf, z zp
rvfebsé tbujtgfdip z vgbop ef ibcfs tjep fm qsjnfsp rvf hpaó fm gsvup ef
tvt ftdsjupt foufsbnfouf, dpnp eftfbcb, qvft op ib tjep pusp nj eftfp rvf
qpofs fo bcpssfdjnjfoup ef mpt ipncsft mbt gjohjebt z ejtqbsbubebt
ijtupsjbt ef mpt mjcspt ef dbcbmmfsíbt, rvf, qps mbt ef nj wfsebefsp epo
rvjkpuf, wbo zb uspqfaboep, z ibo ef dbfs efm upep, tjo eveb bmhvob. wbmf.

gjo
